 
My Religion 
 
 
By: M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
 
Compiled and Edited by: 
Bharatan Kumarappa 
 
 
 
First Published : December 1955 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 40/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: +91-79-27540635/27542634 
Fax: +91-79-27541329 
E-mail: jtndrnavajivan@hotmail.com  
Website:  www.navajivantrust.org  
 
 
My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
EDITOR'S NOTE 
As Gandhiji's life consisted in nothing but seeking  to practise his religion to the 
best of his ability, an attempt has been made in th is volume to present to the 
reader extracts from Gandhiji's writings and speech es, which will give a fairly 
full picture of Gandhiji's religion. 
The task has not been easy. The very fact that reli gion was the mainspring of 
Gandhiji's activities means that all that he said a nd did throughout his public 
career, not only in the realm of religion proper bu t also in the spheres of 
politics, economics and social life, become relevan t to this volume. For him a 
religion which did not concern itself with every si de of life was no religion at 
all. That being the case, no account of his religio n can be adequate which does 
not present his entire philosophy of conduct, wheth er in individual or social 
life. 
Consequently, we have had a very wide field to cove r. At the same time to 
keep this volume small, we have had to select very carefully, seeking however 
in the process of elimination not to leave out anyt hing of significance. 
Gandhiji was born a Hindu. But his Hinduism was his  own. It had its roots firm 
in ancient Hinduism, but it grew and developed in t he light of his contact with 
other religions, more especially Christianity, as w ill be seen from Section Two 
of this volume. He sought to drink at the spring of  all religions, and therefore 
he felt that he belonged to every religion. And yet , if he had to have a label, 
the label he preferred and which was his not only b y right of birth but also 
intrinsically, was Hinduism, the religion of his fo refathers. In learning from 
every religion with which he came in contact, Gandh iji was not by any means 
doing injustice to Hinduism or departing from its e ssential teachings. For the 
genius of Hinduism itself through all its long hist ory has always been to 
assimilate and synthesize whatever new element it c ame up against. Not being 
tied down to a creed or to a founder, it was thus f ree to learn, grow and 
develop. Gandhiji illustrates in himself this youth ful spirit of Hinduism, which My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3  has kept it ever fresh, ever living and ever growin g. Indeed, it may be truly said 
that in this respect in Gandhiji Hinduism found its  own soul. 
Hinduism had in the past, together with Buddhism, i ts offspring, influenced all 
the known countries of the then civilized world, fr om India to China and Japan. 
Today through Gandhiji Hinduism is undergoing rebir th, and India's message of 
peace and non-violence is listened to with respect by all the nations. There is 
no doubt that if the religion of Gandhiji could spr ead throughout the length and 
breadth of this land, India could still be a powerf ul factor in weaning the world 
from materialism, avarice and strife, which are thr eatening mankind with 
complete destruction. 
Gandhiji's message, however, is not only for India but for all the world. As he 
himself said, he did not seek to recapture only the  spirit of Hinduism but the 
spirit of all religions, which, according to him, i s love of God expressing itself in 
love of fellow-beings. His call is therefore not th at others should become 
Hindus, but that Christians, Buddhists, Muslims and  others should live up to the 
best teachings of their own religion. Only thus, he  expected, man can live in 
peace with his fellowman and promote each other's w elfare. Both Hindus and 
non- Hindus should therefore find a challenge, insp iration and guidance in the 
living of the good life, from a study of this book.  
Owing to limitations of space we could give but a b are outline of Gandhiji's 
views on social affairs. Those who would like fulle r details may turn to other 
books published by the Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad-14, such for 
example as  Sarvodaya, Towards Non-violent Socialism, Women an d Social 
Injustice, Removal of Untouchability, For Pacifists  and  Hindu Dharma. 
The arrangement of the material in this book is alt ogether ours, as well as the 
titles of chapters and articles. A glossary of non- English words is added for the 
benefit of readers unfamiliar with them. Date 1 are attached to the writings 
quoted here from the  Young India 1 and the  Harijan 1 Gandhiji's weeklies.  In 
regard to quotations from books by Gandhiji, it may  be of interest to know that 
the  Hind Swaraj  was written in 1908,  From Yeravda Mandir  in 1930,  Unto This 
Last: a paraphrase  was first published in book-form in Gujarati in 19 08 and in My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  English in 1951, and the  Autobiography  in 1927 and 1929. Speeches and 
Writings of Mahatma Gandhi  was published by Natesan & Co., Madras, first 
edition in 1917 and fourth edition in 1933. 
BHARATAN KUMARAPPA  
Bombay, November, 1955  
 
1. The  Young India  was published from 1919-1931 and the  Harijan was published from 
1933-1956 with two breaks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5   
TO THE  READER 
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wr itings and to others who are 
interested in them that I am not at all concerned w ith appearing to be 
consistent. In my search after Truth I have discard ed many ideas and learnt 
many new things. Old as I am in age, I have no feel ing that I have ceased to 
grow inwardly or that my growth will stop at the di ssolution of the flesh. What I 
am concerned with is my readiness to obey the call of Truth, my God, from 
moment to moment, and, therefore, when anybody find s any inconsistency 
between any two writings of mine, if he has still f aith in my sanity, he would do 
well to choose the later of the two on the same sub ject. 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Harijan , 29-4-'33, p. 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION ONE: WHAT I MEAN BY RELIGION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7   
01. DEFINITION OF RELIGION 
By religion, I do not mean formal religion or custo mary religion, but that 
religion which underlies all religions, which bring s us face to face with our 
Maker. 
M. K. Gandhi , By Joseph J. Doke, 1909, p. 7 
 
Religion should pervade every one of our actions. H ere religion does not mean 
sectarianism. It means a belief in ordered moral go vernment of the universe. It 
is not less real because it is unseen. This religio n transcends Hinduism, Islam, 
Christianity, etc. It does not supersede them. It h armonizes them and gives 
them reality. 
Harijan, 10-2-'40 p. 445 
 
Let me explain what I mean by religion. It is not t he Hindu religion which I 
certainly prize above all other religions, but the  religion  which transcends 
Hinduism, which changes one's very nature, which bi nds one indissolubly to the 
truth within and whichever purifies. It is the perm anent element in human 
nature which counts no cost too great in order to f ind full expression and which 
leaves the soul utterly restless until it has found  itself, known its Maker and 
appreciated the true correspondence between the Mak er and itself. 
Young India, 12-5-'20, p. 2 
 
No man can live without religion. There are some wh o in the egotism of their 
reason declare that they have nothing to do with re ligion. But it is like a man 
saying that he breathes but that he has no nose. Wh ether by reason, or by 
instinct, or by superstition, man acknowledges some  sort of relationship with 
the divine. The rankest agnostic or atheist does ac knowledge the need of a 
moral principle, and associates something good with  its observance and 
something bad with its non-observance. Bradlaugh, w hose atheism is well-My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8  known, always insisted on proclaiming his innermost  conviction. He had to 
suffer a lot for thus speaking the truth, but he de lighted in it and said that 
truth is its own reward. Not that he was quite inse nsible to the joy resulting 
from the observance of truth. This joy however is n ot at all worldly, but springs 
out of communion with the divine. That is why I hav e said that even a man who 
disowns religion cannot and does not live without r eligion. 
Young India,  23-1-'30, p. 25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9   
02. THE CENTRAL PLAGE OF MORALITY 
I reject any religious doctrine that does not appea l to reason and is in conflict 
with morality. I tolerate unreasonable religious se ntiment when it is not 
immoral. 
Young India, 21-7-'20 p. 4 
 
As soon as we lose the moral basis, we cease to be religious. There is no such 
thing as religion overriding morality. Man, for ins tance, cannot be untruthful, 
cruel and incontinent and claim to have God on his side. 
Young India, 24-11-'21, p. 385 
 
Religion which takes no account of practical affair s and does not help to solve 
them, is no religion. 
Young India, 7-5-'25, p. 164 
 
Every activity of a man of religion must be derived  from his religion, because 
religion means being bound to God, that is to say, God rules your every breath. 
Harijan, 2-3-'34, p. 23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION TWO: THE SOURCES OF MY RELIGION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11   
03. AT HOME 
My father was a lover of his clan, truthful, brave and generous, but short-
tempered. 
Of religious training he had very little, but he ha d that kind of religious culture 
which frequent visits to temples and listening to r eligious discourses make 
available to many Hindus. In his last days he began  reading the Gita at the 
instance of a learned Brahmana friend of the family , and he used to repeat 
aloud some verses every day at the time of worship.  
The outstanding impression my mother has left on my  memory is that of 
saintliness. She was deeply religious. She would no t think of taking her meals 
without her daily prayers. Going to  Haveli—the  Vaishnava temple—was one of 
her daily duties. As far as my memory can go back, I do not remember her 
having ever missed the  Chaturmas. 1 She would take the hardest vows and keep 
them without flinching. Illness was no excuse for r elaxing them. I can recall her 
once falling ill when she was observing the  Chandrayana 2 vow, but the illness 
was not allowed to interrupt the observance. To kee p two or three consecutive 
fasts was nothing to her. Living on one meal a day during  Chaturmas  was a 
habit with her. Not content with that she fasted ev ery alternate day during one  
Chaturmas.  During another  Chaturmas  she vowed not to have food without 
seeing the sun. We children on those days would sta nd, staring at the sky, 
waiting to announce the appearance of the sua to ou r mother. Everyone knows 
that at the height of the rainy season the sun ofte n does not condescend to 
show his face. And I remember days when, at his sud den appearance, we would 
rush and announce it to her. She would run out to s ee with her own eyes, but 
by that time the fugitive sun would be gone, thus d epriving her of her meal. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12  "That does not matter," she would say cheerfully, " God did not want me to eat 
today." And then she would return to her round of d uties. 
Autobiography , 1948, pp. 12-13 
 
1. Lit. a period of four months. A vow of fasting a nd semi-fasting during the four months 
of the rains. The period is a sort of long Lent. 
2. A sort of fast in which the daily quantity of fo od is increased or diminished according as 
the moon waxes or wanes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13   
04. WHILE AT SCHOOL 
From my sixth or seventh year up to my sixteenth I was at school, being taught 
all sorts of things except religion. I may say that  I failed to get from the 
teachers what they could have given me without any effort on their part. And 
yet I kept on picking up things here and there from  my surroundings. The term 
'religion' I am using in its broadest sense, meanin g thereby self-realization or 
knowledge of self. 
Being born in the Vaishnava faith, I had often to g o to the  Haveli.  But it never 
appealed to me. I did not like its glitter and pomp . Also I heard rumours of 
immorality being practised there, and lost all inte rest in it. Hence I could gain 
nothing from the  Haveli.  
But what I failed to get there I obtained from my n urse, an old servant of the 
family, whose affection for me I still recall. I ha ve said before that there was in 
me a fear of ghosts and spirits. Rambha, for that w as her name, suggested, as a 
remedy for this fear, the repetition of Ramanama. I  had more faith in her than 
in her remedy, and so at a tender age I began repea ting Ramanama to cure my 
fear of ghosts and spirits. This was of course shor t-lived, but the good seed 
sown in childhood was not sown in vain. I think it is due to the seed sown by 
that good woman Rambha that today Ramanama is an in fallible remedy for me. 
What, however, left a deep impression on me was the  reading of the Ramayana 
before my father. During part of his illness my fat her was in Porbandar. There 
every evening he used to listen to the Ramayana. Th e reader was a great 
devotee of Rama. He had a melodious voice. He would  sing the  Dohas  
(couplets) and  Ckopais  (quatrains), and explain them, losing himself in t he 
discourse and carrying his listeners along with him . I must have been thirteen 
at that time, but I quite remember being enraptured  by his reading. That laid 
the foundation of my deep devotion to the Ramayana.  Today I regard the 
Ramayana of Tulsidas as the greatest book in ail de votional literature. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14  A few months after this we came to Rajkot. There wa s no Ramayana reading 
there. The Bhagavat, however, used to be read on ev ery  Ekadashi 1 day. 
Sometimes, I attended the reading, but the reciter was uninspiring. Today I see 
that the Bhagavat is a book which can evoke religio us fervour. I have read it in 
Gujarati with intense interest. But when I heard po rtions of the original read by 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya during my twenty-one da ys' fast. I wished I had 
heard it in my childhood from such a devotee as he is, so that I could have 
formed a liking for it at an early age. Impressions  formed at that age strike 
roots deep down into one's nature, and it is my per petual regret that I was not 
fortunate enough to hear more good books of this ki nd read during that period. 
In Rajkot, however, I got an early grounding in tol eration for all branches of 
Hinduism and sister religions. For my father and mo ther would visit the  Haveli  
as also Shiva's and Rama's temples and would take o r send us youngsters there. 
Jain monks also would pay frequent visits to my fat her, and would even go out 
of their way to accept food from us—non-Jains. They  would have talks with my 
father on subjects religious and mundane. 
He had, besides, Mussalman and Parsi friends, who w ould talk to him about 
their own faiths, and he would listen to them alway s with respect, and often 
with interest. Being his nurse, I often had a chanc e to be present at these talks. 
These many things combined to inculcate in me a tol eration for all faiths. 
Only Christianity was at the time an exception. I d eveloped a sort of dislike for 
it. And for a reason. In those days Christian missi onaries used to stand in a 
corner near the high school and hold forth, pouring  abuse on Hindus and their 
gods. I could not endure this. I must have stood th ere to hear them once only, 
but that was enough to dissuade me from repeating t he experiment. About the 
same time, I heard of a well-known Hindu having bee n converted to 
Christianity. It was the talk of the town that, whe n he was baptized he had to 
eat beef and drink liquor, that he also had to chan ge his clothes, and that 
thenceforth he began to go about in European costum e including a hat. These 
things got on my nerves. Surely, thought I, a relig ion that compelled one to eat 
beef, drink liquor, and change one's own clothes di d not deserve the name. I My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  also heard that the new convert had already begun a busing the religion of his 
ancestors, their customs and their country. All the se things created in me a 
dislike for Christianity. 
But the fact that I had learnt to be tolerant to ot her religions did not mean that 
I had any living faith in God. 
But one thing took deep root in me—the conviction t hat morality is the basis of 
things, and that truth is the substance of all mora lity. Truth became my sole 
objective. It began to grow in magnitude every day and my definition of it also 
has been ever widening. 
A Gujarati didactic stanza likewise gripped my mind  and heart. Its precept—
return good for evil—became my guiding principle. I t became such a passion 
with me that I began numerous experiments in it. He re are those (for me) 
wonderful lines: 
For a bowl of water give a goodly meal; 
For a kindly greeting bow thou down with zeal; 
For a simple penny pay thou back with gold; 
If thy life be rescued, life do not withhold. 
Thus the words and actions of the wise regard;  
Every little service tenfold they reward.  
But the truly noble know all men as one,  
And return with gladness good for evil done. 
Autobiography , 1948, pp. 47-51 
 
1. Eleventh day of the bright and the dark half of a lunar month 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16   
05. AS A STUDENT IN ENGLAND 
Towards the end of my second year in England, I cam e across two Theosophists, 
brothers, and both unmarried. They talked to me abo ut the Gita. They were 
reading Sir Edwin Arnold's translation— The Song Celestial —and they invited me 
to read the original with them. I felt ashamed, as I had read the divine poem 
neither in Sanskrit nor in Gujarati. I was constrai ned to tell them that I had not 
read the Gita, but that I would gladly read it with  them, and that though my 
knowledge of Sanskrit was meagre, still I hoped to be able to understand the 
original to the extent of telling where the transla tion failed to bring out the 
meaning. I began reading the Gita with them. The ve rses in the second chapter 
If one  
Ponders on objects of the sense, there springs  
Attraction; from attraction grows desire,  
Desire flames to fierce passion, passion breeds  
Recklessness; then the memory—all betrayed—  
Lets noble purpose go, and saps the mind,  
Till purpose, mind, and man are all undone. 
 made a deep impression on my mind and they still r ing in my ears. The book 
struck me as one of priceless worth. The impression  has ever since been 
growing on me with the result that I regard it toda y as the book  par excellence 
for the knowledge of Truth. It has afforded me inva luable help in my moments 
of gloom. 
The brothers also recommended  The Light of Asia  by Sir Edwin Arnold, whom I 
knew till then as the author only of  The Song Celestial,  and I read it with even 
greater interest than I did the Bhagavadgita. Once I had begun it I could not 
leave off. 
I recall having read, at the brothers' instance, Ma dame Blavatsky's  Key to 
Theosophy.  This "book stimulated in me the desire to read boo ks on Hinduism, My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17  and disabused me of the notion fostered by the miss ionaries that Hinduism was 
rife with superstition. 
About the same time I met a good Christian from Man chester in a vegetarian 
boarding house. He talked to me about Christianity.  I narrated to him my 
Rajkot recollections. He was pained to hear them. H e said, I am a vegetarian. I 
do not drink. Many Christians are meat-eaters and d rink, no doubt; but neither 
meat-eating nor drinking is enjoined by Scripture. Do please read the Bible'. I 
accepted his advice, and he got me a copy. 
I read the book of Genesis, and the chapters that f ollowed invariably sent me 
to sleep. But just for the sake of being able to sa y that I had read it, I plodded 
through the other books with much difficulty and wi thout the least interest or 
understanding. I disliked reading the book of Numbe rs. 
But the New Testament produced a different impressi on, especially the Sermon 
on the Mount which went straight to my heart. I com pared it with the Gita. The 
verses, 'But I say unto you, that ye resist not evi l; but whosoever shall smite 
thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also . And if any man take away 
thy coat let him have thy cloak too,' delighted me beyond measure and put me 
in mind of Shamal Bhatt's 'For a bowl of water, giv e a goodly meal' etc. My 
young mind tried to unify the teaching of the Gita,  the  Light of Asia  and the 
Sermon on the Mount. That renunciation was the high est form of religion 
appealed to me greatly. 
This reading whetted my appetite for studying the l ives of other religious 
teachers. A friend recommended Caryle's  Heroes and Hero-Worship.  I read the 
chapter on the Hero as a prophet and learnt of the Prophet's (Mahammad) 
greatness and bravery and austere living. 
Beyond this acquaintance with religion I could not go at the moment, as 
reading for the examination left me scarcely any ti me for outside subjects. But 
I took mental note of the fact that I should read m ore religious books, and 
acquaint myself with all the principal religions. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  And how could I help knowing something of atheism t oo? Every Indian knew 
Bradlaugh's name and his so- called atheism. I read  some book about it, the 
name of which I forget. It had no effect on me, for  I had already crossed the 
Sahara of atheism. 
Autobiography , 1948, pp. 90-93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19   
06. RAYCHANDBHAI 
Raychandbhai's commercial transactions covered hund reds of thousands. He was 
a connoisseur of pearls and diamonds. No knotty bus iness problem was too 
difficult for him. But all these things were not th e centre round which his life 
revolved. That centre was the passion to see God fa ce to face. Amongst the 
things on his business table there were invariably to be found some religious 
book and his diary. The moment he finished his busi ness he opened the 
religious book or the diary. Much of his published writings are a reproduction 
from his diary. The man who immediately on finishin g his talk about weighty 
business transactions, began to write about the hid den things of the spirit could 
evidently not be a businessman at all but a real se eker after Truth. And I saw 
him thus absorbed in godly pursuits in the midst of  business, not once or twice 
but very often. I never saw him lose his state of e quipoise. There was no 
business or other selfish tie that bound him to me and yet I enjoyed the closest 
association with him. I was but a briefless barrist er then, and yet whenever I 
saw him he would engage me in conversation of a ser iously religious nature. 
Though I was then groping and could not be said to have any serious interest in 
religious discussion, still I found his talk of abs orbing interest. I have since met 
many a religious leader or teacher. I have tried to  meet the heads of various 
faiths, and I must say that no one else has ever ma de on me the impression that 
Raychandbhai did. His words went straight home to m e. His intellect compelled 
as great a regard from me as his moral earnestness,  and deep down in me was 
the conviction that he would never willingly lead m e astray and would always 
confide to me his innermost thoughts. In my moments  of spiritual crisis, 
therefore, he was my refuge. 
And yet in spite of this regard for him I could not  enthrone him in my heart as 
my Guru. The throne has remained vacant and my sear ch still continues. 
Three moderns have left a deep impression on my lif e, and captivated me: 
Raychandbhai by his living contact; Tolstoy by his book,  The Kingdom of God Is 
Within You; and Ruskin by his  Unto This Last. 
Autobiography , 1948, pp. 112-14 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20   
07. IN SOUTH AFRICA 
Mr. Baker was getting anxious about my future. He t ook me to the Wellington 
Convention. The Protestant Christians organize such  gatherings every few years 
for religious enlightenment or, in other words, sel f-purification. One may call 
this religious restoration or revival. The Wellingt on Convention was of this type. 
Mr. Baker had hoped that the atmosphere of religiou s exaltation at the 
Convention, and the enthusiasm and earnestness of t he people attending it, 
would inevitably lead me to embrace Christianity. 
This Convention was an assemblage of devout Christi ans. I was delighted at 
their faith. I saw that many were praying for me. I  liked some of their hymns, 
they were very sweet.  
The Convention lasted for three days. I could under stand and appreciate the 
devoutness of those who attended it. But I saw no r eason for changing my 
belief—my religion. It was impossible for me to bel ieve that I could go to 
heaven or attain salvation only by becoming a Chris tian. When I frankly said so 
to some of the good Christian friends, they were sh ocked. But there was no 
help for it. 
My difficulties lay deeper. It was more than I coul d believe that Jesus was the 
only incarnate son of God, and that only he who bel ieved in him would have 
everlasting life. If God could have sons, all of us  were His sons. If Jesus was like 
God, or God Himself, then all men were like God and  could be God Himself. My 
reason was not ready to believe literally that Jesu s by his death and by his 
blood redeemed the sins of the world. Metaphoricall y there might be some 
truth in it. Again, according to Christianity only human beings had souls, and 
not other living beings, for whom death meant compl ete extinction; while I 
held a contrary belief. I could accept Jesus as a m artyr, an embodiment of 
sacrifice, and a divine teacher, but not as the mos t perfect man ever born. His 
death on the cross was a great example to the world , but that there was any-
thing like a mysterious or miraculous virtue in it my heart could not accept. 
The pious lives of Christians did not give me anyth ing that the lives of men of My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21  other faiths had failed to give. I had seen in othe r lives just the same 
reformation that I had hear{d of among Christians. Philosophically there was 
nothing extraordinary in Christian principles. From  the point of view of 
sacrifice, it seemed to me that the Hindus greatly surpassed the Christians. It 
was impossible for me to regard Christianity as a p erfect religion or the 
greatest of all religions. 
I shared this mental churning with my Christian fri ends whenever there was an 
opportunity, but their answers could not satisfy me . 
Thus if I could not accept Christianity either as a  perfect, or the greatest 
religion, neither was I then convinced of Hinduism being such. Hindu defects 
were pressingly visible to me. If untouchability co uld be a part of Hinduism it 
could but be a rotten part or an excrescence. I cou ld not understand the  raison 
d' etre  of a multitude of sects and castes. What was the m eaning of saying that 
the Vedas were the inspired Word of God? If they we re inspired, why not also 
the Bible and the Koran? 
As Christian friends were endeavouring to convert m e, even so were Mussalman 
friends. Abdulla Sheth had kept on inducing me to s tudy Islam, and of course he 
had always something to say regarding its beauty. 
I expressed my difficulties in a letter to Raychand hbai. I also corresponded with 
other religious authorities in India and received a nswers from them. 
Raychandbhai's letter somewhat pacified me. He aske d me to be patient and to 
study Hinduism more deeply. One of his sentences wa s to this effect: 'On a 
dispassionate view of the question I am convinced t hat 110 other religion has 
the subtle and profound thought of Hinduism, its vi sion of the soul or its 
charity.' 
Though I took a path my Christian friends had not i ntended for me, I have 
remained for ever indebted to them for the religiou s quest that they awakened 
in me. I shall always cherish the memory of their c ontact. 
Autobiography  1948, pp. 169-72 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22  I had gone to South Africa for travel, for finding a escape from Kathiawad 
intrigues and for gaining my own livelihood. But as  I have said, I found myself in 
search of God and striving for self-realization. 
Christian friends had whetted my appetite for knowl edge, which had become 
almost insatiable, and they would not leave me in p eace, even if I desired to be 
indifferent. 
My religious correspondence continued. Raychand bha i was guiding me. I read 
with interest Max Mullens book  India—What Can It Teach Us?  and the translation 
of the Upanishads published by the Theosophical Soc iety. All this enhanced my 
regard for Hinduism, and its beauties began to grow  upon me. It did not, 
however, prejudice me against other religions. I re ad Washington Irwing's  Life 
of Mahomet and His Successors  and Carlyle's panegyric on the Prophet. These 
books raised Mahammad in my estimation. I also read  a book called  The Sayings 
of Zarathustra.  
Thus I gained more knowledge of the different relig ions. The study stimulated 
my self-introspection and fostered in me the habit of putting into practice 
whatever appealed to me in my studies. Thus I began  some of the Yogic 
practices, as well as I could understand them from a reading of the Hindu 
books. But I could not get on very far, and decided  to follow them with the 
help of some expert when I returned to India. The d esire has never been 
fulfilled. 
I made too an intensive study of Tolstoy's books.  The Gospels in Brief What to 
Do?  and other books made a deep impression on me. I be gan to realize more 
and more the infinite possibilities of universal lo ve. 
Autobiography , 1948, pp. 197-98 
 
When, in 1893, I came in close contact with Christi an friends, I was a mere 
novice. They tried hard to bring home to me, and ma ke me accept, the 
message of Jesus,, and I was a humble and respectfu l listener with an open My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23  mind. At that time I naturally studied Hinduism to the best of my ability and 
endeavoured to understand other religions. 
In 1903 the position was somewhat changed. Theo- so phist friends certainly 
intended to draw me into their society, but that wa s with a view to getting 
something from me as a Hindu. Theosophical literatu re is replete with Hindu 
influence, and so these friends expected that I sho uld be helpful to them. I 
explained that my Sanskrit study was not much to sp eak of, that I had not read 
the Hindu scriptures in the original, and that even  my acquaintance with the 
translations was of the slightest. But being believ ers in  sanskara  (tendencies 
caused by previous births) and  punarjanma  (rebirth) they assumed that I should 
be able to render at least some help. And so I felt  like a Triton among the 
minnows. I started reading Swami Vivekananda's  Raja- yoga  with some of these 
friends and M. N. Dvivedi's  Rajayoga with others. I had to read Patanjali's  Taga 
Sutras  with one friend and the Bhagavadgita with quite a number. We formed a 
sort of Seekers' Club where we had regular readings . I already had faith in the 
Gita, which had a fascination for me. Now I realize d the necessity of diving 
deeper into it. I had one or two translations, by m eans of which I tried to 
understand the original Sanskrit. I decided also to  get by heart one or two 
verses every day. For this purpose I employed the t ime of my morning 
ablutions. The operation took me thirty-five minute s, fifteen minutes for the 
tooth brush and twenty minutes for the bath. The fi rst I used to do standing in 
Western fashion. So on the wall opposite I stuck sl ips of paper on which were 
written the Gita verses and referred to them now an d then to help my memory. 
This time was found sufficient for memorizing the d aily portion and recalling 
the verses already learnt. I remember having - thus  committed to memory 
thirteen chapters. 
What effect this reading of the Gita had on my frie nds only they can say, but to 
me the Gita became an infallible guide of conduct. It became my dictionary of 
daily reference. Just as I turned to the English di ctionary for the meanings of 
English words that I did not understand, I turned t o this dictionary of conduct 
for a ready solution of all my troubles and trials.  Words like  aparigraha  (non-My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  possession) and  samabhava  (equability) gripped me. How to cultivate and 
preserve that equability was the question. How was one to treat alike insulting, 
insolent and corrupt officials, co-workers of yeste rday raising meaningless 
opposition, and men who had always been good to one ? How was one to divest 
oneself of all possessions? Was not the body itself  possession enough? Were not 
wife and children possessions? Was I to destroy all  cupboards of books I had? 
Was I to give up all I had and follow Him? Straight  came the answer: I could not 
follow Him unless I gave up all I had. My study of English law came to my help. 
Snell's discussion of the maxims of Equity came to my memory. I understood 
more clearly in the light of the Gita teaching the implication of the word 
'trustee'. My regard for jurisprudence increased, I  discovered in it religion. I 
understood the Gita teaching of non-possession to m ean that those who desired 
salvation should act like the trustee who, though h aving control over great 
possessions, regards not an iota of them as his own . It became clear to me as 
daylight that non-possession and equability presupp osed a change of heart, a 
change of attitude. I then wrote to Revashankarbhai  to allow the insurance 
policy to lapse and get whatever could be recovered , or else to regard the 
premium already paid as lost, for I had become conv inced that God, who 
created my wife and children as well as myself, wou ld take care of them. To 
my brother, who had been as father to me, I wrote e xplaining that I had given 
him all that I had saved up to that moment, but tha t henceforth he should 
expect nothing from me, for future savings, if any,  would be utilized for the 
benefit of the community. 
Autobiography,  1948, pp. 322-24 
 
I left for Natal. I had taken Mr. Polak into my ful lest confidence. He came to 
see me off at the station, and left with me a book to read during the journey, 
which he said I was sure to like. It was Ruskin's  Unto This Last.  
The book was impossible to lay aside, once I had be gun it. It gripped me. 
Johannesburg to Durban was a twenty- four hours' jo urney. The train reached My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25  there in the evening. I could not get any sleep tha t night. I determined to chan-
ge my life in accordance with the ideals of the boo k. 
I translated it later into Gujarati, entitling it  Sarvodqya (the welfare of all). 
I believe that I discovered some of my deepest conv ictions reflected in this 
great book of Ruskin, and that is "why it so captur ed me and made me 
transform my life. A poet is one who can call forth  the good latent in the 
human breast. Poets do not influence all alike, for  everyone is not evolved in 
an equal measure. 
The teachings of  Unto This Last  I understood to be: 
1. That the good of the individual is contained in the  good of all. 
2. That a lawyer's work has the same value as the barb er's inasmuch as all 
have the same right of earning their livelihood fro m their work. 
3. That a life of labour, i.e., the life of the tiller  of the soil and the 
handicraftsman is the life worth living. 
The first of these I knew. The second I had dimly r ealized. The third had never 
occurred to me.  Unto This Last made it as clear as daylight for me that the 
second and the third were contained in the first. I  arose with the dawn, ready 
to reduce these principles to practice. 
Autobiography , 1948, pp. 364-65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION THREE: I RESPECT ALL RELIGIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27   
08. ALL RELIGIONS LEAD TO GOD 
My Hindu instinct tells me that all religions are m ore or less true. All proceed 
from the same God, but all are imperfect because th ey have come down to us 
through imperfect human instrumentality. 
Young India,  29-5-'24, p. 180 
 
Religions are different roads converging to the sam e point. What does it matter 
that we take different roads, so long as we reach t he same goal? In reality, 
there are as many religions as there are individual s. 
Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule,  1939, pp. 35 & 36 
 
In theory, since there is one God, there can be onl y one religion. But in 
practice, no two persons I have known have had the same identical conception 
of God. Therefore, there will, perhaps, always be d ifferent religions answering 
to different temperaments and climatic conditions. 
Harijan , 2-2-'34, p. 8 
 
I do not share the belief that there can or will be  on earth one religion. I am 
striving, therefore, to find a common factor and to  induce mutual tolerance. 
Young India,  31-7-'24, p. 254 
 
I do not like the word tolerance, but could not thi nk of a better one. Tolerance 
may imply a gratuitous assumption of the inferiorit y of other faiths to one's 
own, whereas Ahimsa teaches us to entertain the sam e respect for the religious 
faiths of others as we accord to our own, thus admi tting the imperfection of 
the latter. This admission will be readily made by a seeker of Truth, who 
follows the law of Love. If we had attained the ful l vision of Truth, we would no 
longer be mere seekers, but have become one with Go d, for Truth is God. But 
being only seekers, we prosecute our quest, and are  conscious of our My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  imperfection. And if we are imperfect ourselves, re ligion as conceived by us 
must also be imperfect. We have not realized religi on in its perfection, even as 
we have not realized God. Religion of our conceptio n, being thus imperfect, is 
always subject to a process of evolution and re-int erpretation. Progress towards 
Truth, towards God, is possible only because of suc h evolution. And if all faiths 
outlined by men are imperfect, the question of comp arative merit does not 
arise. All faiths constitute a revelation of Truth,  but all are imperfect, and 
liable to error. Reverence for other faiths need no t blind us to their faults. We 
must be keenly alive to the defects of our own fait h also, yet not leave it on 
that account, but try to overcome those defects. Lo oking at all religions with 
an equal eye, we would not only not hesitate, but w ould think it our duty, to 
blend into our faith every acceptable feature of ot her faiths. 
Even as a tree has a single trunk, but many branche s and leaves, so there is one 
true and perfect Religion, but it becomes many, as it passes through the human 
medium. The one Religion is beyond all speech. Impe rfect men put it into such 
language as they can command, and their words are i nterpreted by other men 
equally imperfect. Whose interpretation is to be he ld to be the right one? 
Everybody is right from his own standpoint, but it is not impossible that 
everybody is wrong. Hence the necessity for toleran ce, which does not mean 
indifference to one's own faith, but a more intelli gent and purer love for it. 
Tolerance gives us spiritual insight, which is as f ar from fanaticism as the north 
pole from the south. True knowledge of religion bre aks down the barriers 
between faith and faith. 
From Yeravda Mandir,  1945, pp. 38-40 
 
It has been my experience that I am always true fro m my point of view, and am 
often wrong from the point of view of my honest cri tics. I know that we are 
both right from our respective points of view. And this knowledge saves me 
from attributing motives to my opponents or critics . The seven blind men who 
gave seven different descriptions of the elephant w ere all right from their 
respective points of view, and wrong from the point  of view of one another, My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29  and right and wrong from the point of view of the m an who knew the elephant. 
I very much like this doctrine of the manyness of r eality. It is this doctrine that 
has taught me to judge a Mussalman from his own sta ndpoint and a Christian 
from his. Formerly I used to resent the ignorance o f my opponents. Today I can 
love them because I am gifted with the eye to see m yself -as others see me and 
vice versa. I want to take the whole world in the e mbrace of my love. 
Young India,  21-1 -'26, p. 30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30   
09. MY ATTITUDE TO THE SCRIPTURES OF OTHER RELIGION S 
It is no business of mine to criticize the scriptur es of other faiths, or to point 
out their defects. It is and should be, however, my  privilege to proclaim and 
practise the truths that there may be in them. I ma y not, therefore, criticize or 
condemn things in the Koran or the life of the Prop het that I cannot 
understand. But I welcome every opportunity to expr ess my admiration for such 
aspects of his life as I have been able to apprecia te and understand. As for 
things that present difficulties, I am content to s ee them through the eyes of 
devout Mussalman friends, while I try to understand  them with the help of the 
writings of eminent Muslim expounders of Islam. It is only through such a 
reverential approach to faiths other than mine that  I can realize the principle 
of equality of all religions. But it is both my rig ht and duty to point out the 
defects in Hinduism in order to purify it and to ke ep it pure. But when non-
Hindu critics set about criticizing Hinduism and ca taloguing its faults they only 
blazon their own ignorance of Hinduism and their in capacity to regard it from 
the Hindu view-point. It distorts their vision and vitiates their judgment. Thus 
my own experience of the non-Hindu critics of Hindu ism brings home to me my 
limitations and teaches me to be wary of launching on a criticism of Islam or 
Christianity and their founders. 
Harijan , 13-3-37, p. 34 
 
We have regular readings of the Bhagawadgita (in th e Ashram) and we have 
now reached a stage when we finish the Gita every w eek by having readings of 
appointed chapters every morning. Then we have hymn s from the various saints 
of India, and we therein include hymns from the Chr istian hymn-book. As 
Khansaheb is with us, we have readings from the Kor an also. I derive the 
greatest consolation from my reading of Tulsidas's Ramayana. I have also 
derived solace from the New Testament and the Koran . I don't approach them 
with a critical mind. They are to me as important a s the Bhagawadgita, though 
everything in the former may not appeal to me—every thing in the Epistles of My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31  Paul for instance,—nor everything in Tulsidas. Ther efore there is no question of 
selection. 
I exercise my judgment about every scripture, inclu ding the Gita. I-cannot let a 
scriptural text supersede my reason. Whilst I belie ve that the principal books 
are inspired, they suffer from a process of double distillation. Firstly, they 
come through a human prophet, and then through the commentaries of 
interpreters. Nothing in them comes from God direct ly. Matthew may give one 
version of one text, and John may give another. I c annot surrender my reason 
whilst I subscribe to divine revelation. And above all, 'the letter killeth, the 
spirit giveth life.' But you must not misunderstand  my position. I believe in faith 
also, in things where reason has no place. 
Harijan , 5-12-'36, pp. 339 & 345 
 
I am not a literalist. Therefore, I try to understa nd the  spirit  of the various 
scriptures of the world. I apply the test of Truth and Ahimsa laid down by these 
very scriptures for interpretation. I reject what i s inconsistent with that test, 
and I appreciate all that is consistent with it. 
Knowledge cannot be the prerogative of any class or  section. But I can conceive 
the impossibility of people assimilating higher or subtler truths unless they have 
undergone preliminary training, even as those who h ave]not made preliminary 
preparations are quite unfit to breathe the rarefie d atmosphere in high 
altitudes, or those who have no preliminary trainin g in simple mathematics are 
unfit to understand or assimilate higher geometry o r algebra. 
Young India , 27-8-'25, p. 293 
 
I hold that it is the duty of every cultured man or  woman to read 
sympathetically the scriptures of the world- If we are to respect others' 
religions as we would have them to respect our own,  a friendly study of the 
world's religions is a sacred duty. My respectful s tudy of other religions has not 
abated my reverence for, or my faith in, the Hindu scriptures. They have 
indeed left their deep mark upon my understanding o f the Hindu scriptures. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32  They have broadened my view of life. They have enab led me to understand 
more clearly many an obscure passage in the Hindu s criptures. 
Let me own this. If I could call myself, say, a Chr istian, or a Mussalman, with 
my own interpretation of the Bible or the Koran, I should not hesitate to call 
myself either. For the Hindu, Christian and Mussalm an would be synonymous 
terms. I do believe that in the other world there a re neither Hindus, nor 
Christians nor Mussaimans. They all are judged not according to their labels or 
professions but according to their actions irrespec tive of their professions. 
During our earthly existence there will always be t hese labels. I therefore 
prefer to retain the label of my forefathers so lon g as it does not cramp my 
growth and does not debar me from assimilating all that is good anywhere else. 
Young India.  2-9-'26, p. 308 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33   
10. ONE'S OWN RELIGION 
The closest, though very incomplete, analogy for re ligion I can find is marriage. 
It is or used to be an indissoluble tie. Much more so is the tie of religion- And 
just as a husband does not remain faithful to his w ife, or wife to her husband, 
because either is conscious of some exclusive super iority of the other over the 
rest of his or her sex but because of some indefina ble but irresistible 
attraction, so does one remain irresistibly faithfu l to one's own religion and find 
full satisfaction in such adhesion. And just as a f aithful husband does not need 
in order to sustain his faithfulness, to consider o ther women as inferior to his 
wife, so does not a person belonging to one religio n need to consider others to 
be inferior to his own. To pursue the analogy still  further, even as faithfulness 
to one's wife does not presuppose blindness to her shortcomings, so does not 
faithfulness to one's religion presuppose blindness  to the shortcomings of that 
religion. Indeed, faithfulness, not blind adherence , demands a keener 
perception of shortcomings and therefore a livelier  sense of the proper remedy 
for their removal. Taking the view I do of religion , it is unnecessary for me to 
examine the beauties of Hinduism. The reader may re st assured that I am not 
likely to remain Hindu if I was not conscious of it s many beauties. Only for my 
purpose they need not be exclusive. My approach to other religions, therefore, 
is never as a fault-finding critic but as a devotee  hoping to find the like 
beauties in other religions and wishing to incorpor ate in my own the good I may 
find in them and miss in mine. 
Harijan , 12-8-'33, p. 4 
 
In spite of my being a staunch Hindu I find room in  my faith for Christian and 
Islamic and Zoroastrian teaching, and, therefore, m y Hinduism  seems  to some 
to be a conglomeration and some have even dubbed me  an eclectic. Well, to 
call a man eclectic is to say that he has no faith,  but mine is a broad faith 
which does not oppose Christians— not even a Plymou th Brother—not even the 
most fanatical Mussalman. It is a faith based on th e broadest possible My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  toleration. I refuse to abuse a man for his fanatic al deeds, because I try to see 
them from his point of view. It is that broad faith  that sustains me. It is a 
somewhat embarrassing position I know—but to others , not to me. 
Young India,  22-12-'27, p. 425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35   
11. CHRISTIANITY 
The New Testament gave me comfort and boundless joy , as it came after the 
repulsion that parts of the Old had given me. Today  supposing I was deprived of 
the Gita and forgot all its contents but had a copy  of the Sermon (on the 
Mount), I should derive the same joy from it as I d o from the Gita. 
Young India,  22-12-'27, p. 426 
 
Jesus expressed, as no other could, the spirit and will of God. It is in this sense 
that I see Him and recognize Him as the Son of God.  And because the life of 
Jesus has the significance and the transcendency to  which I have alluded, I 
believe that He belongs not solely to Christianity,  but to the entire world, to all 
races and people—it matters little under what flag,  name or doctrine they may 
work, profess a faith, or worship a God inherited f rom their ancestors. 
The Modern Review , October 1941, p. 406 
 
On seeing a painting of the crucified Christ in Rom e, Gandhiji remarked: 'What 
would not I have given to be able to bow my head be fore the living image at 
the Vatican of Christ Crucified ? It was with a wre nch that I could tear myself 
away from the scene of living tragedy. I saw there at once that nations like 
individuals could only be made through the agony of  the Gross and in no other 
way. Joy comes not out of infliction of pain on oth ers but out of pain 
voluntarily borne by oneself.' 
This Was Bafiu,  By R. K. Prabhu, 1954. p. 29 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36   
12. BUDDHISM 
I have heard it contended times without number and I have read in books also 
claiming to express the spirit of Buddhism that Bud dha did not believe in God. 
In my humble opinion such a belief contradicts the very central fact of Buddha's 
teaching. . . . The confusion has arisen over his r ejection and just rejection of 
all the base things that passed in his generation u nder the name of God. He 
undoubtedly rejected the notion that a being called  God was actuated by 
malice, could repent of His actions and like the ki ngs of the earth could 
possibly be open to temptations and bribes and coul d possibly have favourites. 
His whole soul rose in mighty indignation against t he belief that a being called 
God required for His satisfaction the living blood of animals in order that He 
might be pleased —animals who were His own creation . He, therefore, rein-
stated God in the right- place and dethroned the us urper who for the time 
being seemed to occupy that White Throne. He emphas ized and re-declared the 
eternal and unalterable existence of the moral gove rnment of this universe. He 
unhesitatingly said that the Law was God Himself. 
God's laws are eternal and unalterable and not sepa rable from God Himself. It 
is an indispensable condition of His very perfectio n. And hence the great 
confusion that Buddha disbelieved in God and simply  believed in the moral law, 
and because of this confusion about God Himself, ar ose the confusion about the 
proper understanding of the great word  nirvana. Nirvana  is undoubtedly not 
utter extinction. So far as I have been able to und erstand the central fact of 
Buddha's life,  nirvana  is utter extinction of all that is base in us, all  that is 
vicious in us, all that is corrupt and corruptible in us.  Nirvana  is not like the 
black, dead peace of the grave, but the living peac e, the living happiness of a 
soul which is conscious of itself, and conscious of  having found its own abode in 
the heart of the Eternal. 
Young India , 24-11-'27, p. 393 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37   
13. ISLAM 
I do regard Islam to be a religion of peace in the same sense as Christianity, 
Buddhism and Hinduism are. No doubt there are diffe rences in degree, but the 
object of these religions is peace. I have given my  opinion that the followers of 
Islam are too free with the sword. But that is not due to the teaching of the 
Koran. This is due, in my opinion, to the environme nt in which Islam was born. 
Christianity has a bloody record against it not bec ause Jesus was found 
wanting, but because the environment in which it sp read was not responsive to 
his lofty teaching. 
Young India , 20-1-'27, p. 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38   
14. THEOSOPHY 
Asked whether he had ever been a member of the Theo sophical Society, 
Gandhiji is reported to have stated that he had nev er been a member, but he 
was and had ever been in sympathy with its message of Universal Brotherhood 
and consequent toleration. 
He added: 'I owe much to the Theosophical friends a mong whom I have many. 
Whatever critics may say against Madame Blavatsky, or Col. Olcott or Dr. 
Besant, their contribution to humanity will always rank high. What has been a 
bar to my joining the society is its secret side—it s occultism. It has never 
appealed to me.' 
This Was Bapu,  By R, K. Prabhu, 1954, p. 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39   
15. SPIRITUALISM 
I never receive communications from the spirits of the dead. I have no evidence 
warranting a disbelief in the possibility of such c ommunications. But I do 
strongly disapprove of the practice of holding or a ttempting to hold such 
communications. They are often deceptive and are pr oducts of the imagination. 
The practice is harmful both to the medium and the spirits, assuming the 
possibility of such communications. It attracts and  ties to the earth the spirit so 
invoked, whereas its effort should be to detach its elf from the earth, and rise 
higher. A spirit is not necessarily purer because i t is disembodied. It takes with 
it most of the frailties to which it was liable whe n on earth. Information or 
advice, therefore, given by it need not be true or sound. That the spirit likes 
communications with those on earth is no matter for  pleasure. On the contrary 
it should be weaned from such unlawful attachment. So much for the harm 
done to the spirits. 
As for the medium, it is a matter of positive knowl edge with me that all those 
within my experience have been deranged or weak-bra ined and disabled for 
practical work whilst they were holding, or thought  they were holding, such 
communications. I can recall no friend of mine who having held such 
communications had benefited in any way. 
Young India,  12-9-'29, p. 302 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40   
16. SUPERIORITY AND INFERIORITY OF RELIGIONS 
So long as there are different religions, everyone of them may need some 
outward distinctive symbol. But when the symbol is made into a fetish and an 
instrument of proving the superiority of one's reli gion over others', it is fit only 
to be discarded. 
Autobiography , 1948, p. 480 
 
God has created different faiths just as He has the  votaries thereof. How can I 
even secretly harbour the thought that my neighbour 's faith is inferior to mine 
and wish that he should give up his faith and embra ce mine? As a true and loyal 
friend, I can only wish and pray that he may live a nd grow perfect in his own 
faith. In God's house there are many mansions and t hey are equally holy. 
Harijan , 20-4-'34, p. 83 
 
My fear is that though Christian friends nowadays d o not say or admit that 
Hindu religion is untrue, they must harbour in thei r breasts the belief that 
Hinduism is an error and that Christianity as they believe it is the only true 
religion. Without some such thing it is not possibl e to understand, much less to 
appreciate, the G.M.S. appeal 1 from which I reproduced in these columns some 
revealing extracts the other day. One could underst and the attack on 
untouchability and many cither errors that have cre pt into Hindu life. And if 
they would help us to get rid of the admitted abuse s and purify our religion, 
they would do helpful constructive work which would  be gratefully accepted. 
But so far as one can understand the present effort , it is to uproot Hinduism 
from the very foundation and replace it by another faith. It is like an attempt 
to destroy a house which though badly in want of re pair appears to the dweller 
quite decent and habitable. No wonder he welcomes t hose who show him how 
to repair it and even offer; to do so themselves. B ut he would most decidedly 
resist those who sought to destroy that house that had served well him and his 
ancestors for ages, unless he, the dweller, was con vinced that the house was My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41  beyond repair and unfit for human habitation. If th e Christian world entertains 
that opinion about the Hindu house, 'Parliament of Religions' and 'International 
Fellowship' are empty phrases. For both the terms p resuppose equality of 
status, a common platform. There cannot be a common  platform as between 
inferiors and superiors, or the enlightened and une nlightened, the regenerate 
and the unregenerate, the high-born and the low-bor n, the casteman and the 
outcaste. My comparison may be defective, may even sound offensive. My 
reasoning may be unsound. But my proposition stands . 
Harijan,  13-3-'37, p. 36 
 
The aim of the Fellowship (of Faiths) should be to help a Hindu to become a 
better Hindu, a Mussalman to become a better Mussal man, and a Christian a 
better Christian. The attitude of patronizing toler ation is false to the spirit of 
International Fellowship. If I have a suspicion in my mind that my religion is 
more or less true, and that others' are more or les s false, instead of being more 
or less true, then, though I may have some sort of fellowship with them, it is of 
an entirely different kind from the one we need in the International Fellowship. 
Our prayer for others must be NOT 'God, give him th e light that Thou hast given 
me/ BUT 'Give him all the light and truth he needs for his highest development.' 
Pray merely that your friends may become better men , whatever their form of 
religion. 
Nevertheless, your experience may become a part of their experience, without 
your knowing it. 
Sabarmati , A Report of the First Annual Meeting of the Feder ation of International 
Fellowship] 1928, pp. 17-19. 
 
1 The appeal issued by the Church Missionary Societ y of England, extracts wherefrom were 
reproduced in the  Harijan  issue of 26-12-'36. 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42   
17. CONVERSION 
C. F. Andrews: What would you say to a man who alte r considerable thought 
and prayer said that he could not have his peace an d salvation except by 
becoming a Christian ? 
Gandhiji: I would say if a non-Christian (say a Hin du) came to a Christian and 
made that statement, he should ask him to become a good Hindu rather than 
find goodness in change of faith. 
C.F.A: I cannot in this go the whole length with yo u, though you know my own 
position. I discarded the position that there is no  salvation except through 
Christ long ago. But supposing the Oxford Group Mov ement people changed the 
life of your son, and he felt like being converted,  what would you say ? 
Gandhiji: I would say that the Oxford Group may cha nge the lives of as many as 
they like but not their religion. They can draw the ir attention to the best in 
their respective religions and change their lives b y asking them to live 
according to them. There came to me a man, the son of Brahmana parents, 
who said his reading of your book had led him to em brace Christianity. I asked 
him if he thought that the religion of his forefath ers was wrong. He said, 'No.' 
Then I said: 'Is there any difficulty about your ac cepting the Bible as one of the 
great religious books of the world and Christ as on e of the great teachers?' I said 
to him that you had never through your books asked Indians to take up the Bible 
and embrace Christianity, and that he had misread y our book—unless of course 
your position is like that of the late M. Mahommed Ali's, viz., that a believing 
Mussalman, however bad his life, is better than a g ood Hindu.' 
C.F.A.: I do not accept M. Mahommed Ali's position at all. But I do say that if a 
person really needs a change of faith I should not stand in his way. 
Gandhiji: But don't you see that you do not even gi ve him a chance? You do not 
even cross-examine him. Supposing a Christian came to me and said he was 
captivated by a reading of the Bhagawat and so want ed to declare himself a 
Hindu, I should say to him: 'No. What the Bhagawat offers the Bible also offers. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43  You have not yet made the attempt to find it out. M ake the attempt and be a 
good Christian.' 
C.F.A.: I don't know. If someone earnestly says tha t he will become a good 
Christian, I should say, 'You may become one', thou gh you know that I have in 
my own life strongly dissuaded ardent enthusiasts w ho came to me. I said to 
them, 'Certainly not on  my  account will you do anything of the kind.' But hum an 
nature does require a concrete faith. 
Gandhiji: If a person wants to believe in the Bible  let him say so, but why 
should he discard his own religion? This proselytiz ation will mean no peace in 
the world. Religion is a very personal matter. We s hould by living the life 
according to our lights share the best with one ano ther, thus adding to the sum 
total of human effort to reach God. 
"Consider," continued Gandhiji, "whether you are go ing to accept the position 
of mutual toleration or of equality of all religion s. My position is that all the 
great religions are fundamentally equal. We must ha ve innate respect for other 
religions as we have for our own. Mind you, not mut ual toleration, but equal 
respect." 
Harijan , 28-11-'36, p. 330 
 
Conscience is not the same thing for all. Whilst, t herefore, it is a good guide for 
individual conduct, imposition of that conduct upon  all will be an insufferable 
interference with everybody else's freedom of consc ience. 
Young India,  23-9-'26, p. 334 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44   
18. THE BETTER WAY 
The propagation of truth and non-violence can be do ne less by books than by 
actually living those principles. Life truly lived is more than books. 
Harijan,  13-5-'39 p. 122 
 
After long study and experience, I have come to the  conclusion that (1) all 
religions are true; (2) all religions have some err or in them; (3) all religions are 
almost as dear to me as my own Hinduism, in as much  as all human beings 
should be as dear to me as one's own close relative s. My own veneration for 
other faiths is the same as that for my own faith. 
Sabarmati,  1928, p. 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION FOUR: MY FAITH IN GOD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46   
19. GOD IS 
If we exist, if our parents and their parents have existed, then it is proper to 
believe in the Parent of the whole creation. If He is not we are nowhere. He is 
one and yet many; He is smaller than an atom, and b igger than the Himalayas. 
He is contained even in a drop of the ocean, and ye t not even the seven seas 
can compass Him. Reason is powerless to know Him. H e is beyond the reach or 
grasp of reason. But I need not labour the point. F aith is essential in this 
matter. My logic can make and unmake innumerable hy potheses. An atheist 
might floor me in a debate. But my faith runs so ve ry much faster than my 
reason that I can challenge the whole world and say , 'God is, was and ever shall 
be.' 
But those who want to deny His existence are at lib erty to do so. He is merciful 
and compassionate. He is not an earthly king needin g an army to make us 
accept His sway. He allows us freedom, and yet His compassion commands 
obedience to His will. But if any one of us disdain  to bow to His will, He says * 
'So be it. My sun will shine no less for thee, my c louds will rain no less for thee. 
I need not force thee to accept my sway.' Of such a  God let the ignorant 
dispute the existence. I am one of the millions of wise men who believe in Him 
and am never tired of bowing to Him and singing His  glory. 
Young India,  21-1-'26. pp. 30-31 
 
There is an indefinable mysterious Power that perva des everything. I feel it, 
though I do not see it. It is this unseen Power whi ch makes itself felt and yet 
defies all proof, because it is so unlike all that I perceive through my senses. It 
transcends the senses. 
But it is possible to reason out the existence of G od to a limited extent. Even in 
ordinary affairs we know that people do not know wh o rules or why, and how 
he rules. And yet they know that there is a power t hat certainly rules. In my 
tour last year in Mysore I met many poor villagers and I found upon inquiry that My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47  they did not know who ruled Mysore. They simply sai d some god ruled it. If the 
knowledge of these poor people was so limited about  their ruler I who am 
infinitely lesser than God, than they than their ru ler, need not be surprised if I 
do not realize the presence of God, the King of kin gs. Nevertheless I do feel as 
the poor villagers felt about Mysore that there is orderliness in the Universe, 
there is an unalterable Law governing everything an d every being that exists or 
lives. It is not a blind law, for no blind law can govern the conduct of living 
beings, and thanks to the marvelous researches of S ir J. CL Bose, it can now be 
proved that even matter is life. That Law then whic h governs all life is God. 
Law and the Law-giver are one. I may not deny the L aw or the Law-giver, 
because I know so little about It or Him. Even as m y denial or ignorance of the 
existence of an earthly power will avail me nothing , so will not my denial of 
God and His Law liberate me from its operation, whe reas humble and mute 
acceptance of divine authority makes life's journey  easier even as the 
acceptance of earthly rule makes life under it easi er. 
I do dimly perceive that whilst everything around m e is ever changing, ever 
dying, there is underlying all that change a living  power that is changeless, that 
holds all together, that creates, dissolves and re- creates. That informing power 
or spirit is God. And since nothing else I see mere ly through the senses can or 
will persist, He alone is. 
And is this power benevolent or malevolent? I see i t as purely benevolent. For I 
can see that in the midst of death life persists, i n the midst of untruth truth 
persists, in the midst of darkness light persists. Hence I gather that God is Life, 
Truth, Light. He is Love. He is the Supreme Good. 
But He is no God who merely satisfies the intellect , if He ever does. God to be 
God must rule the heart and transform it. He must e xpress Himself in even the 
smallest act of His votary. This can only be done t hrough a definite realization 
more real than the five senses can ever produce. Se nse perceptions can be, 
often are, false and deceptive, however real they m ay appear to us. Where 
there is realization outside the senses it is infal lible. It is proved not by My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48  extraneous evidence but in the transformed conduct and character of those 
who have felt the real presence of God within. 
Such testimony is to be found in the experience of an unbroken line of prophets 
and sages in all countries and climes. To reject th is evidence is to deny oneself. 
This realization is preceded by an immovable faith.  He who would in his own 
person test the fact of God's presence can do so by  a living faith. And since 
faith itself cannot be proved by extraneous evidenc e, the safest course is to 
believe in the moral government of the world and th erefore in the supremacy 
of the moral law, the law of Truth and Love. Exerci se of faith will be the safest 
where there is a clear determination summarily to r eject all that is contrary to 
Truth and Love. 
I cannot account for the existence of evil by any r ational method. To want to 
do is to be coequal with God. I am therefore humble  enough to recognize evil 
as such. And I call God long suffering and patient precisely because He permits 
evil in the world. I know that He has no evil. He i s the author of it and yet 
untouched by it. 
I know too that I shall never know God if I do not wrestle with and against evil 
even at the cost of life itself. I am fortified in the belief by my own humble and 
limited experience. The purer I try to become, the nearer I feel to be to God. 
How much more should I be, when my faith is not a m ere apology as it is today 
but has become as immovable as the Himalayas and as  white and bright as the 
snows on their peaks? Meanwhile I invite the corres pondent to pray with 
Newman who sang from experience Lead, kindly Light,  amid the encircling 
gloom, Lead Thou me on; 
The night is dark and I am far from home, Lead Thou  me on; 
Keep Thou my feet, I do not ask to see 
The distant scene; one step enough for me. 
Young India,  11-10-'28. pp. 340-41 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49  Rationalists are admirable beings, rationalism is a  hideous monster when it 
claims for itself omnipotence. Attribution of omnip otence to reason is as bad a 
piece of idolatry as is worship of stock and stone believing it to be God. I plead 
not for the suppression of reason, but for a due re cognition of that in us which 
sanctifies reason. 
Young India,  14-10-'26, p. 359 
 
It is easy enough to say, 'I do not believe in God. ' For God permits all things to 
be said of Him with impunity. He looks at our acts.  And any breach of His Law 
carries with it, not its vindictive, but its purify ing, compelling punishment. 
Young India , 23-9-26, p. 333 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50   
20. THE NATURE OF GOD 
I do not regard God as a person. Truth for me is Go d, and God's Law and God 
are not different things or facts, in the sense tha t an earthly king and his law 
are different. Because God is an Idea, Law Himself.  Therefore, it is impossible 
to conceive God as breaking the Law. He, therefore,  does not rule our actions 
and withdraw Himself. When we say He rules our acti ons, we are simply using 
human language and we try to limit Him. Otherwise, He and His Law abide 
everywhere and govern everything. Therefore I do no t think that He answers in 
every detail every request of ours, but there is no  doubt that He rules our 
actions, and I literally believe that not a blade o f grass grows or moves without 
His will. The free will we enjoy is less than that of a passenger on a crowded 
deck. 
"Do you feel a sense of freedom in your communion w ith God?" 
I do. I do not feel cramped as I would on a boat fu ll of passengers. Although I 
know that my freedom is less than that of a passeng er, I appreciate that 
freedom as I have imbibed through and through the c entral teaching of the Gita 
that man is the maker of his own destiny in the sen se that he has freedom of 
choice as to the manner in which he uses that freed om. But he is no controller 
of results. The moment he thinks he is, he comes to  grief. 
Harijan , 23-3-'40, p. 55 
 
Perfection is the attribute of the Almighty, and ye t what a great democrat He 
is! What an amount of wrong and humbug He suffers o n our part! He even 
suffers us, insignificant creatures of His, to ques tion His very existence, though 
He is in every atom about us, around us and within us. But He has reserved to 
Himself the right of becoming manifest to whomsoeve r He chooses. He is a 
Being without hands and feet and other organs, -yet  he can see Him to whom 
He chooses to reveal Himself. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51  Harijan,  14-ll-'36, p. 316 
 
In a strictly scientific sense God is at the bottom  of both good and evil. He 
directs the assassin's dagger no less than the surg eon's knife. But all that good 
and evil are, for human purposes, from each other d istinct and incompatible, 
being symbolical of light and darkness, God and Sat an. 
Harijan , 20-2-,37, p. 9 
 
The laws of Nature are changeless, unchangeable, an d there are no miracles in 
the sense of infringement or interruption of Nature 's laws. But we, limited 
beings, fancy all kinds of things and impute our li mitations to God. 
Harijan , 17-4-'37, p. 87 
 
To me God is Truth and Love; God is ethics and mora lity; God is fearlessness. 
God is the source of Light and Life and yet He is a bove and beyond all these. 
God is conscience. He is even the atheism of the at heist. For in His boundless 
love God permits the atheist to live. He is the sea rcher of hearts. He transcends 
speech and reason. He knows us and our hearts bette r than we do ourselves. He 
does not take us at our word for He knows that we o ften do not mean it, some 
knowingly and others unknowingly. He is a personal God to those who need His 
personal presence. He is embodied to those who need  His touch. He is the 
purest essence. He simply is to those who have fait h. He is all things to all men. 
He is in us and yet above and beyond us. One may ba nish the word 'God', but 
one has no power to banish the Thing itself. And su rely conscience is but a poor 
and laborious paraphrase of the simple combination of three letters called God. 
He cannot cease to be because hideous immoralities or inhuman brutalities are 
committed in His name. He is long suffering. He is patient but He is also 
terrible.. He is the most exacting personage in the  world and the world to 
come. He metes out the same measure to us as we met e out to our neighbours 
— men and brutes. With Him ignorance is no excuse. And withal He is ever 
forgiving for He always gives us the chance to repe nt. He is the greatest My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52  democrat the world knows, for He leaves us 'unfette red' to make our own 
choice between evil and good. He is the greatest ty rant ever known, for He 
often dashes the cup from our lips and under cover of free will leaves us a mar-
gin so wholly inadequate as to provide only mirth f or Himself at our expense, 
therefore it is that Hinduism calls it all His spor t — Lila , or calls it all an illusion 
— Maya. We are  not , He alone  Is.  And if we will be, we must eternally sing His 
praise and do His will. Let us dance to the tune of  His bansi  (flute), and all 
would be well. 
Young India , 5-3-'25, p. 81 
 
[Replying to a question asked of him at a meeting i n Switzerland on his way back from the 
Round Table Conference in London, Gandhiji said:] 
You have asked me why I consider that God is Truth.  In my early youth I was 
taught to repeat what in Hindu scriptures are known  as one thousand names of 
God. But these one thousand names of God were by no  means exhaustive. We 
believe — and I think it is the truth — that God ha s as many names as there are 
creatures and, therefore, we also say that God is n ameless and since God has 
many forms we also consider Him formless, and since  He speaks to us through 
many tongues we consider Him to be speechless and s o on. And so when I came 
to study Islam I found that Islam too had many name s for God. I would say with 
those who say God is Love, God is Love. But deep do wn in me used to say that 
though God may be Love, God is Truth, above all. If  it is possible for the human 
tongue to give the fullest description of God, I ha ve come to the conclusion 
that for myself, God is Truth. But two years ago I went a step further and said 
that Truth is God. You will see the fine distinctio n between the two 
statements, viz., that God is Truth and Truth is Go d. And I came to that 
conclusion after a continuous and relentless search  after Truth which began 
nearly fifty years ago. I then found that the neare st approach to Truth was 
through Love. But I also found that love has many m eanings in the English 
language at least and that human love in the sense of passion could become a 
degrading thing also. I found too that love in the sense of Ahimsa had only a 
limited number of votaries in the world. But I neve r found a double meaning in My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53  connection with truth and even atheists had not dem urred to the necessity or 
power of truth. But in their passion for discoverin g truth the atheists have not 
hesitated to deny the very existence of God—from th eir own point of view 
rightly. And it was because of this reasoning that I saw that rather than say that 
God is Truth I should say that Truth is God. I reca ll the name of Charles 
Bradlaugh who delighted to call himself an atheist but knowing as I do 
something of him, I would never regard him as an at heist. I would call him a 
God-fearing man, though I know that he would reject  the claim. His face would 
redden if I would say " Mr Bradlaugh, you are a tru th-fearing man, and so a God-
fearing man. " I would automatically disarm his cri ticism by saying that Truth is 
God, as have I disarmed criticisms of many a young man. Add to this the great 
difficulty that millions have taken the name of God  and in His name committed 
nameless atrocities. Not that scientists very often  do not commit cruelties in 
the name of Truth. I know how in the name of truth and science inhuman 
cruelties are perpetrated on animals when men perfo rm vivisection. There are 
thus a number of difficulties in the way, no matter  how you describe God. But 
the human mind is a limited thing, and you have to labour under limitations 
when you think of a being or entity who is beyond t he power of man to grasp. 
And then we have another thing in Hindu philosophy,  viz., God alone is and 
nothing else exists, and the same truth you find em phasized and exemplified in 
the Kalma of Islam. There you find it clearly state d that God alone is and 
nothing else exists. In fact the Sanskrit word for Truth is a word which literally 
means that which exists —  Sat. For these and several other reasons that I can 
give you I have come to the conclusion that the def inition, 'Truth is God', gives 
me the greatest satisfaction. And when you want to find truth as God the only 
inevitable means is Love, i.e., non-violence, and s ince I believe that ultimately 
the means and the end are convertible terms, I shou ld not hesitate to say that 
God is Love. 
'What then is Truth?' 
A difficult question, (said Gandhiji), but I have s olved it for myself by saying 
that it is what the voice within tells you. How, th en, you ask, do different My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54  people think of different and contrary truths? Well , seeing that the human mind 
works through innumerable media and that the evolut ion of the human mind is 
not the same for all, it follows that what may be t ruth for one may be untruth 
for another, and hence those who have made these ex periments have come to 
the conclusion that there are certain conditions to  be observed in making those 
experiments. Just as for conducting scientific expe riments there is an 
indispensable scientific course of instruction, in the same way strict preliminary 
discipline is necessary to qualify a person to make  experiments in the spiritual 
realm. Everyone should, therefore, realize his limi tations before he speaks of 
his Inner Voice. Therefore we have the belief based  upon experience, that 
those who would make individual search after truth as God, must go through 
several vows, as for instance, the vow of truth, th e vow of Brahmacharya 
(purity) — for you cannot possibly divide your love  for Truth and God with 
anything else—, the vow of nonviolence, of poverty and non-possession. Unless 
you impose on yourselves the five vows you may not embark on the experiment 
at all. There are several other conditions prescrib ed, but I must not take you 
through all of them. Suffice it to say that those w ho have made these 
experiments know that it is not proper for everyone  to claim to hear the voice 
of conscience, and it is because we have at the pre sent moment everybody 
claiming the right of conscience without going thro ugh any discipline 
whatsoever and there is so much untruth being deliv ered to a bewildered 
world, all that I can, in true humility, present to  you is that truth is not to be 
found by anybody who has not got an abundant sense of humility. If you would 
swing on the bosom of the ocean of Truth you must r educe yourself to a zero. 
Further than this I cannot go along this fascinatin g path. 
Young India  31-12-'31, pp. 427-28 
 
There are innumerable definitions of God, because H is manifestations are 
innumerable. They overwhelm me with wonder and awe and for a moment stun 
me. But I worship God as Truth only- I have not yet  found Him, but I am seeking 
after Him. I am prepared to sacrifice the things de arest to me in pursuit of this 
quest. Even if the sacrifice demanded be my very li fe, I hope I may be prepared My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55  to give it. But as long as I have not realized this  Absolute Truth, so long must I 
hold by the relative truth as I have conceived it. That relative truth must, 
meanwhile, be my beacon, my shield and buckler. Tho ugh this path is straight 
and narrow and sharp as the razor's edge, for me ha s it been the quickest and 
easiest. Even my Himalayan blunders have seemed tri fling to me because I have 
kept strictly to this path- For the path has saved me from coming to grief, and I 
have gone forward according to my light. Often in m y progress I have had faint 
glimpses of the Absolute Truth, God, and daily the conviction is growing upon 
me that He alone is real and all else is unreal. 
The further conviction has been growing upon me tha t whatever is possible for 
me is possible even for a child, and I have sound r easons for saying so. The 
instruments for the quest of Truth are as simple as  they are difficult. They may 
appear quite impossible to an arrogant person, and quite possible to an 
innocent child. The seeker after Truth should be hu mbler than the dust. The 
world crushes the dust under its feet, but the seek er after Truth should so 
humble himself that even the dust could crush him. 
Let hundreds like me perish, but let Truth prevail.  
From Introduction to  Autobiography , pp. 6-7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56   
21. GOD IN MY EXPERIENCE 
I am surer of His existence than of the fact that y ou and I are sitting in this 
room. Then I can also testify that I may live witho ut air and water but not 
without Him. You may pluck out my eyes, but that ca nnot kill me. You may 
chop off my nose, but that will not kill me. Bu' bl ast my belief in God, and I am 
dead. You may call this a superstition, but I confe ss it is a superstition that I 
hug, even as I used to do the name of Rama in my ch ildhood when there was 
any cause of danger or alarm. 
Harijan , 14-5-'38 p. 109 
 
I learnt to rely consciously upon God before I was fifteen years old. 
Harijan , 11-3-'39, p. 46 
 
When I admire the wonder of a sunset or the beauty of the moon, my soul 
expands in worship of the Creator. I try to see Him  and His mercies in all these 
creations. 
Young India  13-11 -'24, p. 378 
 
What I want to achieve, — what I have been striving  and pining to achieve these 
thirty years, —is self-realization, to see God face  to face, to attain  Moksha 1. I 
live and move and have my being in pursuit of this goal. All that I do by way of 
speaking and writing, and all my ventures in the po litical field, are directed to 
this same end. 
From Introduction to  Autobiography,  pp. 4-5
 
It is an unbroken torture to me that I am still so far from Him, who, as I fully 
know, governs every breath of my life, and whose of fspring I am. I know that it 
is the evil passions within that keep me so far fro m Him, and yet I cannot get 
away from them. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57  From Introduction to  Autobiography,  p. 8 
 
I must go with God as my only guide. He is a jealou s Lord. He will allow no one 
to share His authority. One has, therefore, to appe ar before Him in all one's 
weakness, empty-handed and in a spirit of full surr ender, and then He enables 
you-, to stand before a whole world and protects yo u from all harm. 
Young India,  3-9-'31, p. 247 
 
I do not want to foresee the future. I am concerned  with taking care of the 
present. God has given me no control over the momen t following. 
Young India,  26-12-'24, p. 427 
 
Do not seek to protect me. The Most High is always there to protect us all. You 
may be sure that when my time is up, no one, not ev en the most renowned in 
the world, can stand between Him and me. 
Young India,  2-4-'31, p. 54 
 
God saves me so long as He wants me in this body. T he moment His wants are 
satisfied, no precautions on my part will save me. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  1949, p. 91 
 
God is the hardest taskmaster I have known on earth , and He tries you through 
and through. And when you find that your faith is f ailing or your body is failing 
you, and you are sinking, He comes to your assistan ce somehow or other, and 
proves to you that you must not lose your faith and  that He is always at your 
beck and call, but on His terms, not on your terms.  
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi,  4th ed., p. 1069 
 
He (a votary of the Gita) takes note of things as t hey happen and reacts 
naturally to them, fulfilling his part as if propel led by the great Mechanic, even My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58  as a piece of machine in good order responds automa tically to the call of the 
machinist. It is the most difficult thing for an intelligent  being to be like a 
machine. And yet, if one is to become a zero, that is precisely what one 
desiring perfection has to become. The vital differ ence between the machine 
and the man is that the machine is inert, the man i s all life and consciously 
becomes like a machine in the hands of the Master M echanic. Krishna says in so 
many words that God moves all beings as if they wer e parts of a machine. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  1949, pp. 238-39 
 
I have been a willing slave to this most exacting M aster for more than half a 
century. His voice has been increasingly audible as  years have rolled by. He has 
never forsaken me even in my darkest hour. He has s aved me often against 
myself and left me not a vestige of independence. T he greater the surrender to 
Him, the greater has been my joy. 
Harijan,  6-5-'33, p. 4 
 
God is with us and looks after us as if He had no o ther care besides. How this 
happens I do not know. That it does happen I do kno w. Those who have faith 
have all their cares lifted from off their shoulder s. 
Bapu’s Letters to Mira , 1949, p. 267 
 
Defeat cannot dishearten me. It can only chasten me . I know that God will 
guide me. 
Young India , 3-7-'24, p. 218 
 
There is not a moment when I do not feel that prese nce of a Witness whose eye 
misses nothing and with whom I strive to keep in tu ne. 
I cannot recall a moment in my life when I had a se nse of desertion by God. 
Harijan,  24-12-'38, p. 395 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59  If I did not feel the presence of God within me, I see so much of misery and 
disappointment every day that I would be a raving m aniac and my destination 
would be the Hooghli. 
Young India,  6-8-J25, p. 272 
 
As days pass I feel this Living Presence in every f ibre of my veins. Without that 
feeling I should be demented. There are so many thi ngs that are calculated to 
disturb my peace of mind. So many events happen tha t would, without the 
realization of that Presence, shake me to the very foundation. But they pass me 
by leaving me practically untouched. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  1949, p. 268 
 
I believe it to be possible for every human being t o attain that blessed and 
indescribable sinless state in which he feels withi n himself the presence of God 
to the exclusion of everything else. 
Young India,  17-11-'21, p. 368 
 
1 Lit. freedom from birth and death. The nearest En glish equivalent is salvation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60   
22. THE INNER VOICE 
My claim to hear the Voice of God is no new claim. Unfortunately there is no 
way that I know of proving the claim except through  results. 
Harijan , 6-5-'33, p. 4 
 
The first question that has puzzled many is about t he Voice of God. What was 
it? What did I here? Was there any person I saw? If  not, how was the Voice 
conveyed to me ? These are pertinent questions. 
For me the Voice of God, of Conscience, of Truth or  the Inner Voice or 'the still 
small Voice' mean one and the same thing. I saw no form. I have never tried, 
for I have always believed God to be without form. But what I did hear was like 
a Voice from afar and yet quite near. . It was as u nmistakable as some human 
voice definitely speaking to me, and irresistible. I was not dreaming at the time 
I heard the Voice. The hearing of the Voice was pre ceded by a terrific struggle 
within me. Suddenly the Voice came upon me. I liste ned, made certain that it 
was the Voice, and the struggle ceased. I was calm.  The determination was 
made accordingly, the date and the hour of the fast  were fixed. Joy came over 
me. This was between 11 and 12 midnight. I felt ref reshed and began to write 
the note about it which the reader must have seen. 
Could I give any further evidence that it was truly  the Voice that I heard and 
that it was not an echo of my own heated imaginatio n? I have no further 
evidence to convince the sceptic. He is free to say  that it was all self- delusion 
or hallucination. It-may well have been so. I can o ffer no proof to the contrary. 
But I can say this that not the unanimous verdict o f the whole world against me 
could shake me from the belief that what I heard wa s the true Voice of God. 
But some think that God Himself is a creation of ou r own imagination. If that 
view holds good, then nothing is real, everything i s of our own imagination. 
Even so, whilst my imagination dominates me, I can only act under its spell. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61  Realest things are only relatively so. For me the V oice was more real than my 
own existence. It has never failed me, and for that  matter, anyone else. 
And every one who wills can hear the Voice. It is w ithin every one. But like 
everything else, it requires previous and definite preparation. 
Harijan,  8-7-'33, p. 4 
 
I shall lose my usefulness the moment I stifle the 'still small Voice within'. 
Young India , 3-12-'25, p. 422 
 
Nobody has to my knowledge questioned the possibili ty of the Inner Voice 
speaking to some, and it is a gain to the world eve n if one person's claim to 
speak under the authority of the Inner Voice can be  really sustained. Many may 
make the claim, but not all will be able to substan tiate it. But it cannot and 
ought not to be suppressed for the sake of preventi ng false claimants. There is 
no danger whatsoever if many people could truthfull y represent the Inner 
Voice. But, unfortunately, there is no remedy again st hypocrisy. Virtue must 
not be suppressed because many will feign it. Men h ave always been found 
throughout the world claiming to speak for the Inne r Voice. But no harm has yet 
overtaken the world through their short-lived activ ities. Before one is able to 
listen to that Voice, one has to go through a long and fairly severe course of 
training, and when it is the Inner Voice that speak s, it is unmistakable. The 
world cannot be successfully fooled for all time. T here is, therefore, no danger 
of anarchy setting in because a humble man like me will not be suppressed and 
will dare to claim the authority of the Inner Voice , when he believes that he 
has heard it. 
Harijan,  18-3-'33, p. 8 
 
Man is a fallible being. He can never be sure of hi s steps. What he may .regard 
as answer to prayer may be an echo of his pride. Fo r infallible guidance man 
has to have a perfectly innocent heart incapable of  evil. I can lay no such 
claim. Mine is a struggling, striving, erring, impe rfect soul. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62  Young India,  25-9-'24, p. 313 
 
Having made a ceaseless effort to attain self-purif ication, I have developed 
some little capacity to hear correctly and clearly the 'still small Voice within. 
The Epic Fast  By Pyarelal, 1933, p. 34 
 
My firm belief is that He reveals Himself daily to every human being, but we 
shut our ears to the 'still small Voice'. 
Young India , 25-5-'21, p. 162 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION FIVE: MY RELIGION IN PRACTICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64   
23. RELIGION OF LOVE 
Where love is, there God is also. 
Satyagraha in South Africa,  1950, p. 360 
 
Non-violence is an active force of the highest orde r. It is soul-force or the 
power of Godhead within us. We become Godlike to th e extent we realize non-
violence. 
Harijan,  12-11-'38 p. 326 
 
Scientists tell us that without the presence of the  cohesive force amongst the 
atoms that comprise this globe of ours, it would cr umble to pieces and we 
would cease to exist; and even as there is cohesive  force in blind matter, so 
must there be in all things animate, and the name f or that cohesive force 
among animate beings is Love. We notice it between father and son, between 
brother and sister, friend and friend. But we have to learn to use that force 
among all that lives, and in the use of it consists  our knowledge of God. 
Young India , 5-5-'20, p. 7 
 
Man's highest endeavour lies in trying to find God,  said Gandhiji. He cannot be 
found in temples or idols or places of worship buil t by man's hands, nor can He 
be found by abstinences. God can be found only thro ugh love, not earthly, but 
divine. 
Harijan , 23-11-'47, p. 425 
 
I claim that even now, though the social structure is not based on a conscious 
acceptance of non-violence, all the world over mank ind lives and men retain 
their possessions on the sufferance of one another.  If they had not done so, 
only the fewest and the most ferocious would have s urvived. But such is not the 
case. Families are bound together by ties of love, and so are groups in the so-My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65  called civilized society called nations. Only they do not recognize- the 
supremacy of the law of non-violence. It follows, t herefore, that they have not 
investigated its vast possibilities. Hitherto out o f sheer inertia, shall I say, we 
have taken it for granted that complete non-violenc e is possible only for the 
few who take the vow of non-possession and the alli ed abstinences. Whilst it is 
true that the votaries alone can carry on research work and declare from time 
to time the new possibilities of the great eternal law governing man, if it is the 
law, it must hold good for all. The many failures w e see are not of the law but 
of the followers, many of whom do not even know tha t they are under that law 
willy nilly. When a mother dies for her child she u nknowingly obeys the law. I 
have been pleading for the past fifty years for a c onscious acceptance of the 
law and its zealous practice even in the face of fa ilures. Fifty years' work has 
shown marvellous results and strengthened my faith.  
Harijan,  22-2-'42, p. 48 
 
I have suggested in these columns that woman is the  incarnation of Ahimsa. 
Ahimsa means infinite love, which again means infin ite capacity for suffering. 
Who but woman, the mother of man, shows this capaci ty in the largest mea-
sure? She shows it as she carries the infant and fe eds it during nine months and 
derives joy in the suffering involved. What can bea t the suffering caused by the 
pangs of labour? But she forgets them in the joy of  creation. Who again suffers 
daily so that her babe may wax from day to day ? Le t her transfer that love to 
the whole of humanity, let her forget that she ever  was or can be the object of 
man's lust. And she will occupy her proud position by the side of man as his 
mother, maker and silent leader. It is given to her  to teach the art of peace to 
the warring world thirsting for that nectar. 
Harijan,  24-2-'40, p. 13 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66   
24. LOVE EXPRESSING ITSELF IN SELF-SACRIFICING SERV ICE 
A. SERVICE 
The only way to find God is to see Him in His creat ion and be one with it. This 
can only be done by service of all. I am a part and  parcel of the whole, and I 
cannot find Him apart from the rest of humanity. My  countrymen are my 
nearest neighbours. They have become so helpless, s o resourceless, so inert 
that I must concentrate myself on serving them. If I could persuade myself that 
I should find Him in a Himalayan cave I would proce ed there immediately. But I 
know that I cannot find Him apart from humanity. 
Harijan , 29-8-'36, p. 226 
 
God having cast my lot in midst of the people of In dia, I should be untrue to my 
Maker if I failed to serve them. If I do not know h ow to serve them I shall never 
know how to serve humanity. 
Young India,  18-6-'25, p. 211 
 
And as I know that God is found more often in the l owliest of His creatures than 
in the high and mighty, I am struggling to reach th e status of these. I cannot do 
so without their service. Hence my passion for the service of the suppressed 
classes. And as I cannot render this service withou t entering politics, I find 
myself in them. 
Young India , 11-9-'24, p. 298 
 
If I am to identify myself with the grief of the le ast in India, aye, if I have the 
power, the least in the world,, let me identify mys elf with the sins of the little 
ones who are under my care. And so doing in all hum ility, I hope someday to 
see God—Truth—face to face. 
Young India,  3-12-'25, p. 422.  
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67  I will give you a talisman. Whenever you are in dou bt, or when the self 
becomes too much with you, try the following expedi ent: 
Recall the face of the poorest and the most helples s man whom you have seen 
and ask yourself, if the step you contemplate is go ing to be of any use to  him . 
Will he be able to gain anything by it? Will it res tore him to a control over his 
own life and destiny? In other words will it lead t o Swaraj or self-rule for the 
hungry and also spiritually starved millions of our  countrymen? 
Then you will find your doubts and yourself melting  away. 
[From a letter to a friend] 
This Was Bapu,  by R. K. Prabhu, 1954, p. 48 
 
While he was engaged with Mahatmaji, a young Americ an missionary asked him 
what religion he professed and what shape the futur e religion of India was 
likely to assume. 
His reply was very brief. Pointing to the two sick persons in the room, he said 
'To serve is my religion. I do not worry about the future.' 
This Was Bapu,  by R. K. Prabhu, 1954, p. 4 
 
Religion is service of the helpless. God manifests Himself to us in the form of 
the helpless and the stricken. 
I have certainly regarded spinning superior to the practice of denominational 
religions. But that does not mean that the latter s hould be given up. I only 
mean that a Dharma which has to be observed by the followers of all religions 
transcends them, and hence I say that a Brahmana is  a better Brahmana, a 
Mussalman a better Mussalman, a Vaishnava a better Vaishnava, if he turns the 
(spinning) wheel in the spirit of service. 
If it was possible for me to turn the wheel in my b ed and if I felt that it would 
help me in concentrating my mind on God, I would ce rtainly leave the rosary 
aside and turn the wheel. If I am strong enough to turn the wheel, and I have to 
make a choice between counting beads or turning the  wheel, I would certainly My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68  decide in favour of the wheel, making it my rosary,  so long as I found poverty 
and starvation stalking the land. I do look forward  to a time when even 
repeating the name of Rama will become a hindrance.  When I have realized 
that Rama transcends even speech, I shall have no n eed to repeat the name. 
The spinning wheel, the rosary and the Ramanama are  the same to me. They 
subserve the same end, they teach me the religion o f service. I cannot practise 
Ahimsa without practising the religion of service, and I cannot find the truth 
without practising the religion of Ahimsa. And ther e is no religion other than 
truth. 
Young India,  14-8-'24, p. 267 
 
Hand-spinning does not, it is not intended that it should, compete with, in 
order to displace, any existing type of industry; i t does not aim at withdrawing 
a single able-bodied person, who can otherwise find  a remunerative occupation 
from his work. The sole claim advanced on its behal f is that it alone offers an 
immediate, practicable, and permanent solution of t hat problem of problems 
that confronts India, viz., the enforced idleness f or nearly six months in the 
year of an overwhelming majority of India's populat ion, owing to lack of a 
suitable supplementary occupation to agriculture an d the chronic starvation of 
the masses that results there from. 
Young India,  21-10-'26, p. 368 
 
We should be ashamed of resting, or having a square  meal, so long as there is 
one able-bodied man or woman without work or food. 
Young India,  5-2-'25, p. 48.  
 
Imagine, therefore, what a calamity it must be to h ave 300 million 
unemployed, several millions becoming degraded ever y day for want of 
employment, devoid of self- respect, devoid of fait h in God. I may as well place 
before the dog over there the message of God as bef ore those hungry millions 
who have no lustre in their eyes and whose only God  is their bread. I can take My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69  before them a message of God only by taking the mes sage of sacred work 
before them. It is good enough to talk of God whils t we are sitting here after a 
nice breakfast and looking forward to a nicer lunch eon, but how am I to talk of 
God to the millions who have to go without two meal s a day ? To them God can 
only appear as bread and butter. 
Young India , 15-10-'31, p. 310 
 
Self-realization I hold to be impossible without se rvice of an identification with 
the poorest. 
Young India , 21-10-'26, p. 364 
 
B. SACRIFICE 
The human body is meant solely for service, never f or indulgence. The secret of 
happy life lies in renunciation. Renunciation is li fe. Indulgence spells death. 
Therefore, everyone has a right and should desire t o live 125 years while 
performing service without an eye on result . Such life must be wholly and 
solely dedicated to service. Renunciation made for the sake of such service is 
an ineffable joy of which none can deprive one, bec ause that nectar springs 
from within and sustains life. In this there can be  no room for worry or 
impatience. Without this joy, long life is impossib le and would not be worth-
while even if possible. 
Harijan,  24-2-'46, p. 19 
 
This body, therefore, has been given us, only in or der that we may serve all 
creation with it. 
And even as a bond slave receives food, clothing an d so on from the master 
whom he serves, so should we gratefully accept such  gifts as may be assigned 
to us by the Lord of the universe. What we receive must be called a gift; for as 
debtors we are entitled to no consideration for the  discharge of our obligations. 
Therefore we may not blame the Master, if we fail t o get it. Our body is His to My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70  be cherished or cast away according to His will. Th is is not a matter for 
complaint or even pity; on the contrary, it is natu ral and even a pleasant and 
desirable state, if only we realize our proper plac e in God's scheme. We do ' 
indeed need strong faith, if we would experience th is supreme bliss. "Do not 
worry in the least about yourself, leave all worry to God,"—this appears to be 
the commandment in all religions. 
This need not frighten any one. He who devotes hims elf to service with a clear 
conscience will day by day grasp the necessity for it in greater measure, £nd 
will continually grow richer in faith. The path of service can hardly be trodden 
by one, who is not prepared to renounce self-intere st, and to recognize the 
conditions of his birth. Consciously or unconscious ly every one of us does render 
some service or other. If we cultivate the habit of  doing this service 
deliberately, our desire for service will steadily grow stronger, and will make 
not only for our own happiness, but that of the wor ld at large. 
*  *  * 
Again, not only the good, but all of us are bound t o place our resources at the 
disposal of humanity. And if such is the law, as ev idently it is, indulgence 
ceases to hold a place in life and gives way to ren unciation. The duty of 
renunciation differentiates mankind from the beast.  
Some object that life thus understood becomes dull and devoid of art, and 
leaves no room for the householder. But renunciatio n here does not mean 
abandoning the world and retiring into the forest. The spirit of renunciation 
should rule all the activities of life. A household er does not cease to be one if 
he regards life as a duty rather than as an indulge nce. A merchant, who 
operates in the sacrificial spirit, will have crore s passing through his hands, but 
he will therefore not cheat or speculate, will lead  a simple life, will not injure 
a living soul and will lose millions rather than ha rm anybody. Let no one run 
away with the idea that this type of merchant exist s only in my imagination. 
Fortunately for the world, it does exist in the Wes t as well as i the East. It is 
true, such merchants may be counted on one's finger s' ends, but the type 
ceases to be imaginary, as soon as even one living specimen can be found to My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71  answer to it. No doubt these sacrificers obtain the ir livelihood by their work. 
But livelihood is not their objective, but only a b y-product of their vocation. A 
life of sacrifice is the pinnacle of art, and is fu ll of true joy. 
One who would serve will not waste a thought upon h is own comforts, which he 
leaves to be attended to or neglected by his Master  on high. He will not 
therefore encumber himself with everything that com es his way; he will take 
only what he strictly needs and leave the rest. He will be calm, free from anger 
and unruffled in mind even if he finds himself inco nvenienced. His service, like 
virtue, is its own reward, and he will rest content  with it. 
Voluntary service of others demands the best of whi ch one is capable, and must 
take precedence over service of self. In fact, the pure devotee consecrates 
himself to the service of humanity without any rese rvation whatever. 
From Yeravda Mandir,  1945, pp. 54-60 
 
Sacrifices may be of many kinds. One of them may we ll be bread labour. If all 
laboured for their bread and no more, then there wo uld be enough food and 
enough leisure for all. Then there would be no cry of over-population, no 
disease and no such misery as we see around. Such l abour will be the highest 
form of sacrifice. Men will no doubt do many other things either through their 
bodies or through their minds, but all this will be  labour of love for the common 
good. There will then be no rich and no poor, none high and none low, no 
touchable and no untouchable. 
This may be unattainable ideal. But we need not, th erefore, cease to strive for 
it. Even if without fulfilling the whole law of sac rifice, that is, the law of our 
being, we performed physical labour enough for our daily bread, we should go a 
long way towards the ideal. 
If we did so, our wants would be minimized, our foo d would be simple. We 
should then eat to live, not live to eat. Let anyon e who doubts the accuracy of 
this proposition try to sweat for his bread, he wil l derive the greatest relish My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72  from the production of his labour, improve his heal th and discover that many 
things he took were superfluities. 
May not men earn their bread by intellectual labour  ? No. The needs of the 
body must be supplied by the body. 'Render unto Cae sar that which is Caesar's' 
perhaps applies- here well. 
Mere mental, that is, intellectual labour is for th e soul and is its own 
satisfaction. It should never demand payment. In th e ideal state, doctors, 
lawyers and the like will work solely for the benef it of society, not for self. 
Obedience to law of bread labour will bring about a  silent revolution in the 
structure of society. Men's triumph will consist in  substituting the struggle for 
existence by the struggle for mutual service. The l aw of the brute will be 
replaced by the law of man. 
Harijan,  29-6-'35 p. 156 
 
In India there is a particular type of man who deli ghts in having as few needs as 
possible. He carries with him only a little flour a nd a pinch of salt and chillies 
tied in his napkin. He has a  lota  and a string to draw water from the well. He 
needs nothing else. He walks on foot covering 10-12  miles a day. He makes the 
dough in his napkin, collects a few twigs to make a  fire and bakes his dough on 
the embers. It is called  bati.  Its relish does not lie in itself but in the appet ite 
that honest toil and contentment of mind give. Such  a man has God as his 
companion and friend and feels richer than any king  or emperor. God is not the 
friend of those who inwardly covet other's riches. Everyone can copy this 
example and enjoy ineffable peace and happiness him self and radiate it to 
others. On the other hand, if one hankers after ric hes, one has to resort to 
exploitation, by whatever name it may be called. Ev en then the crores cannot 
become millionaires. True happiness lies in content ment and companionship 
with God only. 
Harijan,  21-7-'46, p. 232 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73  The true connotation of humility is self-effacement . Self-effacement is  moksha.  
(salvation). Service without humility is selfishnes s and egotism. 
Autobiography,  1948, p. 483 
 
When self-satisfaction creeps over a man, he has ce ased to grow and therefore 
has become unfit for freedom. He who offers a littl e sacrifice from a lowly and 
religious spirit quickly realizes the littleness of  it. Once on the path of 
sacrifice, we find out the measure of our selfishne ss and must continually wish 
to give more and not be satisfied till there is a c omplete self-surrender. 
Young India , 29-9-'21, p. 306 
 
Not until we have reduced ourselves to nothingness can we conquer the evil in 
Us. God demands nothing less than complete self-sur render as the price for the 
only real freedom that is worth having. And when a man thus loses himself he 
immediately finds himself in the service of ail tha t lives. It becomes his delight 
and his recreation. He is - a new man, never weary of spending himself in the 
service of God's creation. 
Young India,  20-12-'28, p. 420 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74   
25. LOVE IN OPPOSITION TO WRONG 
A. THE LAW OF LOVE AGAINST HATE 
Having flung aside the sword, there is nothing exce pt the cup of love which I 
can offer to those who oppose me. It is by offering  that cup that I expect to 
draw them close to me. 
Young India,  2-4-'31, p. 54 
 
It is easy enough to be friendly to one's friends. But to befriend the one who 
regards himself as your enemy, is the quintessence of true religion. 
Harijan,  11-5-'47, p. 146 
 
It is no non-violence if we merely love those that love us. It is non-violence only 
when we love those that hate us. 
[From a private letter dated 31-12-'34]  
 
In its positive form, Ahimsa means the largest love , greatest charity. If I am a 
follower of Ahimsa, I  must love my enemy. I must apply the same rules to the 
wrong-doer who is my enemy or a stranger to me, as I would to my wrong-doing 
father or son. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi , G. A. Natesan, Madras, 1933, p, 346 
 
My appeal to you is to cleanse your hearts and to h ave charity. Make your 
hearts as broad as the ocean.... Do not judge other s lest you be judged. There 
is that supreme Judge who can hang you, but He leav es you alive. There are so 
many enemies within you and around you, but He prot ects and looks upon you 
with a kindly eye. 
Young India,  1-1-'25, p. 8 
 
The weak can never forgive. Forgiveness is the attr ibute of the strong. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75  Young India,  2-4-'31, p. 59 
 
They say 'means are after all means'. I would say * means are after all 
everything'. As the means so the end. There is no w all of separation between 
means and end. Indeed the Creator has given us cont rol (and that too very 
limited) over means, none over the end. Realization  of the goal is in exact 
proportion to that of the means. This is a proposit ion that admits of no 
exception 
Young India,  17-7-'24, p. 236 
 
I have therefore concerned myself principally with the conservation of the 
means and their progressive use. I know if we can t ake care of them, 
attainment of the goal is assured. I feel too that our progress towards the goal 
will be in exact proportion to the purity of our me ans. 
This method may appear to be long, perhaps too long , but I am convinced that 
it is the shortest. 
The Amrit Bazar Patrika,  17-9-'33 
 
You need not be afraid that the method of non-viole nce is a slow long-drawn 
but process- It is the swiftest the world has seen,  for it is the surest. 
Young India,  30-4-'25, p. 153 
 
It (resistance by love) is a force that may be used  by individuals as well as by 
communities. It may be used as well in political as  in domestic affairs. Its 
universal applicability is a demonstration of its p ermanence and invincibility. It 
can be used alike by men, women and children. It is  totally untrue to say that it 
is a force to be used only by the weak so long as t hey are not capable of 
meeting violence by- violence... This force is to v iolence, and therefore to all 
tyranny, all injustice, what light is to darkness. 
Young India,  3-11-'27, p. 369 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76  In the application of the method of non-violence, o ne must believe in the 
possibility of every person, however depraved, bein g reformed under humane 
and skilled treatment. 
Harijan , 22-2-'42, p. 49 
 
It is against my creed to punish even a murderer, a  thief or a decoit. 
Young India,  2-4-'31, p. 55 
 
When a person claims to be non-violent, he is expec ted not to be angry with 
one who has injured him. He will not wish him harm;  he will wish him well; he 
will not swear at him; he will not cause him any ph ysical hurt. He will put up 
with all the injury to which he is subjected by the  wrongdoer. Thus non-
violence is complete innocence. Complete non-violen ce is complete absence of 
ill- will against all that lives. It therefore embr aces even subhuman life not 
excluding noxious insects or beasts. They have not been created to feed our 
destructive propensities. If we only knew the mind of the Creator, we should 
find their proper place in His creation. Non-violen ce is therefore in its active 
form goodwill towards all life. It is pure love. I read it in the Hindu scriptures, 
in the Bible, in the Quran. 
Non-violence is a perfect state. It is a goal towar ds which all mankind moves 
naturally though unconsciously. Man does not become  divine when he 
personifies innocence in himself. Only then does he  become truly man. In our 
present state we are partly men and partly beasts, and in our ignorance and 
even arrogance say that we truly fulfill the purpos e of our species, when we 
deliver blow for blow and develop the measure of an ger required for the 
purpose. We pretend to believe that retaliation is the law of our being, 
whereas in every scripture we find that retaliation  is nowhere obligatory but 
only permissible. It is restraint that is obligator y. Retaliation is indulgence 
requiring elaborate regulating. Restraint is the la w of our being. For, highest 
perfection is unattainable without highest restrain t. Suffering is thus the badge 
of the human tribe. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77  The goal ever recedes from us. The greater the prog ress, the greater the 
recognition of our unworthiness. Satisfaction lies in the effort, not in the 
attainment. Full effort is full victory. 
Young India,  9-3-'22, p. 141 
 
If we turn our eyes to the time of which history ha s any record down to our own 
time, we shall find that man has been steadily prog ressing towards Ahimsa. Our 
remote ancestors were cannibals. Then came a time w hen they were fed up 
with cannibalism and they began to live on chase. N ext came a stage when man 
was ashamed of leading the life of a wandering hunt er. He therefore took to 
agriculture and depended principally on mother eart h for his food. Thus from 
being a nomad he settled down to civilized stable l ife, founded villages and 
towns, and from member of a family he became member  of a community and a 
nation. All these are signs of progressive Ahimsa a nd diminishing Himsa. Had it 
been otherwise, the human species should have been extinct by now, even as 
many of the lower species have disappeared. 
Prophets and  avatars  have also taught the lesson of Ahimsa more or less . Not 
one of them has professed to teach Himsa. And how s hould it be otherwise? 
Himsa does not need to be taught. Man as animal is violent, but as Spirit is non-
violent. The moment he awakes to the Spirit within,  he cannot remain violent. 
Either he progresses towards Ahimsa or rushes to hi s doom. That is why the 
prophets and  avatars  have taught the lessons of truth, harmony, brother hood, 
justice, etc.—all attributes of Ahimsa. 
And yet violence seems to persist, even to the exte nt of thinking people like 
the correspondent regarding it as the final weapon.  But as I have shown history 
and experience are against him. 
If we believe that mankind has steadily progressed towards Ahimsa, it follows 
that it has to progress towards it still further. N othing in this world is static, 
everything is kinetic. If there is no progression t hen there is inevitable 
retrogression. No one can remain without the eterna l cycle, unless it be God 
Himself. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78  Harijan,  11-8-'40 p. 245 
 
I have found that life persists in the midst of des truction and therefore there 
must be a higher law than that of destruction. Only  under that law would a well 
ordered society be intelligible and life worth livi ng. And if that is the law of 
life, we have to work it cut in daily life. Wheneve r there are jars, whenever 
you are confronted with an opponent conquer him wit h love. In this crude 
manner I have worked it out in my life. That does n ot mean that all my 
difficulties are solved. Only I have found that thi s law of love has answered as 
the law of destruction has never done. The more I w ork at this law, the more I 
feel delight in life, delight in the scheme of this  universe. It gives me a peace 
and a meaning of the mysteries of nature that I hav e no power to describe. 
Young India,  1-10-'31, pp. 286-87 
 
I know how difficult it is to follow this grand law  of life. But are not all great 
and good things difficult to do? Love of the hater is the most difficult of all. But 
by the grace of God even this most difficult thing becomes easy to accomplish 
if we want to do it. 
[From a private letter dated 31-12-'34]  
 
In this age of wonders no one will say that a thing  or idea is worthless because 
it is new. To say it is impossible because it is di fficult, is again not in 
consonance with the spirit of the age. Things undre amt of are daily being seen, 
the impossible is ever becoming possible. We are co nstantly being astonished 
these days at the amazing discoveries in the field of violence. But I maintain 
that far more undreamt of and seemingly impossible discoveries will be made in 
the field of non-violence. 
Harijan,  25-8-'40 p. 260 
 
I am an irrepressible optimist. My optimism rests o n my belief in the infinite 
possibilities of the individual to develop non-viol ence. The more you develop it My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 79  in your own being, the more infectious it becomes t ill it overwhelms your 
surroundings and by and by might over sweep the wor ld. 
Harijan , 28-1-'39, p. 443 
 
B. DIRECT ACTION 
No passiveness 
Never has anything been done on this earth without direct action. I reject the 
word 'passive resistance' because of its insufficie ncy and its being interpreted 
as a weapon of the weak. 
Young India , 12-5-'20, p. 3 
 
My goal is friendship with the whole world and I ca n combine the greatest love 
with the greatest opposition to wrong. 
Young India,  10-3-'20, p. 5 
 
Non-violence is 'not a resignation from all real fi ghting against wickedness'. On 
the contrary, the non-violence of my conception is a more active and real fight 
against wickedness than retaliation whose very natu re is to increase 
wickedness. I contemplate a mental and therefore a moral opposition to 
immoralities. I seek entirely to blunt the edge of the tyrant's sword not by 
putting up against it a sharper-edged weapon, but b y disappointing his 
expectation that I would be offering physical resis tance. The resistance of the 
soul that I should offer would elude him. It would at first dazzle him and at last 
compel recognition from him, which recognition woul d not humiliate him but 
would uplift him. 
Young India,  8-10-'25, p. 346 
 
Non-violence in its dynamic condition means conscio us suffering. It does not 
mean meek submission to the will of the evil-doer, but it means the pitting of 
one's whole soul against the will of the tyrant. Wo rking under this law of our My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 80  being, it is possible for a single individual to de fy the whole might of an unjust 
empire to save his honour, his religion, his soul a nd lay the foundation for that 
empire's fall or its regeneration. 
Young India,  11-8-'20, p. 3 
 
No Room for Cowardice 
My creed of non-violence is an extremely active for ce. It has no room for 
cowardice or even weakness. There is hope for a vio lent man to be some day 
non-violent, but there is none for a coward. I have  therefore said more than 
once in these pages that if we do not know how to d efend ourselves, our 
women and our places of worship by the force of suf fering, i.e. non-violence, 
we must, if we are men, be at least able to defend all these by fighting. 
Young India,  16-6-'27, p. 196 
 
Non-violence and cowardice go ill together. I can i magine a fully armed man to 
be at heart a coward. Possession of arms implies an  element of fear, if not 
cowardice. But true non-violence is an impossibilit y without the possession of 
unadulterated fearlessness. 
Harijan,  15-7-'39, p. 201 
 
Strength does not come from physical capacity. It c omes from an indomitable 
will. 
Young India , 11-8-'20, p. 3 
 
A small body of determined spirits fired by an unqu enchable faith in their 
mission can alter the course of history. 
Harijan,  19-11-'38 p. 343 
 
The votary of non-violence has to cultivate the cap acity for sacrifice of the 
highest type in order to be free from fear. He wrec ks not if he should lose his My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 81  land, his wealth, his life. He who has not overcome  all fear cannot practise 
Ahimsa to perfection. The votary of Ahimsa has only  one fear, that is of God. 
Harijan,  1-9-'40, p. 268 
 
Where there is fear there is no religion. 
Young India , 2-9-'26, p. 308 
 
Nothing whatever in this world is ours. Even we our selves are His. Why then 
should we entertain any fear? 
Young India , 11-9-'20, p. 2 
 
Let us fear God and we shall cease to fear man. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi , G. A. Natesan, Madras, 1933, p. 330 
 
Spirituality is not a matter of knowing scriptures and engaging in philosophical 
discussions. It is a matter of heart culture, of un measurable strength. 
Fearlessness is the first requisite of spirituality . Cowards can never be moral. 
Young India,  13-10-21, p. 323 
 
A Satyagrahi bids good-bye to fear. He is, therefor e, never afraid of trusting 
the opponent. Even if the opponent plays him false twenty times, the 
Satyagrahi is ready to trust him the twenty-first t ime, for an implicit trust in 
human nature is the very essence of his creed. 
Satyagraha in South Africa , 1950, p. 246 
 
Let our first act every morning be to make the foll owing resolve for the day: 'I 
shall not fear any one on earth. I shall fear God o nly. I shall not bear ill-will 
towards any one. I shall not submit to injustice fr om any one. I shall conquer 
untruth by truth and in resisting untruth I shall p ut up with all suffering.' My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 82  Satyagraha Leaflet,  4-5-'19, p. 14 
 
Dare to Stand Alone 
That something in me which never deceives me tells me now: 'You have to 
stand against the whole world although you may have  to stand alone. You have 
to stare the world in the face although the world m ay look at you with blood-
shot eyes. Do not fear. Trust that little thing in you which resides in the heart 
and says: Forsake friends, wife, all; but testify t o that for which you have lived 
and for which you have to die. ’ 
The Bombay Chronicle,  9-8-'42 
 
Strength of numbers is the delight of the timid. Th e valiant in spirit glory in 
fighting alone. 
Young India,  17-6-'26, p. 217 
 
The greatest men of the world have always stood alo ne. Take the great 
prophets, Zoroaster, Buddha, Jesus, Mohammed — they  all stood alone like 
many others whom I can name. But they had living fa ith in themselves and their 
God, and believing as they did that God was on thei r side, they never felt 
lonely. 
Young India,  10-10-'29, p. 330 
 
Reliance on God 
Non-violence succeeds only when we have a living fa ith in God. 
Harijan , 28-1-'39, p. 443 
 
In a righteous struggle, God himself plans campaign s and conducts battles. A  
dharmayuddha  can be waged only in the name of God, and it is on ly when the 
Satyagrahi feels quite helpless, is apparently on h is last legs and finds utter 
darkness all round him, that God comes to the rescu e. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 83  Satyagraha in South Africa,  1950, p. 5 
 
I have learned this one lesson — that what is impos sible with man is child's play 
with God, and if we have faith in that Divinity whi ch presides on the destiny of 
the meanest of His creation, I have no doubt that a ll things are possible and in 
that final hope I live and pass my time and endeavo ur to obey His will. 
Young India,  19-11-'31, p. 361 
 
I know  the path. It is straight and narrow. It is like th e edge of a sword. I 
rejoice to walk on it. I weep when I slip. God's wo rd is: 'He who strives never 
perishes'. I have implicit faith in that promise. T hough, therefore, from my 
weakness I fail a thousand times, I will not lose f aith. 
Young India,  17-6-'26, p. 215 
 
He (the Satyagrahi) must know that relief will come  when there is least hope 
for it. For such is the way of the cruelly-kind Dei ty who insists upon testing His 
devotee through a fiery furnace and delights in hum bling him to the dust. 
Young India,  4-6-'25, p. 189 
 
Appeal Through Self-suffering 
Love never claims, it ever gives. Love ever suffers , never revenges itself. 
Young India , 9-7-'25, p. 240 
 
I have come to this fundamental conclusion that if you want something really 
important to be done, you must not merely satisfy r eason, you must move the 
heart also. The appeal of reason is more to the hea d but the penetration of the 
heart comes from suffering. It opens up the inner u nderstanding in man. 
Young India , 5-11-'31, p. 341 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 84  The conviction has been growing upon me, that thing s of fundamental 
importance to the people are not secured by reason alone but have to be 
purchased with their suffering. Suffering is the la w of human beings; war is the 
law of the jungle. But suffering is infinitely more  powerful than the law of the 
jungle for converting the opponent and opening his ears, which are otherwise 
shut, to the voice of reason. 
Young India,  5-11-'31, p. 341 
 
The religion of Ahimsa consists in allowing others maximum of convenience at 
the maximum of inconvenience to us, even at the ris k of life. 
Young India , 2-12-'26, p. 422 
 
The hardest heart and the grossest ignorance must d isappear before the rising 
sun of suffering without anger and without malice. 
Young India,  19-2-'25, p. 61 
 
Aim to Convert the Opponent 
It is often forgotten that it is never the intentio n of a Satyagrahi to embarrass 
the wrongdoer. The appeal is never to his fear, it is, must be, always to his 
heart. The Satyagrahi's object is to convert, not t o coerce, the wrongdoer. 
Harijan , 18-3-'39, p. 53 
 
The Satyagrahi seeks to convert his opponent by she er force of character and 
suffering. The purer he is and the more he suffers,  the quicker the progress. 
Young India , 18-9-'24, p. 306 
 
The aim of the non-violent worker must ever be to c onvert. He may not 
however wait endlessly. When therefore the limit is  reached, he takes risks and 
conceives plans of active Satyagraha which may mean  civil disobedience and 
the like. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 85  Young India,  6-2-'30, p. 44 
 
Satyagraha 1 
Since Satyagraha is one of the most powerful method s of direct action, a 
Satyagrahi exhausts all other means before he resor ts to Satyagraha. He will, 
therefore, constantly and continually approach the constituted authority, he 
will appeal to public opinion, educate public opini on, state his case calmly and 
coolly before everybody who wants to listen to him,  and only after he has 
exhausted all these avenues will he resort to Satya graha. But when he has 
found the impelling call of the Inner Voice within him and launches out upon 
Satyagraha he has burnt his boats and there is no r eceding. 
Young India , 20-10-'27, p. 353 
 
Joy lies in the fight, in the attempt, in the suffe ring involved, not in the victory 
itself. 
Harijan,  23-12-'39 p. 386 
 
It is not because I value life low that I countenan ce with joy thousands 
voluntarily losing their lives in Satyagraha, but b ecause I know that it results, in 
the long run, in the least loss of life and, what i s more, it ennobles those who 
lose their lives and morally enriches the world for  their sacrifice. 
Young India,  8-10-'25, p. 365 
 
My Fasts 
I may say that I began my experiments in fasting on  any large scale as an 
instrument of reform in 1913. I had fasted often en ough before, but not in the 
manner of 1913. My definite opinion is that the gen eral result of my numerous 
fasts was without doubt beneficial. They invariably  quickened the conscience of 
the people interested in, and sought to be influenc ed by those fasts. I am not 
aware of any injustice having been perpetrated thro ugh those fasts. In no case My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 86  was there any idea of exercising coercion on any on e. Indeed, I think that the 
word coercion would be a misnomer for the influence  that was exerted by the 
fasts, under criticism. Coercion means some harmful  force used against  a 
person who is expected to do something desired by t he user of the force. In the 
fasts in question, the force used was against mysel f. Surely, force of self-
suffering cannot be put in the same category as the  force of suffering caused to 
the party sought to be influenced. If I fast in ord er to awaken the conscience of 
an erring friend whose error is beyond question, I am not coercing him in the 
ordinary sense of the word. 
The fact is that all spiritual fasts always influen ce those who come within the 
zone of their influence. That is why spiritual fast ing is described as  tapas.  And 
all  tapas invariably exerts purifying influence on those in w hose behalf it is 
undertaken. 
Of course, it is not to be denied that fasts can be  really coercive. Such are fasts 
to attain a selfish object. A fast undertaken to wr ing money from a person or 
for fulfilling some such personal end would amount to the exercise of coercion 
or undue influence. I would unhesitatingly advocate  resistance of such undue 
influence. I have myself successfully resisted it i n the fasts that have been 
undertaken or threatened against me. And if it is a rgued that the dividing line 
between a selfish and an unselfish end is often ver y thin, I would urge that a 
person who regards the end of a fast to be selfish or otherwise base should 
resolutely refuse to yield to it, even though the r efusal may result in the death 
of the fasting person. If people will cultivate the  habit of disregarding fasts 
which in their opinion are taken for unworthy ends,  such fasts will be robbed of 
the taint of coercion and undue influence. Like all  human institutions, fasting 
can be both legitimately and illegitimately used. B ut as a great weapon in the 
armoury of Satyagraha, it cannot be given up becaus e of its possible abuse. 
Satyagraha has been designed as an effective substi tute for violence. This use is 
in its infancy and, therefore, not yet perfected. B ut as the author of modern 
Satyagraha I cannot give up any of its manifold use s without forfeiting my claim 
to handle it in the spirit of a humble seeker. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 87  Harijan,  9-9-'33, p. 5 
 
Non-co-operation 
My non-co-operation, though it is part of my creed,  is a prelude to co-
operation. My non-co-operation is with- methods and  systems, never with men. 
Young India , 12-9-'29, p. 300 
 
Behind my non-co-operation there is always the keen est desire to co-operate 
on the slightest pretext even with the worst of opp onents. 
Young India,  4-6-'25, p. 193 
 
My non-co-operation has its root not in hatred, but  in love. My personal religion 
peremptorily forbids me to hate anybody. I learnt t his simple yet grand 
doctrine when I was twelve years old through a scho ol book and the conviction 
has persisted up to now. It is daily growing on me.  It is a burning passion with 
me- 
Young India,  6-8-'25, p. 272 
 
Civil Disobedience against an Evil State 
Civil disobedience is the inherent right of a citiz en. He does not give it up 
without ceasing to be a man. Civil .disobedience is  never followed by anarchy. 
Criminal disobedience can lead to it. Every State p uts down criminal 
disobedience by force. It perishes, if it does not.  But to put down civil 
disobedience is to attempt to imprison conscience. 
Young India , 5-1-'22. p. 5 
An out-and-out civil resister simply ignores the au thority of the State. He 
becomes an outlaw claiming to disregard every unmor al State law. Thus, for 
instance, he may refuse to pay taxes, he may refuse  to recognize the authority 
of the State in his daily intercourse. He may refus e to obey the law of trespass 
and claim to enter military barracks in order to sp eak to the soldiers, he may My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 88  refuse to submit to limitations upon the manner of picketing and may picket 
within the prescribed area. In doing all this he ne ver uses force and never 
resists force when it is used against him. 
Young India,  10-11-'21, p. 362 
 
I hold the opinion firmly that civil disobedience i s the purest type of 
constitutional agitation. Of course, it becomes deg rading and despicable, if it’s 
civil, i.e., nonviolent character is a mere camoufl age. 
Young India,  15-12-'21, p. 419 
 
Disobedience to be civil must be sincere, respectfu l, restrained, never defiant, 
must be based upon some well-understood principle, must not be capricious, 
and, above all, must have no ill-will or hatred beh ind it. 
Young India , 24-3-'20, p. 4 
 
It requires the fewest number of soldiers. Indeed o ne perfect  civil resister is 
enough to win the battle of Right against Wrong. 
Young India , 10-11-'21, p. 362 
 
C. IN PLACE OF WAR 
Not the Sword for Defence 
I am not a visionary. I claim to be a practical ide alist. The religion of non-
violence is not meant merely for the Rishis and sai nts. It is meant for the 
common people as well. Non-violence is the law of o ur species as violence is 
the law of the brute. The spirit lies dormant in th e brute and he knows no law 
but that of physical might. The dignity of man requ ires obedience to a higher 
law — to the strength of the spirit. 
I have therefore ventured to place before India the  ancient law of self-
sacrifice. For Satyagraha and its offshoots, non-co -operation and civil 
resistance, are nothing but new names for the law o f suffering. The Rishis, who My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 89  discovered the law of non-violence in the midst of violence, were greater 
geniuses than Newton. They were themselves greater warriors than Wellington. 
Having themselves known the use of arms, they reali zed their uselessness and 
taught a weary world that its salvation lay not thr ough violence but through 
non-violence. 
And so I am not pleading for India to practise nonv iolence because it is weak. I 
want her to practise nonviolence being conscious of  her "strength and power. 
No training in arms is required for realization of her strength. We seem to need 
it because we seem to think that we are but a lump of flesh. I want India to 
recognize that she has a soul that cannot perish an d that can rise triumphant 
above every physical weakness and defy the physical  combination of a whole 
world. What is the meaning of Rama, a mere human be ing, with his host of 
monkeys, pitting himself against the insolent stren gth of ten-headed Ravana 
surrounded in supposed safety by the raging waters on all sides of Lanka? Does 
it not mean the conquest of physical might by spiri tual strength? If India takes 
up the doctrine of the sword, she may gain momentar y victory. Then India will 
cease to be the pride of my heart. I am wedded to I ndia because I owe my all 
to her. I believe absolutely that she has a mission  for the world. She is not to 
copy Europe blindly. India's acceptance of the swor d will be the hour of my 
trial. I hope I shall not be found wanting. My reli gion has no geographical limits. 
If I have a living faith in it, it will transcend m y love for India herself. My life is 
dedicated to the service of India through the relig ion of non-violence which I 
believe to be the root of Hinduism. 
- Young India , 11-8-'20, pp. 3, 4 
 
Participation in War 
Being a confirmed war resister I have never given m yself training in the use of 
destructive weapons in spite of opportunities to ta ke such training. It was 
perhaps thus that I escaped direct destruction of h uman life. But so long as I 
lived under a system of Government based on force a nd voluntarily partook of 
the many facilities and privileges it created for m e, I was bound to help that My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 90  Government to the extent of my ability when it was engaged in a war unless I 
non-co-operated with that Government and renounced to the utmost of my 
capacity the privileges it offered me. 
Let me take an illustration. I am a member of an in stitution which holds a few 
acres of land whose crops are in imminent peril fro m monkeys. I believe in the 
sacredness of all life and hence I regard it a brea ch of Ahimsa to inflict any 
injury on the monkeys. But I do not hesitate to ins tigate and direct an attack on 
the monkeys in order to save the crops. I would lik e to avoid this evil. I can 
avoid it by leaving or breaking up the institution.  I do not do so because I do 
not expect to be able to find a society where there  will be no agriculture and 
therefore no destruction of some life. In fear and trembling, in humility and 
penance, I therefore participate in the injury infl icted on the monkeys, hoping 
some day to find a way out. 
Even so did I participate in the three acts of war.  I could not, it would be 
madness for me to sever my connection with the soci ety to which I belong. And 
on those three occasions I had no thought for non-c o-operating with the British 
Government. My position regarding the Government is  totally different today 
and hence I should not voluntarily participate in i ts wars, and I should risk 
imprisonment and even the gallows if I was forced t o take up arms or otherwise 
take part in its military operations. 
But that still does not solve the riddle. If there was a national Government, 
whilst I should not take any direct part in any war , I can conceive occasions 
when it would be my duty to vote for the military t raining of those who wish to 
take it. For I know that all its members do not bel ieve in non-violence to the 
extent I do. It is not possible to make a person or  a society non-violent by 
compulsion. 
Non-violence works in a most mysterious manner. Oft en a man's actions defy 
analysis in terms of non-violence; equally often hi s actions may wear the 
appearance of violence when he is absolutely non-vi olent in the highest sense 
of the term and is subsequently found so to be. All  I can then claim for my My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 91  conduct is that it was, in the instance cited, actu ated in the interests of non-
violence. There was no thought of sordid national o r other interest. 
Young India,  13-9-'28, p. 308 
 
Disarmament 
Before general disarmament in Europe commences, as it must some day, unless 
Europe is to commit suicide, some nation will have to dare to disarm herself 
and take large risks. The level of non-violence in that nation, if that ever 
happily comes to pass, will naturally have risen so  high as to command 
universal respect. Her judgments will be unerring, her decisions firm, her 
capacity for heroic self-sacrifice will be great, a nd she will want to live as 
much for other nations as for herself. 
Young India,  8-10-'25, P. 345 
 
Like opium production, the world manufacture of swo rds needs to be 
restricted. The sword is probably responsible for m ore misery in the world than 
opium. 
Young India,  19-11-'25, p. 397 
 
If there were no greed, there would be no occasion for armaments. 
Harijan,  12-11-'38, p. 328 
 
World peace 
If the recognized leaders of mankind who have contr ol over the engines of 
destruction were wholly to renounce their use, with  full knowledge of its 
implications, permanent peace can be obtained. It i s my conviction that the 
root of the evil is want of a living faith in a liv ing God. It is a first class human 
tragedy that peoples of the earth who claim to beli eve in the message of Jesus 
whom they describe as the Prince of Peace show litt le of that belief in actual 
practice. It is painful to see sincere Christian di vines limiting the scope of Jesus' My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 92  message to select individuals. I have been taught f rom my childhood and tested 
the truth by experience that the primary virtues of  mankind are possible of 
cultivation by the meanest of the human species. It  is this undoubted universal 
possibility that distinguishes the humans from the rest of God's creation. If even 
one nation were unconditionally to perform the supr eme act of renunciation, 
many of us would see in our lifetime visible peace established on earth. 
Harijan,  18-6-'38, p. 153 
 
I reiterate my conviction that there will be no pea ce for the Allies or the world 
unless they shed their belief in the efficacy of wa r and its accompanying 
terrible deception and fraud and are determined to hammer out real peace 
based on freedom and equality of all races and nati ons. 
The Bombay Chronicle,  18-4-’45 
 
1 Satyagraha or non-violent direct action took in t he case of Gandhiji the forms of fasting, 
non-co-operation and civil disobedience, dealt with  briefly below.—Ed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 93   
26. LOVE IN RELATION TO THE ANIMAL WORLD  
A. NON-KILLING OF ANIMALS 
Ahimsa is a comprehensive principle. We are helples s mortals caught in the 
conflagration of Himsa. The saying that life lives on life has a deep meaning in 
it. Man cannot for a moment live without consciousl y or unconsciously 
committing outward Himsa. The very fact of his livi ng— eating, drinking, and 
moving about—necessarily involves some Himsa, destr uction of life, be it ever 
so minute. A votary of Ahimsa therefore remains tru e to his faith if the spring 
of all his actions is compassion, if he shuns to th e best of his ability the 
destruction of the tiniest creature, tries to save it, and thus incessantly strives 
to be free from the deadly coil of Himsa. He will b e constantly growing in self-
restraint and compassion, but he can never become e ntirely free from outward 
Himsa. 
Then again because underlying Ahimsa is the unity o f all life, the error of one 
cannot but affect all, and hence man cannot be whol ly free from Himsa. So 
long as he continues to be a social being, he canno t but participate in the 
Himsa that the very existence of society involves. 
Autobiography,  1948, pp. 427-29 
 
Taking life may be a duty. Let us consider this pos ition. 
We do destroy as much life as we think is necessary  for sustaining the body. 
Thus for food we take life, vegetable and other, an d for health we destroy 
mosquitoes and the like by the use of disinfectants , etc. and we do not think 
that we are guilty of irreligion in doing so. 
This is as regards one's own self. But for the sake  of others, i.e., for the benefit 
of the species we kill carnivorous beasts. When lio ns and tigers pester their 
villages, the villagers regard it as a duty to kill  them or have them killed. 
Even manslaughter may be necessary in certain cases . Suppose a man runs 
amuck and goes furiously about sword in hand, and k illing any one that comes My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 94  his way, and no one dares to capture him alive. Any one who dispatches this 
lunatic will earn the gratitude of the community an d be regarded a benevolent 
man. 
From the point of view of Ahimsa it is the plain du ty of every one to kill such a 
man. There is indeed one exception if it can be so called. The  yogi  who can 
subdue the fury of this dangerous man may not kill him. But we are not here 
dealing with beings who have almost reached perfect ion; we are considering 
the duty of a society of ordinary erring human bein gs. 
There may be a difference of opinion as regards the  appositeness of my 
illustrations. But if they are inadequate, others c an be easily imagined. What 
they are meant to show is that refraining from taki ng life can in no cir-
cumstances be an absolute duty. 
The fact is that Ahimsa does not simply mean non-ki lling. Himsa means causing 
pain to or killing any life out of anger, or from a  selfish purpose, or with the 
intention of injuring it. Refraining from so doing is Ahimsa. 
The physician who prescribes bitter medicine causes  you pain but does no 
Himsa. If he fails to prescribe bitter medicine whe n it is necessary to do so, he 
fails in his duty of Ahimsa. The surgeon who, from fear of causing pain to his 
patient, hesitates to amputate a rotten limb is gui lty of Himsa. He who refrains 
from killing a murderer who is about to kill his wa rd (when he cannot prevent 
him otherwise) earns no merit, but commits a sin, h e practises no Ahimsa, but 
Himsa out of a fatuous sense of Ahimsa. 
Let us now examine the root of Ahimsa. It is utterm ost selflessness. Selflessness 
means complete freedom from a regard for one's body . When some sage 
observed man killing numberless creatures, big and small, out of a regard for 
his own body, he was shocked at his ignorance. He p itied him for thus 
forgetting the deathless soul, encased within the p erishable body, and for 
thinking of the ephemeral physical pleasure in pref erence to the eternal bliss of 
the spirit. He there from deduced the duty of compl ete self-effacement. He 
saw that if man desires to realize himself, i.e. Tr uth, he could do so only by My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 95  being completely detached from the body, i.e. by ma king all other beings feel 
safe from him. That is the way of Ahimsa. 
A realization of this truth shows that the sin of H imsa consists not in merely 
taking life, but in taking life for the sake of one 's perishable body. All 
destruction therefore involved in the process of ea ting, drinking, etc. is selfish 
and therefore Himsa. But man regards it to be unavo idable and puts up with it. 
But the destruction of bodies of tortured creatures  being for their own peace 
cannot be regarded as Himsa, or the unavoidable des truction caused for the 
purpose of protecting one's wards cannot be regarde d as Himsa. 
This line of reasoning is liable to be most mischie vously used. But that is not 
because the reasoning is faulty, but because of the  inherent frailty of man to 
catch at whatever pretexts he can get to deceive hi mself to satisfy his 
selfishness or egoism. But that danger may not excu se one from defining the 
true nature of Ahimsa. Thus we arrive at the follow ing result from foregoing: 
1. It is impossible to sustain one's body without the destruction of other 
bodies to some extent. 
2. All have to destroy some life 
a) for sustaining their own bodies; 
b) for protecting those under their care; or 
c) sometimes for the sake of those whose life is taken . 
3. (a) and (b) in (2) mean -Himsa to a greater or less er extent, (c) means no 
Himsa, and is therefore Ahimsa. Himsa in (a) and (b ) is unavoidable. 
4. A progressive Ahimsa-ist will therefore commit the Himsa contained in (a) 
and (b) as little as possible only when it is unavo idable, and after full and 
mature deliberation and having exhausted all remedi es to avoid it. 
Young India,  4-11-'26, pp. 384-85 
 
To cause pain or wish ill to or to take the life of  any living being out of anger or 
a selfish intent is Himsa. On the other hand, after  a calm and clear judgment to 
kill or cause pain to a living being with a view to  its spiritual or physical benefit 
from a pure, selfless intent may be the purest form  of Ahimsa. Each such case My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 96  must be judged individually and on its own merits. The final test as to its 
violence or non-violence is after all the intent un derlying the act. 
Young India,  4-10-'28, p. 331 
 
Whilst it is true that mental attitude is the cruci al test of Ahimsa, it is not the 
sole test. To kill any living being or things save for his or its own interest is 
Himsa, however noble the motive may otherwise be. A nd a man who harbours 
ill-will towards another is no less guilty of Himsa  because for fear of society or 
want [of opportunity he is unable to translate his ill-will into action. A 
reference to both intent and deed is thus necessary  in order finally to decide 
whether a particular act or abstention can be class ed as Ahimsa. 
Young India,  18-10-'28 p. 352 
 
I am painfully aware of the fact that my desire to continue life in the body 
involves me in constant Himsa, that is why I am bec oming growingly indifferent 
to this physical body of mine. For instance, I know  that in the act of respiration 
I destroy innumerable invisible germs floating in t he air. But I do not stop 
breathing. The consumption of vegetables involves H imsa, but I find that I 
cannot give them up. Again, there is Himsa in the u se of antiseptics, yet I 
cannot bring myself to discard the use of disinfect ants like kerosene, etc. to rid 
myself of the mosquito pest and the like. I suffer snakes to be killed in the 
Ashram when it is impossible to catch and put them out of harm's way. I even 
tolerate the use of the stick to drive the bullock in the Ashram. Thus there is no 
end of Himsa which I directly and indirectly commit . And now I find myself 
confronted with this monkey problem. Let me assure the reader that I am in no 
hurry to take the extreme step of killing them. In fact, I am not sure that I 
would at all be able finally to make up my mind to kill them. As it is, friends 
are helping me with useful suggestions and the adop tion of some of them may 
solve the difficulty at least temporarily without o ur having to kill them. But I 
cannot today promise that I shall never kill the mo nkeys even though they may 
destroy all the crops in the Ashram. If as a result  of this humble confession of My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 97  mine, friends choose to give me up as lost, I would  be sorry, but nothing will 
induce me to try to conceal my imperfections in the  practice of Ahimsa, All I 
claim for myself is that I am ceaselessly trying to  understand the implications 
of great ideals like Ahimsa and to practise them in  thought, word and deed, 
and that not without a certain measure of success a s I think. But I know that I 
have a long distance yet to cover in this direction . 
Young India , 1-11-’28, p. 361  
 
The rule of not killing venomous reptiles has been practised for the most part 
at Phoenix 1, Tolstoy Farm 1 and Sabarmati. 2 At each of these places we had to 
settle on waste lands, we have had, however, no los s of life occasioned by 
snakebite. I see, with the eye of faith, in this ci rcumstance the hand of the God 
of Mercy. Let no one cavil at this, saying that God  can never be partial, and 
that He has no time to meddle with the humdrum affa irs of men. I have no 
other language to express the fact of the matter, t o describe this uniform 
experience of mine. Human language can but imperfec tly describe God's ways. I 
am sensible of the fact that they are indescribable  and inscrutable. But if 
mortal man will dare to describe them, he has no be tter medium than his own 
inarticulate speech. Even if it be a superstition t o believe that complete 
immunity from harm for twenty-five years in spite o f a fairly regular practice of 
non-killing is not a fortuitous accident but a grac e of God, I should still hug that 
superstition. 
Autobiography,  1948, pp. 524-25 
 
My Ahimsa is my own. I am not able to accept in its  entirety the doctrine of 
non-killing of animals. I have no feeling in me to save the life of those animals 
who devour or cause hurt to man. I consider it wron g to help in the increase of 
their progeny. Therefore, I will not feed ants, mon keys, or dogs. I will never 
sacrifice a man's life in order to save theirs. 
Thinking along these lines I have come to the concl usion that to do away with 
monkeys where they have become a menace to the well -being of man is My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 98  pardonable. Such killing becomes a duty. The questi on may arise as to why this 
rule should not also apply to human beings. It cann ot because, however bad, 
they are as we are. Unlike the animal, God has give n man the faculty of reason. 
Harijan,  5-5-'46, p. 123 
 
B. VEGETARIANISM 
To my mind the life of a lamb is no less precious t han that of a human being. I 
should be unwilling to take the life of lamb for th e sake of the human body. I 
hold that the more helpless a creature, the more en titled it is to protection by 
man from the cruelty of man. 
Autobiography,  1948, p. 290 
 
Rightly or wrongly it is a part of my religious con viction that man may not eat 
meat, eggs, and the like. There should be a limit e ven to the means of keeping 
ourselves alive. Even for life itself we may not do  certain things. 
Autobiography,  1948, pp. 302-03 
 
I do not regard flesh-food as necessary for us at a ny stage and under any clime 
in which it is possible for human beings ordinarily  to live. I hold flesh-food to be 
unsuited to our species. We err in copying the lowe r animal world if we are 
superior to it. Experience teaches that animal food  is unsuited to those who 
would curb their passions. 
But it is wrong to overestimate the importance of f ood in the formation of 
character or in subjugating the flesh. Diet is a po werful factor not to be 
neglected. But to sum up all religion in terms of d iet, as is often done in India, 
is as wrong as it is to disregard all restraint in regard to diet and to give full 
reins to one's appetite. Vegetarianism is one of th e priceless gifts of Hinduism. 
It may not be lightly given up. It is necessary the refore to correct the error that 
vegetarianism has made us weak in mind or body, or passive or inert in action. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 99  The greatest Hindu reformers have been the activest  in their generation and 
they have invariably been vegetarians. Who could sh ow greater activity than 
say Shankara or Dayananda in their times ? 
The choice of one's diet is not a thing to be based  on faith. It is a matter for 
everyone to reason out for himself. There has grown  up especially in the West 
an amount of literature on vegetarianism which any seeker after truth may 
study with profit. Many eminent medical men have co ntributed to this 
literature. Here, in India, we have not needed any encouragement for 
vegetarianism. For it has been hitherto accepted as  the most desirable and the 
most respectable thing. 
Young India,  7-10-'26, p. 347 
 
It should be remembered that mere  Jivadaya  (kindness to animals) does not 
enable us to overcome the 'six deadly enemies' with in us, namely lust, anger, 
greed, infatuation, pride and falsehood. Give me th e man who has completely 
conquered self and is full of goodwill and love tow ards all and is ruled by the 
law of love in all his actions, and I tor one will offer him my respectful homage, 
even though he be a meat-eater. On the other hand, the Jivadqya  of a person 
who is steeped in anger and lust but daily feeds th e ants and insects and 
refrains from killing has hardly anything in it to recommend itself. It is a 
mechanical performance without any spiritual value.  It may even be worse—a 
hypocritical screen for hiding the corruption withi n. 
Harijan,  15-9-'40, p. 285 
 
C. MILK 
'I cannot rebuild your body unless you take milk. I f in addition you would take 
iron and arsenic injections, I would guarantee full y to renovate your 
constitution.' 
'You can give me the injections', I replied, 'but m ilk is a different question; I 
have a vow against it.' My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 100  'What exactly is the nature of your vow ?' the doct or inquired. 
I told him the whole history and the reasons behind  my vow, how, since I had 
come to know that the cow and the buffalo were subj ected to the process of  
phooka,  I had conceived a strong disgust for milk. Moreove r, I had always held 
that milk is not the natural diet of man. I had the refore abjured its use 
altogether. Kasturba was standing near my bed liste ning all the time to this 
conversation. 
'But surely you cannot have any objection to goat's  milk then,' she interposed. 
The doctor too took up the strain* 'If you will tak e goat's milk, it will be enough 
for me,' he said. 
I succumbed. My intense eagerness to take up the Sa tyagraha fight had created 
in me a strong desire to live, and so I contented m yself with adhering to the 
letter of my vow only, and sacrificed its spirit. F or although I had only the milk 
of the cow and the she-buffalo in mind when I took the vow, by natural 
implication it covered the milk of all animals. Nor  could it be right for me to 
use milk at all, so long as I held that milk is not  the natural diet of man. Yet 
knowing all this I agreed to take goat's milk. The will to live proved stronger 
than the devotion to truth, and for once the votary  of truth compromised his 
sacred ideal by his eagerness to take up the Satyag raha fight. The memory of 
this action even now rankles in my breast and fills  me with remorse, and I am 
constantly thinking how to give up goat's milk. But  I cannot yet free myself 
from that subtlest of temptations, the desire to se rve, which still holds me. 
My experiments in dietetics are dear to me as a par t of my researches in 
Ahimsa. They give me recreation and joy. But my use  of goat's milk today 
troubles me not from the view-point of dietetic Ahi msa so much as from that of 
truth, being no less than a breach of pledge. It se ems to me that I understand 
the ideal of truth better than that of Ahimsa, and my experience tells me that, 
if I let go my hold of truth, I shall never be able  to solve the riddle of Ahimsa. 
The ideal of truth requires that vows taken should be fulfilled in the spirit as 
well as in the letter. In the present case I killed  the spirit—the soul of my vow— 
by adhering to its outer form only, and that is wha t galls me. But in spite of this My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 101  clear knowledge I cannot see my way straight before  me. In other words, 
perhaps, I have not the courage to follow the strai ght course. Both at bottom 
mean one and the same thing, for doubt is invariabl y the result of want or 
weakness of faith. 'Lord, give me faith' is, theref ore, my prayer day and night. 
Autobiography,  1948, pp. 556-58 
 
D. VIVISECTION  
I abhor vivisection with my whole soul. I detest th e unpardonable slaughter of 
innocent life in the name of science and humanity s o-called, and all the 
scientific discoveries stained with innocent blood I count as of no consequence. 
If the circulation of blood theory could not have b een discovered without 
vivisection, the human kind could well have done wi thout it. And I see the day 
clearly dawning when the honest scientist of the We st will put limitations upon 
the present methods of pursuing knowledge. Future m easurements will take 
note not merely of the human family but of all that  lives, and even as we are 
slowly but surely discovering that it is an error t o suppose that Hindus can 
thrive upon the degradation of a fifth of themselve s or that peoples of the West 
can rise or live upon the exploitation and degradat ion of the Eastern and 
African nations, so shall we realize in the fullnes s of time that our domination 
over the lower order of creation is not for their s laughter, but for their benefit 
equally with ours. For I am as certain that they ar e endowed with a soul as that 
I am. 
Young India,  17-12-'25, p. 440 
 
Bowing to the Earth we learn or ought to learn to b e humble even as the Earth 
is humble. She supports the beings that tread upon her. She is therefore rightly 
the consort of Vishnu. This conception, in my opini on, does no violence to 
truth. On the contrary, it is beautiful and is whol ly consistent with the idea 
that God is everywhere. There is nothing inanimate for Him. We are of the 
Earth earthy. If Earth is not, we are not. I feel n earer God by feeling Him 
through the Earth. In bowing to the Earth, I at onc e realize my indebtedness to My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 102  Him and if I am a worthy child of that Mother, I sh all at once reduce myself to 
dust and rejoice in establishing kinship with not o nly the lowliest of human 
beings, but also with the lowest forms of creation whose fate—reduction to 
dust—I have to share with them. The lowest form of creation is just as 
imperishable as my soul is. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  1949, pp. 147-48 
 
1 Ashrams founded by Gandhiji in South Africa. 
2 An Ashram founded by Gandhiji in Gujarat, India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 103   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION SIX: AIDS TO THE PRACTICE OF MY RELIGION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 104   
27. FASTING AND PRAYER 
This is a hoary institution. A genuine fast cleanse s body, mind and soul. It 
crucifies the flesh and to that extent sets the sou l free. A sincere prayer can 
work wonders. It is an intense longing of the soul for its even greater purity. 
Purity thus gained when it is utilized for a noble purpose becomes a prayer. 
Fasting and prayer therefore are a most powerful pr ocess of purification, and 
that which* purifies necessarily enables us the bet ter to do our duty and to 
attain our goal. If therefore fasting and prayer se em at times not to answer, it 
is not because there is nothing in them but because  the right spirit is not 
behind them. 
A fast to be true must be accompanied by a readines s to receive pure thoughts 
and determination to resist all Satan's temptation.  Similarly a prayer to be true 
has to be intelligible and definite. One has to ide ntify oneself with it. Counting 
beads with the name of Allah on one's lips whilst t he mind wanders in all 
directions is worse than useless. 
Young India,  24-3-'20, p. 1 
 
My religion teaches me that whenever there is distr ess which one cannot 
remove, one must fast and pray. 
Young India,  25-9-'24, p. 319 
 
A. FASTS 
It is my firm belief that the strength of the soul grows in proportion as you 
subdue the flesh. 
Young India , 23-10-'24, p. 354 
 
For the seeker who would live in fear of God, and w ho would see Him face to 
face, restraint in diet both as to quantity and qua lity is as essential as restraint 
in thought and speech. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 105  Autobiography,  1948, p. 334 
 
 
Fasting has to be of the widest character possible.  Fasting of the body has to be 
accompanied by fasting of all  the senses. And the meagre food of the Gita, is 
also a fasting of the body. The Gita enjoins not te mperance in food but 
'meagreness'; meagreness is a perpetual fast. Meagr eness means just enough to 
sustain the body for the service for which it is ma de. The test is again supplied 
by saying that food should be taken as one takes me dicine in measured doses, 
at measured times and as required, not for taste bu t for the welfare of the 
body. 'Meagreness' is perhaps better rendered by 'm easured quantities'. I cannot 
recall Arnold's rendering. A 'full' meal is therefo re a crime against God and 
man—the latter because the full-mealers deprive the ir neighbours of their 
portion. God's economy provides from day to day jus t enough food for all in just 
medicinal doses. We are all of the tribe of full me alers. Instinctively to know 
the medicinal dose required is a Herculean task, fo r by parental training we are 
gluttons. Then, when it is almost too late, it dawn s upon some of us that food 
is made not to enjoy but to sustain the body as our  slave. It becomes from the 
moment a grim fight against the inherited and acqui red habit of eating for 
pleasure. Hence the necessity for a complete fast a t intervals and partial fasts 
forever. Partial fast is the meagre or measured foo d of the Gita. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  1949, pp. 241-42 
 
"Spare diet" is a good expression,  अ/glyph228प  means less than enough. What is enough 
is a matter of conjecture, therefore our own mental  picture. The man of truth, 
knowing that man is always indulgent to the body, s aid, in order to counteract 
the indulgence, that he should take less food than what he would think was 
enough; then there was likelihood of his taking wha t in fact was enough. So 
what we often think is spare or meagre is likely ev en to be more than enough. 
More people are weak through over-feeding or wrong feeding than through My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 106  underfeeding. It is wonderful, if we chose the righ t diet, what an 
extraordinarily small quantity would suffice. 
Bapu’s Letters to Mir a,  1949, p. 254 
 
The mere fact of the body is nothing without the wi ll behind it. It must be a 
genuine confession of the inner fast, an irrepressi ble longing to express truth 
and nothing but truth. 
Harijan,  6-5-'33 
 
My austerities, fastings and prayers are, I know, o f no value, if I rely upon them 
for reforming me. But they have an inestimable valu e, if they represent, as I 
hope they do, the yearnings of a soul striving to l ay his weary head in the lap of 
his Maker. 
Harijan,  18-4-'36, p. 77 
 
Mortification of the flesh is a necessity when the flesh rebels against one; it is a 
sin when the flesh has come under subjection and ca n be used as an instrument 
of service. In other words, there is no inherent me rit in mortification of the 
flesh. 
Harijan , 2-11-'35 p. 299 
 
Hindu religious literature is replete with instance s of fasting, and thousands of 
Hindus fast even today on the slightest pretext. It  is the one thing that does the 
least harm. There is no doubt that, like everything  that is good, fasts are 
abused. That is inevitable. One cannot forbear to d o good, because sometimes 
evil is done under its cover. 
Mortification of the flesh has been held all the wo rld over as a condition of 
spiritual progress. A complete fast is a complete a nd literal denial of self. It is 
the truest prayer. "Take my life and let it be alwa ys, only, all for Thee" is not, 
should not be, a mere lip or figurative expression.  It has to be a reckless and My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 107  joyous giving without the least reservation. Absten tion from food and even 
water is but the mere beginning, the least part of the surrender. 
I have a profound belief in the method of the fast,  both private and public. 
Harijan,  15-4-'33, p. 4 
 
I know now more fully than ever that there is no pr ayer without fasting, be the 
latter ever so little. And this fasting relates not  merely to the palate, but to all 
the senses and organs. Complete absorption in praye r must mean complete 
exclusion of physical activities till prayer posses ses the whole of our being and 
we rise superior to, and are completely detached fr om, all physical functions. 
That state can only be reached after continual and voluntary crucifixion of the 
flesh. Thus all fasting, if it is a spiritual act, is an intense prayer or a 
preparation for it. It is a yearning of the soul to  merge in the divine essence. 
Harijan,  8-7-'33, p. 4 
 
B. PRAYER 
Prayer is the very soul and essence of religion, an d, therefore, prayer must be 
the very core of the life of man, for no man can li ve without religion. 
Young India , 23-1-'30, p. 25 
 
God has a thousand names, or rather, He is Nameless . We may worship or pray 
to Him by whichever name that pleases us. Some call  Him Rama, some Krishna, 
others call Him Rahim, and yet others call Him God.  All worship the same spirit, 
but as all foods do not agree with all, all names d o not appeal to all. Each 
chooses the name according to his associations, and  He being the In-Dweller all-
Powerful and Omniscient knows our innermost feeling s and responds to us 
according to our deserts. 
Worship or prayer, therefore, is not to be performe d with the lips, but with the 
heart. And that is why it can be performed equally by the dumb and the 
stammerer, by the ignorant and the stupid. And pray ers of those whose tongues My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 108  are nectared but whose hearts of full of poison are  never heard. He, therefore, 
who would pray to God, must cleanse his heart. It i s faith that steers us through 
stormy seas, faith that moves mountains and faith t hat jumps across the ocean. 
That faith is nothing but a living, wide-awake cons ciousness of God within. He 
who has achieved that faith wants nothing. Bodily d iseased he is spiritually 
healthy, physically pure, he rolls in spiritual ric hes. 
'But how is the heart to be cleansed to this extent ?' one might well ask. The 
language of the lips is easily taught but who can t each the language of the 
heart ? Only the  bhakta—  the true devotee—knows it and can teach it. The Gi ta 
has defined the  bhakta  in three places, and talked of him generally 
everywhere. But knowledge of the definition of a  bhakta  is hardly a sufficient 
guide. They are rare on this earth. I have therefor e suggested the Religion of 
Service as the means. God of Himself seeks for His seat the heart of him who 
serves his fellow-men. 
A prayerful heart is the vehicle and service makes the heart prayerful. Those 
Hindus who in this age serve the "untouchables' fro m a full heart truly pray; the 
Hindus and those others who spin prayerfully for th e poor and the indigent truly 
pray. 
Young India , 24-9-25, pp. 331-32 
 
What is it that millions of Hindus, Mussalmans, Chr istians, Jews and others do 
every day during the time set apart for the adorati on of the Maker ? It seems to 
me that it is a yearning of the heart to be one wit h the Maker, an invocation for 
His blessing. It is in this case the attitude that matters, not words uttered or 
muttered. And often the association of words that h ave been handed down 
from ancient times has an effect which in their ren dering into one's mother-
tongue they will lose altogether. Thus the Gayatri translated and recited in, 
say, Gujarati, will not have the same effect as the  original. The utterance of 
the word Rama will instantaneously affect millions of Hindus, when the word 
God, although they may understand the meaning, will  leave them untouched. 
Words after all acquire a power by long usage and s acredness associated with My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 109  their use. There is much therefore to be said for t he retention of the old 
Sanskrit formulae for the most prevalent  mantras  or verses. That the meaning 
of them should be properly understood goes without saying. 
There can be no fixed rule laid down as to the time  these devotional acts 
should take. It depends upon individual temperament . These are precious 
moments in one's' daily life. The exercises are int ended to sober and humble us 
and enable us to realize that nothing happens witho ut His will and that we are 
but 'clay in the hands of the Potter.' These are mo ments when one reviews one's 
immediate past, confesses one's weakness, asks for forgiveness and strength to 
be and do better. One minute may be enough for some , twenty-four hours may 
be too little for others. For those, who are filled  with the presence of God in 
them, to labour is to pray. Their life is one conti nuous prayer or act of worship. 
For those others who act only to sin, to indulge th emselves, and live for self, no 
time is too much. If they had patience and faith an d the will to be pure, they 
would pray till they feel the definite purifying pr esence of God within them. 
For us ordinary mortals there must be a middle path  between these two 
extremes. We are not so exalted as to be able to sa y that all our acts are a 
dedication, nor perhaps are we so far gone as to be  living purely for self. Hence 
have all religions set apart times for general devo tion. Unfortunately these 
have nowadays become merely mechanical and formal, where they are not 
hypocritical. What is necessary therefore is the co rrect attitude to accompany 
these devotions. 
For definite personal prayer in the sense of asking  God for something, it should 
certainly be in one's own tongue. Nothing can be gr ander than to ask God to 
make us act justly towards everything that lives. 
Young India,  10-6-'26, p. 211 
 
Man's destined purpose is to conquer old habits, to  overcome the evil in him 
and to restore good to its rightful place. If relig ion does not teach us how to 
achieve this conquest, it teaches us nothing. But t here is no royal road to 
success in this the truest enterprise in life. Cowa rdice is perhaps the greatest My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 110  vice from which we suffer and is also possibly the greatest violence, certainly 
far greater than bloodshed and the like that genera lly go under the name of 
violence. For it comes from want of faith in God an d ignorance of His 
attributes. I can give my own testimony and say tha t a heartfelt prayer is 
undoubtedly the most potent instrument that man pos sesses for overcoming 
cowardice and all other bad old habits, Prayer is a n impossibility without a 
living faith in the presence of God within. 
We have to make our choice whether we should ally o urselves with the forces 
of evil or with the forces of good. And to pray to God is nothing but that sacred 
alliance between God and man whereby he attains his  deliverance from the 
clutches of the prince of darkness. But a heartfelt  prayer is not a recitation 
with the lips. It is yearning from within which exp resses itself in every word, 
every act, nay, every thought of man. When an evil thought successfully assails 
him, he may know that he has offered but a lip pray er and similarly with regard 
to an evil word escaping hit lips or an evil act do ne by him. Real prayer is an 
absolute shield and protection against this trinity  of evils. Success does not 
always attend the very first effort at such real li ving prayer. We have to strive 
against ourselves, we have to believe in spite of o urselves, because months are 
as our years. We have therefore to cultivate illimi table patience if we will 
realize the efficacy of prayer. There will be darkn ess, disappointment and even 
worse; but we must have courage enough to battle ag ainst all these and not 
succumb to cowardice. There is no such thing as ret reat for a man of prayer. 
What I am relating is not a fairy tale. I have not drawn an imaginary picture. I 
have summed up the testimony of men who have by pra yer conquered every 
difficulty in their upward progress, and I have add ed my own humble testimony 
that the more I live, the more I realize how much I  owe to faith and prayer 
which is one and the same thing for me.. And I am q uoting an experience not 
limited to a few hours, or days or weeks, but exten ding over an unbroken 
period of nearly 40 years. I have had my share of d isappointments, uttermost 
darkness, counsels of despair, counsels of caution,  subtlest assaults of pride, 
but I am able to say that my faith,—and I know that  it is ' still little enough, by My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 111  no means as great as I want it to be,—has ultimatel y conquered every one of 
these difficulties up to now. If we have faith in u s, if we have a prayerful heart, 
we may not tempt God, may not make terms with Him. We must reduce 
ourselves to a cipher. 
Not until we have reduced ourselves to nothingness can we conquer the evil in 
us. God demands nothing less than complete self-sur render as the price for the 
only real freedom that is worth having. And when a man thus loses himself, he 
immediately finds himself in the service of all tha t lives. It becomes his delight 
and his recreation. He is a new man, never weary of  spending himself in the 
Service of God's creation. 
Young India,  20-12-'28, p. 420 
 
God never answers the prayers of the arrogant, nor the prayers of those who 
bargain with Him If you would ask Him to help you, you would go to Him in all 
your nakedness, approach Him without reservations, also without fear or doubts 
as to how He can help a fallen being like you. He w ho has helped millions who 
have approached Him, is He going to desert you? He makes no exceptions 
whatsoever and you will find that every one of your  prayers will be answered. 
The prayer of even the most impure will be answered . I am telling this out of 
my personal experience. I have gone through the pur gatory. Seek first the 
Kingdom of Heaven and everything will be added unto  you. 
Young India,  4-4-'29, p. 111 
 
On all occasions of trial He has saved me. In all m y trials—of a spiritual nature, 
as a lawyer, in conducting institutions, and in pol itics—I can say that God saved 
me. When every hope is gone, 'when helpers fail and  comforts flee/ I find that 
help arrives somehow, from I know not where. Suppli cation, worship, prayer 
are no superstition; they are acts more real than t he acts of eating, drinking, 
sitting or walking. It is no exaggeration to say th at they alone are real, all else 
is unreal. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 112  Such worship or prayer is no flight of eloquence; i t is no lip-homage. It springs 
from the heart. If, therefore, we achieve that puri ty of the heart when it is 
'emptied of all but love', if we keep all the chord s in proper tune, they 
'trembling pass in music out of sight'. Prayer need s no speech. It is in itself 
independent of any sensuous effort. I have not the slightest doubt that prayer is 
an unfailing means of cleansing the heart of passio ns. But it must be combined 
with the utmost humility. 
Autobiography,  1948, p. 96 
 
Prayer has been the saving of my life. Without it I  should have been a lunatic 
long ago. My autobiography will tell you that I hav e had my fair share of the 
bitterest public and private experience. They threw  me into temporary despair, 
but if I was able to get rid of it, it was because of prayer. Now I may tell you 
that prayer has not been part of my life in the sen se that truth has been. It 
came out of sheer necessity, as I found myself in a  plight when I could not 
possibly be happy without it. And the more my faith  in God increased, the more 
irresistible became the yearning for prayer. Life s eemed to be dull and vacant 
without it. I had attended the Christian service in  South Africa, but it had failed 
to grip me. I could not join them in prayer. They s upplicated God, but I could 
not do so, I failed egregiously. I started with dis belief in God and prayer, and 
until at a late stage in life I did not feel anythi ng like a void in life. But at that 
stage I felt that as food was indispensable for the  body, so was prayer in-
dispensable for the soul. In fact food for the body  is not so necessary as prayer 
for the soul. For starvation is often necessary in order to keep the body in 
health, but there is no such thing as prayer-starva tion — In spite of despair 
staring me in the face on the political horizon, I have never lost my peace. In 
fact I have found people who envy my peace. That pe ace, I tell you, comes 
from prayer. I am not a man of learning but I humbl y claim to be a man of 
prayer. I am indifferent as to the form. Everyone i s law unto himself in that 
respect. But there are some well-marked roads, and it is safe to walk along the 
beaten tracks, trod by the ancient teachers. I have  given my personal My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 113  testimony. Let everyone try and find that as a resu lt of daily prayer he adds 
something new to his life, something with which not hing can be compared. 
Young India,  24-9-'31, p. 274 
 
[The following is a summary of the discourse given in Gujarati by Gandhiji at Sabarmati to 
a conference of hostel boys from Gujarat:] 
I am glad that you want me to speak to you on the m eaning of and the 
necessity for prayer. 
Prayer is the very core of man's life, as it is the  most vital part of religion. 
Prayer is either petitional or in its wider sense i s inward communion. In either 
case the ultimate result is the same. Even when it is petitional, the petition 
should be for the cleansing and purification of the  soul, for freeing it from the 
layers of ignorance and darkness that envelop it. H e therefore who hungers for 
the awakening of the divine in him must fall back o n prayer. But prayer is no 
mere exercise of words or of the ears, it is no mer e repetition of empty 
formula. It is better in prayer to have a heart wit hout words than words 
without a heart. It must be in clear response to th e spirit which hungers for it. 
And even as a hungry man relishes a hearty meal, a hungry soul will relish a 
heartfelt prayer. And I am giving you a bit of my e xperience and that of my 
companions when I say that he who has experienced t he magic of prayer may 
do without food for days together but not a single moment without prayer. For 
without prayer there is no inward peace. 
If that is the case, someone will say, we should be  offering our prayers every 
minute of our lives. There is no doubt about it, bu t we erring mortals, who find 
it difficult to retire within ourselves for inward communion even for single 
moment, will find it impossible to remain perpetual ly in communion with the 
divine. We therefore fix some hours when we make a serious effort to throw off 
the attachments of the world for a while, we make a  serious endeavour to 
remain, so to say, out of the flesh. You have heard  Suradas's hymn. It is the 
passionate cry of a soul hungering for union with t he divine. According to our 
standards he was a saint, but according to his own he was a proclaimed sinner. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 114  Spiritually he was miles ahead of us, but he felt t he separation from the divine 
so keenly that he has uttered that anguished cry in  loathing and despair. 
I have talked of the necessity for prayer, and ther e-through I have dealt with 
the essence of prayer. We are born to serve our fel lowmen, and we cannot 
properly do so unless we are wide-awake. There is a n eternal struggle raging in 
man's breast between the powers of darkness and of light, and he who has not 
the sheet-anchor of prayer to rely upon will be a v ictim to the powers of 
darkness. The man of prayer will be at peace with h imself and with the whole 
world; the man who goes about the affairs of the wo rld without a prayerful 
heart will be miserable and will make the world als o miserable. Apart therefore 
from its bearing on man's condition after death, pr ayer has incalculable value 
for man in this world of the living. Prayer is the only means of bringing about 
orderliness and peace and repose in our daily acts.  
Begin therefore your day with prayer, and make it s o soulful that it may remain 
with you until the evening. Close the day with pray er so that you may have a 
peaceful night free from dreams and nightmares. Do not worry about the form 
of prayer. Let it be any form, it should be such as  can put us into communion 
with the divine. Only, whatever be the form, let no t the spirit wander while 
the words of prayer run on out of your mouth. 
If what I have said has gone home to you, you will not be at peace until you 
have compelled your hostel superintendents to inter est themselves in your 
prayer and to make it obligatory. Restraint self-im posed is no compulsion. A 
man, who chooses the path of freedom from restraint , i.e. self-indulgence, will 
be a bond slave of passions, whilst the man who bin ds himself to rules and 
restraints releases himself. All things in the univ erse, including the sun and the 
moon and the stars, obey certain laws. Without the restraining influence of 
these laws the world will not go on for a single mo ment. You, whose mission in 
life is service of your fellowmen, will go to piece s if you do not impose on 
yourselves some sort of discipline, and prayer is n ecessary spiritual discipline. It 
is discipline and restraint that separates us from the brute. If we will be men My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 115  walking with our heads erect and not walking on all  fours, let us understand 
and put ourselves under voluntary discipline and re straint. 
Young India , 23-1-'30, pp. 25-26 
 
Why pray at all ? Does not God, if there be one, kn ow what has happened ? 
Does He stand in need of prayer to enable Him to do  His duty ? 
No, God needs no reminder. He is within every one. Nothing happens without 
His permission. Our prayer is a heart search. It is  a reminder to ourselves that 
we are helpless without His support. No effort is c omplete without prayer,—
without a definite recognition that the best human endeavour is of no effect if 
it has not God's blessings behind it. Prayer is a c all to humility. It is a call to 
self-purification, to inward search. 
Harijan,  8-6-'35, p. 132 
 
Dr. Fabri, a follower of Buddha, called on Gandhiji  at Abbottabad, and 
enquired: 
"Gould the Divine Mind be changed by prayer? Could one find it out by prayer?" 
"It is a difficult thing to explain fully what I do  when I pray," said Gandhiji. "But 
I must try to answer your question. The Divine Mind  is unchangeable, but that 
Divinity is in everyone and everything—animate and inanimate. The meaning of 
prayer is that I want to evoke that Divinity within  me. Now I may have that 
intellectual conviction, but not a living touch. An d so when I pray for Swaraj or 
Independence for India I pray or wish for adequate power to gain that Swaraj or 
to make the largest contribution I can towards winn ing it, and I maintain that I 
can get that power in answer to prayer." 
"Then you are not justified in calling it prayer. T o pray means to beg or 
demand," said Dr. Fabri. 
"Yes, indeed. You may say I beg it of myself, of my  Higher Self, the Real Self 
with which I have not yet achieved complete identif ication. You may, My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 116  therefore, describe it as a Constitutional longing to lose oneself in the Divinity 
which comprises all." 
"What about the people who cannot pray?" asked Dr. Fabri. 
"Be humble", said Gandhiji, "I would say to them, a nd do not limit even the real 
Buddha by your own conception of Buddha. He could n ot have ruled the lives of 
millions of men that he did and does today if he wa s not humble enough to 
pray. There is something infinitely higher than int ellect that rules us and even 
the sceptics. Their scepticism and philosophy do no t help them in critical 
periods of their lives. They need something better,  something outside them 
that can sustain them. And so if someone puts a con undrum before me, I say to 
him, 'You are not going to know the meaning of God or prayer unless you reduce 
yourself to a cipher. You must be humble enough to see that in spite of your 
greatness and gigantic intellect you are but a spec k in the universe. A merely 
intellectual conception of the things of life is no t enough. It is the spiritual 
conception which eludes the intellect, and which al one can give one 
satisfaction. Even moneyed men have critical period s in their lives. Though 
they are surrounded by everything that money can bu y and affection can give, 
they find themselves at certain moments in their li ves utterly distracted. It is in 
these moments that we have a glimpse of God, a visi on of Him who is guiding 
every one of our steps in life. It is prayer.' " 
"You mean what we might call a true religious exper ience which is stronger 
than intellectual conception," said Dr. Fabri. 
"That is prayer," repeated Gandhiji with an insiste nce that could not but have 
gone home. 
Harijan , 19-8-'39, pp. 237-38 
 
Q. Would it not be better for a man to give the tim e he spends on the worship 
of God to the service of the poor? And should not t rue service make devotional 
worship unnecessary for such a man? My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 117  A.  I sense mental laziness as also agnosticism in thi s question. The biggest of  
karmayogis  never give up devotional songs or worship. Idealis tically it may be 
said that true service of others is itself worship and that such devotees do not 
need to spend any time in songs etc. As a matter of  fact,  bhajans  etc. are a 
help to true service and keep the remembrance of Go d fresh in the heart of the 
devotee. 
Harijan,  13-10-'46 p. 357 
 
C. RAMANAMA 
I am a stranger to  yogic  practices. The practice I follow is a practice I l earnt in 
my childhood from my nurse. I was afraid of ghosts.  She used to say to me: 
'There are no ghosts, but if you are afraid, repeat  Ramanama (the name of 
God).' What I learnt in my childhood has become a h uge thing in my mental 
firmament. It is a sun that has brightened my darke st hour. A Christian may find 
the same solace from the repetition of the name of Jesus, and a Muslim from 
the name of Allah. All these things have the same i mplications and they 
produce identical results under identical circumsta nces. Only the repetition 
must not be a lip expression, but part of your very  being. 
Harijan , 5-12-'36, p. 339 
 
It (repetition of Ramanama) has been second nature with me with growing 
knowledge and advancing years. I may even say that the Word is in my heart, if 
not actually on my lips, all the twenty-four hours.  It has been my saviour and I 
am ever stayed on it. 
Harijan , 17-8-*34, p. 213 
 
God's grace shall descend on those who do His will and wait upon Him, not on 
those who simply mutter 'Rama Rama'. 
Young India , 8-4-'26, pp. 131-32 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 118  He and His Law are one. To observe His Law is, ther efore, the best form of 
worship. A man who becomes one with the Law does no t stand in need of vocal 
recitation of the name. In other words, an individu al with whom contemplation 
on God has become as natural as breathing is so fil led with God's spirit that 
knowledge or observance of the Law becomes second n ature, as it were, with 
him. 
Harijan , 24-3-'46, p. 56 
 
A true devotee of God faithfully obeys the five ele mental forces of nature. If he 
so obeys, he will not fall ill. If perchance he doe s, he will cure himself with the 
aid of the elementals. It is not for the dweller in  the body to get the body 
cured anyhow—he who believes that he is nothing but  body will naturally 
wander to the ends of the earth in order to cure th e body of its ills. But he who 
realizes that the soul is something apart from, tho ugh in the body, that it is 
imperishable in contrast to the perishable body, wi ll not be perturbed nor 
mourn if the elementals fail. On the contrary he wi ll welcome death as a 
friend- He will become his own healer instead of se eking for medical men. He 
will live in the consciousness of the soul within a nd look to the care, first and 
last, of the in- dweller. 
Such a man will take God's name with every breath. His Rama will be awake 
even whilst the body is asleep. Rama will always be  with him in whatever he 
does. The real death for such a devoted man will be  the loss of this sacred 
companionship. 
As an aid to keeping his Rama with him, he will tak e what the five elementals 
have to give him. That is to say, he will employ th e simplest and easiest way of 
deriving ; all the benefit he can from earth, air, water, sunlight and ether. This 
aid is not complementary to Ramanama. It is but a m eans of its realization. 
Ramanama does not in fact require any aid. But to c laim belief in Ramanama 
and at the same time to run to doctors do not go ha nd in hand. 
A friend versed in religious lore who read my remar ks on Ramanama sometime 
ago wrote to say that Ramanama is an alchemy such a s can transform the body. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 119  The conservation of the vital energy has been liken ed to accumulated wealth, 
but it is in the power of Ramanama alone to make it  a running stream of ever 
increasing spiritual strength ultimately making a f all impossible. 
Just as the body cannot exist without blood, so the  soul needs the matchless 
and pure strength of faith. This strength can renov ate the weakness of all man's 
physical organs. That is why it is said that when R amanama is enshrined in the 
heart, it means the rebirth of man. This law applie s to the young, the old man 
and woman alike. 
This belief is to be found in the West too. Christi an Science gives a glimpse of 
it. 
India needs no outside support for a belief which h as been handed down to her 
people from time immemorial. 
Harijan , 29-6-’47, p. 212 
 
There is no connection between Ramanama of my conce ption and  jantar 
mantar  (magic). I have said that to take Ramanama from th e heart means 
deriving help from an incomparable power. The atom bomb is as nothing 
compared with it. This power is capable of removing  all pain. It must, however, 
be admitted that it is easy to say that Ramanama mu st come from the heart, 
but to attain the reality is very difficult. Nevert heless, it is the biggest thing 
man can possess. 
Harijan,  13-10-‘46, p. 357 
 
My Rama, the Rama of our prayers is not the histori cal Rama, the son of 
Dasharatha, the King of Ayodhya. He is the eternal,  the unborn, the one 
without a second. Him alone I worship. His aid alon e I seek, and so should you. 
He belongs equally to all. I, therefore, see no rea son why a Mussalman or 
anybody should object to taking His name. But he is  in no way bound to 
recognize God as Rama. He may utter to himself Alla h or Khuda so as not to 
mar the harmony of the sound. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 120  Harijan , 28-4-'46, p. 111 
 
Q. While in conversation or doing brain work or whe n one is suddenly worried, 
can one recite Ramanama in one's heart? Do people d o so at such times and, if 
so, how? 
A.  Experience shows that man can do so at any time, e ven in sleep, provided 
Ramanama is enshrined in his heart. If the taking o f the name has become a 
habit, its recitation through the heart becomes as natural as the heart beat. 
Otherwise, Ramanama is a mere mechanical performanc e or at best has 
touched the heart only on the surface. When Ramanam a has established its 
dominion over the heart, the question of vocal reci tation does not arise. 
Because then it transcends speech. But it may well be held that persons who 
have attained this state are few and far between. 
There is no doubt whatsoever that Ramanama contains  all the power that is 
attributed to it. No one can, by mere wishing, ensh rine Ramanama in his heart. 
Untiring effort is required as also patience. What an amount of labour and 
patience have been lavished by man to acquire the n on-existent philosopher's 
stone? Surely, God's name is of infinitely richer v alue and always existent. 
Q. Is it harmful if, owing to stress or exigencies of work, one is unable to carry 
out daily devotions in the prescribed manner? Which  of the two should be given 
preference? Service or the rosary? 
A.  Whatever the exigencies of service or adverse circ umstances may be, 
Ramanama must not cease. The outward form will vary  according to the 
occasion. The absence of the rosary does not interr upt Ramanama which has 
found an abiding place in the heart. 
Harijan , 17-2-'46, pp. 12-13 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 121   
28. ASHRAM VOWS 
[Gandhiji sent to members of his Ashram at Sabarmat i during 1930 a series of weekly 
discourses from the Yeravda Jail (which he called  mandir  or temple). Those discourses 
dealing with the Ashram vows of Truth, Non-violence , Brahmacharya or Chastity, Non-
possession and Non-stealing are given hereunder. Th e remaining vows of the Ashram are: 
Control of the Palate, Fearlessness, Removal of Unt ouchability, Bread Labour, Equality of 
Religions and Swadeshi. Gandhiji's discourses on th ese also will be found in the booklet 
From Yeravda Mandir. 1 Some of them have been treated in other parts of t his present 
volume.] 
 
Importance of Vows 
Taking vows is not a sign of weakness, but of stren gth. To do at any cost 
something that one ought to do constitutes a vow. I t becomes a bulwark of 
strength. A man who says that he will do something 'as far as possible', betrays 
either his pride or his weakness. I have noticed in  my own case, as well as in 
the case of others, that the limitation 'as far as possible' provides a fatal 
loophole. To do something 'as far as possible' is t o succumb to the very first 
temptation. There is no sense in saying that one wo uld observe truth 'as far as 
possible'. Even as no businessman will look at a no te in which a man promises to 
pay a certain amount on a certain date 'as far as p ossible', so will God refuse to 
accept a promissory note drawn by one, who will obs erve truth 'as far as 
possible'. 
God is the very image of the vow. God would cease t o be God if He swerved 
from His own laws even by a hair's breadth. The sun  is a great keeper of 
observances; hence the possibility of measuring tim e and publishing almanacs. 
All business depends upon men fulfilling their prom ises. Are such promises less 
necessary in character-building or self-realization ? We should therefore never 
doubt the necessity of vows for the purpose of self -purification and self-
realization. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 122  From Yeravda Mandir,  1945, pp. 51-52 
 
A. TRUTH 
The word  Satya  (Truth) is derived from  Sat,  which means 'being'. Nothing is or 
exists in reality except Truth. That is why  sat  or Truth is perhaps the most 
important name of God. In fact it is more correct t o say that Truth is God, than 
to say that God is Truth. 
Devotion to this Truth is the sole justification fo r our existence. All our 
activities should be centred in Truth. Truth should  be the very breath of our 
life. When once this stage in the pilgrim's progres s is reached, all other rules of 
correct living will come without effort, and obedie nce to them will be 
instinctive. But without Truth it would be impossib le to observe any principles 
or rules in life. 
Generally speaking, observation of the law of Truth  is understood merely to 
mean that we must speak the truth. But we in the As hram should understand 
the word Satya  or Truth in a much wider sense. There should be Tr uth in 
thought, Truth in speech, and Truth in action. 
But Truth is the right designation of God. Hence th ere is nothing wrong in every 
man following Truth according to his lights. Indeed  it is his duty to do so. Then 
if there is a mistake on the part of any one so fol lowing Truth, it will be 
automatically set right. For the quest of Truth inv olves  tapas— self-suffering, 
sometimes even unto death. There can be no place in  it for even a trace of 
self-interest. In such selfless search for Truth no body can lose his bearings for 
long. Directly he takes to the wrong path he stumbl es, and is thus redirected to 
the right path. Therefore the pursuit of Truth is t rue  bhakti  (devotion). It is the 
path that leads to God. 
How beautiful it would be, if all of us, young and old, men and women, devoted 
ourselves wholly to Truth in all that we might do i n our waking hours, whether 
working, eating, drinking or playing, till dissolut ion of the body makes us one My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 123  with Truth ? God as Truth has been for me a treasur e beyond price; may He be 
so to every one of us. 
From Yeravda Mandir,  1945, pp. 1-4
 
He who would go in for novel experiments must begin  with himself. That leads 
to a quicker discovery of Truth, and God always pro tects the honest 
experimenter. 
Autobiography,  1948, p. 376 
 
A devotee of Truth may not do anything in deference  to convention. He must 
always hold himself open to correction, and wheneve r he discovers himself to 
be wrong he must confess it at all costs and atone for it. 
Autobiography,  1948, p. 429 
 
A clean confession, combined with a promise never t o commit the sin again, 
when offered before one who has the right to receiv e it, is the purest type of 
repentance. 
Autobiography , 1948, p. 42 
 
Experience has taught me that silence is part of th e spiritual discipline of a 
votary of Truth. Proneness to exaggerate, to suppre ss or modify the truth, 
wittingly or unwittingly, is a natural weakness of man and silence is necessary 
in order to surmount it. A man of few words will ra rely be thoughtless in his 
speech; he will measure every word. 
Autobiography , 1948, p. 84 
 
Silence is a great help to a seeker after Truth lik e myself. In the attitude of 
silence the soul finds the path in a clearer light,  and what is elusive and 
deceptive resolves itself into crystal clearness. O ur life is a long and arduous My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 124  quest after Truth, and the soul requires inward res tfulness to attain its full 
height. 
It (silence) has now become both a physical and spi ritual necessity for me. 
Originally it was taken to relieve the sense of pre ssure. Then I wanted time for 
writing. After, however, I had practised it for som e time, I saw the spiritual 
value of it. It suddenly flashed across my mind tha t that was the time when I 
could best hold communion with God. And now I feel as though I was naturally 
built for silence. 
Harijan , 10-12-'38, pp. 373-74 
 
B. AHIMSA OR LOVE 
It is impossible for us to realize perfect Truth so  long as we are imprisoned in 
this mortal frame. We can only visualize it in our imagination. We cannot, 
through the instrumentality of this ephemeral body,  see face to face Truth 
which is eternal. That is why in the last resort we  must depend on faith. 
It appears that the impossibility of full realizati on of Truth in this mortal body 
led some ancient seeker after Truth to the apprecia tion of Ahimsa. The 
question which confronted him was: "Shall I bear wi th those who create 
difficulties for me, or shall I destroy them?" The seeker realized that he who 
went on destroying others did not make headway but simply stayed where he 
was, while the man who suffered those who created d ifficulties marched 
ahead, and at time even took the others with him. T he first act of destruction 
taught him that the Truth which was the object of h is quest was not outside 
himself but within. Hence the more he took to viole nce, the more he receded 
from Truth. For in fighting the imagined enemy with out, he neglected the 
enemy within. 
We punish thieves, because we think they harass us.  They may leave us alone; 
but they will only transfer their attentions to ano ther victim. This other victim 
however is also a human being, ourselves in a diffe rent form, and so we are 
caught 'in a vicious circle. The trouble from thiev es continues to increase, as My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 125  they think it is their business to steal. In the en d we see that it is better to 
endure the thieves than to punish them. The forbear ance may even bring them 
to their senses. By enduring them we realize that t hieves are not different from 
ourselves, they are our brethren, our friends, and may not be punished. But 
whilst we may bear with the thieves, we may not end ure the infliction. That 
would only induce cowardice. So we realize a furthe r duty. Since we regard the 
thieves as our kith and kin, they must be made to r ealize the kinship. And so wc 
must take pains to devise ways and means of winning  them over. This is the 
path of Ahimsa. It may entail continuous suffering and the cultivating of endless 
patience. Given these two conditions, the thief is bound in the end to turn 
away from his evil ways. Thus step by step we learn  how to make friends with 
all the world; we realize the greatness of God—of T ruth. Our peace of mind 
increases in spite of suffering; we become braver a nd more enterprising; we 
understand here clearly the difference between what  is everlasting and what is 
not; we learn how to distinguish between what is ou r duty and what is not. Our 
pride melts away, and we become humble. Our worldly  attachments diminish, 
and the evil within us diminishes from day to day. 
Ahimsa is not the crude thing it has been made to a ppear. Not to hurt any living 
thing is no doubt a part of Ahimsa. But it is its l east expression. The principle of 
Ahimsa is violated by every evil thought, by undue haste, by lying, by hatred, 
by wishing ill to anybody. It is also violated by o ur holding on to what the world 
needs. But the world needs even what we eat day by day. 
Realizing the limitations of the flesh, we must str ive day by day towards the 
idea with what strength we have in us. 
It is perhaps clear from the foregoing, that withou t Ahimsa it is not possible to 
seek and find Truth. Ahimsa and Truth are so intert wined that it is practically 
impossible to disentangle and separate them. They a re like the two sides of a 
coin, or rather of a smooth unstamped metallic disc . Who can say, which is the 
obverse, and which is the reverse? Nevertheless Ahi msa is the means; Truth is 
the end. Means to be means must always be within ou r reach, and so Ahimsa is 
our supreme duty- If we take care of the means, we are bound to reach the end My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 126  sooner or later. When once we have grasped this poi nt, final victory is beyond 
question. Whatever difficulties we encounter, whate ver apparent reverses we 
sustain, we may not give up the quest for Truth whi ch alone is being God 
Himself. 
From Yeravda Mandir , 1945, pp. 5-9
 
C. BRAHMACHARYA OR CHASTITY 
The man, who is wedded to Truth and worships Truth alone, proves unfaithful 
to her, if he applies his talents to anything else.  How then can he minister to 
the senses? A man, whose activities are wholly cons ecrated to the realization of 
Truth, which requires utter selflessness, can have no time for the selfish 
purpose of begetting children and running a househo ld. Realization of Truth 
through self-gratification should, after what has b een said before, appear a 
contradiction in terms. 
If we look at it from the standpoint of Ahimsa, we find that the fulfillment of 
Ahimsa is impossible without utter selflessness. Ah imsa means Universal Love. If 
a man gives his love to one woman, or a woman to on e man, what is there left 
for all the world besides? It simply means, "we two  first, and the devil take all 
the rest of them." As a faithful wife must be prepa red to sacrifice her all for 
the sake of her husband, and a faithful husband for  the sake of his wife, it is 
clear that such persons cannot rise to the height o f Universal Love or look upon 
all mankind as kith and kin. For they have created a boundary wall round their 
love. The larger their family, the farther are they  from Universal Love. Hence 
one who would obey the law of Ahimsa cannot marry, not to speak of 
gratification outside the marital bond. 
Then what about people who are already married ? Wi ll they never be able to 
realize Truth? Can they never offer up their all at  the altar of humanity? There 
is a way out for them. They can behave as if they w ere not married. Those who 
have enjoyed this happy condition will be able to b ear me out. Many have to 
my knowledge successfully tried the experiment. If the married couple can 
think of each other as brother and sister, they are  freed for universal service. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 127  The very thought that all the women in the world ar c his sisters, mothers or 
daughters will at once ennoble a man and snap his c hains. The husband and 
wife do not lose anything here, but only add to the ir resources and even to 
their family. Their love becomes free from the impu rity of lust and so grows 
stronger. With the disappearance of this impurity, they can serve each other 
better, and the occasions for quarrel become fewer.  There are more occasions 
for quarrelling where the love is selfish and bound ed. 
If the foregoing argument is appreciated, a conside ration of the physical 
benefits of chastity becomes a matter of secondary importance. How foolish it 
is intentionally to dissipate vital energy in sensu al enjoyment ! It is a grave 
misuse to fritter away for physical gratification t hat which is given to man and 
woman for the full development of their bodily and mental powers. Such 
misuse is the root cause of many a disease. 
Brahmacharya,  like all other observances, must be observed in th ought, word 
and deed. We are told in the Gita, and experience w ill corroborate the 
statement, that the foolish man, who appears to con trol his body, but is nursing 
evil thoughts in his mind, makes a vain effort. It may be harmful to suppress 
the body, if the mind is at the same time allowed t o go astray. Where the mind 
wanders, the body must follow sooner or later. 
It is necessary here to appreciate a distinction. I t is one thing to allow the mind 
to harbour impure thoughts; it is a different thing  altogether if it strays among 
them in spite of ourselves. Victory will be ours in  the end, if we non-co-operate 
with the mind in its evil wanderings. 
We experience every moment of our lives, that often  while the body is subject 
to our control, the mind is not. This physical cont rol should never be relaxed, 
and in addition, we must put forth a constant endea vour to bring the mind 
under control. We can do nothing more, nothing less . If we give way to the 
mind, the body and the mind will pull different way s, and we shall be false to 
ourselves. Body and mind may be said to go together  so long as we continue to 
resist the approach of every evil thought. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 128  The observance of  brahmacharya  has been believed to be very difficult, almost 
impossible. In trying to find a reason for this bel ief, we see that the term  
brahmacharya has been taken in a narrow sense. Mere control of a nimal passion 
has been thought to be tantamount to observing brahmacharya.  I feel that this 
conception is incomplete and wrong.  Brahmacharya  means control of all the 
organs of sense. He who attempts to control only on e organ, and allows all the 
others free play, is bound to find his effort futil e. To hear suggestive stories 
with the ears, to see suggestive sights with the ey es, to taste stimulating food 
with the tongue, to touch exciting things with the hands, and then at the same 
time expect to control the only remaining organ is like putting one's hands in a 
fire and then expecting to escape being burnt. He t herefore who is resolved to 
control the one must be likewise determined to cont rol the rest. I have always 
felt that much harm has been done by the narrow def inition of  brahmacharya.  
If we practise simultaneous self-control in all dir ections, the attempt will be 
scientific and possible of success. 
Let us remember the root meaning of  brahmacharya. Charya  means course of 
conduct;  brahmacharya  conduct adapted to the search of  Brahma , i.e., Truth. 
From this etymological meaning arises the special m eaning, viz., control of all 
the senses. We must entirely forget the incomplete definition which restricts 
itself to the sexual aspect only. 
From Yeravda Mandir,  1945, pp. 10-14 
 
The knowledge that a perfect observance of  brahma charya  means realization 
of  Brahma , I did not owe to a study of the Shastras. It slow ly grew upon me 
with experience. The Shastraic texts on the subject  I read only later in life. 
Realization of God is impossible without complete r enunciation of the sexual 
desire. 
Young India , 24-6-'26 , p. 230 
 
The conquest of lust is the highest endeavour of a man or woman's existence. 
Without overcoming lust man cannot hope to rule ove r self. And without rule My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 129  over self there can be no Swaraj or Ramaraj. Rule o f all without rule of oneself 
would prove to be as deceptive and disappointing as  a painted toy-mango, 
charming to look at outwardly but hollow and empty within. No worker who has 
not overcome lust can hope to render any genuine se rvice to the cause of 
Harijans, communal unity, Khadi, cow protection or village reconstruction. 
Great causes like these cannot be served by intelle ctual equipment alone, they 
call for spiritual effort or soul-force. Soul-force  comes only through God's 
grace, and God's grace never descends upon a man wh o is a slave to lust. 
Harijan, 21-ll-'36 p.321 
 
Remember my definition of  brahmacharya . It means not suppression of one or 
more senses but complete mastery over them all. The  two states are 
fundamentally different. I can suppress all my sens es today but it may take 
aeons to conquer them. Conquest means  using  them as my willing slaves. I can 
prick the ear drum and suppress the sense of hearin g by a simple, painless 
operation. This is worthless. I must train the ear so that it refuses to hear 
gossip, lewd talk, blasphemy, but it is open to the  celestial music, it will hear 
the most distant cry for succour from thousands of miles. Saint Ramdas is said 
to have done so. Then how to use the organs of gene ration? By transmitting the 
most creative energy that we possess from creating counterparts of our flesh 
into creating constructive work for the whole of li fe. 
Bapu's Letters to Mir a,  1949, pp. 257-58 
 
Aids to Brahmacharya 
A friend writes : 
'I am miserable. I am haunted by carnal thoughts ev en whilst I am in my office, 
on the road, by night and day, whilst reading and w orking, even whilst I am 
praying. How is a wandering mind to be controlled? How is one to learn to look 
upon every woman as one's mother? How is the eye to  radiate forth purest love? 
How can evil thoughts be eradicated? I have before me your article on  
brahmacharya  (written years ago), but it has failed to help me. ' My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 130  This condition is heart rending. Many suffer from i t. But so long as the mind is 
engaged in a perpetual struggle against evil though ts, there is no reason to 
despair. When the eye offends, it should be closed.  When the ears offend they 
should be stopped. It is best always to walk with d owncast eyes. They will then 
have no occasion to go astray. All haunts of filthy  talk or unclean music should 
be avoided. There should be full control of the pal ate. I know that he who has 
not mastered his palate cannot master the carnal de sire. It is difficult I know to 
master the palate. But mastery of the palate means automatic mastery of the 
other senses. One of the rules for control of the p alate is to abjure completely 
or, as much as possible, all condiments. A more dif ficult rule is to cultivate the 
feeling that the food we eat is to sustain the body , never to satisfy the palate. 
We take air not for the pleasure of it but to breat he. We drink water to quench 
our thirst; and so should we take food to satisfy o ur hunger. But from childhood 
upwards we are brought up to a different habit. Our  parents make us cultivate 
all sorts of tastes, not with a view to our nourish ment, but for indulging their 
affection for us. We thus get spoiled. We have ther efore to struggle against the 
results of our own upbringing. 
There is however a golden rule for gaining control of the carnal desire. It is the 
repetition of the divine word Rama or such other  mantra.  
Everyone must select the  mantra  after his heart. I have suggested the word 
Rama because I was brought up to repeat it in my ch ildhood and I have ever got 
strength and sustenance out of it. Whichever  mantra  is selected one should be 
identified with it whilst repeating it. I have not the least doubt of ultimate 
success as a result of repetition of some such  mantra  incomplete faith, even 
though other thoughts distract the mind. The  mantra  will be the light of one's 
life and will keep one from all distress. Such holy  mantras  should obviously 
never be used for material ends. If their use is st rictly restricted to the 
preservation of morals, the result attained will be  startling. Of course a  mere 
repetition of such  mantra  parrot-wise would be of no avail. One should throw  
his whole soul into it. The parrot repeats it like a machine. We should repeat it My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 131  with a view to preventing the approach of unwelcome  thoughts and with full 
faith in the efficacy of the  mantra  that end. 
Young India , 5-6-'24, pp. 186-87 
 
Control of the palate is the first essential in the  observance of the vow. I found 
that complete control of the palate made the observ ance very easy, and so I 
now pursued my dietetic experiments not merely from  the vegetarian's but also 
from the  brahmachari's  point of view. As the result of these experiments I saw 
that the  brahmachari's  food should be limited, simple, spiceless, and, if  
possible, uncooked. 
Six years of experiment have showed me th at the brahmachari's  ideal food is 
fresh fruit and nuts. The immunity from passion tha t I enjoyed when I lived on 
this food was unknown to me after I changed that di et.  Brahmacharya  needed 
no effort on my part in South Africa when I lived o n fruits and nuts alone. It has 
been a master of very great effort ever since I beg an to take milk. 
As an external aid to  brahmacharya , fasting is as necessary as selection and 
restriction in diet. So overpowering are the senses  that they can be kept under 
control only when they are completely hedged in on all sides, from above and 
from beneath. It is common knowledge that they are powerless without food, 
and so fasting undertaken with a view to control of  the senses is, I have no 
doubt, very helpful. With some, fasting is of no av ail, because assuming that 
mechanical fasting alone will make them immune, the y keep their bodies 
without food, but feast their minds upon all sorts of delicacies, thinking all the 
while what they will eat and what they will drink a fter the fast terminates. 
Such fasting helps them in controlling neither pala te nor lust. Fasting is useful, 
when mind cooperates with starving body, that is to  say, when it cultivates 
distaste for the objects that are denied to the bod y. Mind is at the root of all 
sensuality. Fasting, therefore, has a limited use, for a fasting man may 
continue to be swayed by passion. But it may be sai d that extinction of the 
sexual passion is as a rule impossible without fast ing, which may be said to be 
indispensable for the observance of  brahmacharya.  My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 132  Every day I have been realizing more and more the n ecessity for restraints of 
the kind I have detailed above. There is no limit t o the possibilities of 
renunciation, even as there is none to those of  brahmacharya.  Such  
brahmacharya  is impossible of attainment by limited effort. For  many it must 
remain only as an ideal. An aspirant after brahmacharya  will always be 
conscious of his shortcomings, will seek out the pa ssions lingering in the 
innermost recesses of his heart and will incessantl y strive to get rid of them. So 
long as thought is not under complete control of th e will,  brahmacharya  in its 
fullness is absent. Involuntary thought is an affec tion of the mind, and curbing 
of thought, therefore, means curbing of the mind wh ich is even more difficult 
to curb than the wind. Nevertheless the existence o f God within makes even 
control of the mind possible. Let no one think that  it is impossible because it is 
difficult. It is the highest goal, and it is no won der that the highest effort 
should be necessary to attain it. 
But it was after coming to India (from South Africa ) that I realized that such  
brahmacharya  was impossible to attain by mere human effort. Unt il then I had 
been labouring under the delusion that fruit diet a lone would enable me to 
eradicate all passions, and I had flattered myself with the belief that I had 
nothing more to do. 
But I must not anticipate the chapter of my struggl e. Meanwhile let me make it 
clear that those who desire to observe  brahmacharya  with a view to realizing 
God need not despair, provided their faith in God i s equal to their confidence in 
their own effort. His name and His grace are the la st resources of the aspirant 
after  moksha.  
Autobiography , 1948, pp. 256-60 
 
Experience teaches that animal food is unsuited to those who would curb their 
passions. But it is wrong to overestimate the impor tance of food in the 
formation of character or in subjugating the flesh.  Diet is a powerful factor not 
to be neglected. But to sum up all religion in term s of diet, as is often done in My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 133  India, is as wrong as it is to disregard all restra int in regard to diet and to give 
full reins to one's appetite. 
Young India , 7-10-'26, p. 347 
 
Steps to Brahmacharya 
The first step is the realisation of its necessity.  
The next is gradual control of the senses. A  brahmachari  must needs control his 
palate. He must eat to live, and not for enjoyment.  He must see only clean 
things and close his eyes before anything unclean. It is thus a sign of polite 
breeding to walk with one's eyes towards the ground  and not wandering about 
from object to object. A  brahmachari  will likewise hear nothing obscene or 
unclean, smell no strong, stimulating things. The s mell of clean earth is far 
sweeter than the fragrance of artificial scents and  essences. Let the aspirant to  
brahmacharya  also keep his hands and feet engaged in all the wa king hours in 
healthful activity. Let him also fast occasionally.  
The third step is to have clean companions—clean fr iends and clean books. 
The last and not the least is prayer. Let him repea t Ramanama with all his 
heart regularly everyday, and ask for divine grace.  
None of these things are difficult for an average m an or woman. They are 
simplicity itself. But their very simplicity is emb arrassing. Where there is a will, 
the way is simple enough. Men have not the will for  it and hence vainly grope. 
The fact that the world rests on the observance, mo re or less, of  brahmacharya  
or restraint, means that it is necessary and practi cable. 
Young India,  29-4-'26, pp. 157-58 
 
Patanjali has described five disciplines. And for t his age the five have been 
expanded into eleven. They are: non-violence, truth , non-stealing,  
brahmacharya , non-possession, bread labour, control of the pala te, 
fearlessness, equal regard for all religions, Swade shi and removal of 
untouchability. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 134  It is well to bear in mind that all the disciplines  are of equal importance. If one 
is broken all are. Therefore, it is essential that all the disciplines should be 
taken as one. This enables one to realize the full meaning and significance of  
brahmacharya.  
Harijan,  8-6-'47, p. 180 
 
Birth-control 
There can be no two opinions about the necessity of  birth-control. But the only 
method handed down from ages past is self-control o r  brahmacharya.  It is an 
infallible sovereign remedy doing good to those who  practise it. And medical 
men will earn the gratitude of mankind, if instead of devising artificial means 
of birth-control, they will find out the means of s elf-control. The union is 
meant not for pleasure but for bringing forth proge ny. And union is a crime 
when the desire for progeny is absent. 
Artificial methods are like putting a premium upon vice. They make man and 
woman reckless. And respectability that is being gi ven to the methods must 
hasten the dissolution of the restraints that publi c opinion puts upon one. 
Adoption of artificial methods must result in imbec ility and nervous prostration. 
The remedy will be found to be worse than the disea se. It is wrong and immoral 
to seek to escape the consequences of one's acts. I t is good for a person who 
overeats to have an ache and a fast. It is bad for him to indulge his appetite 
and then escape the consequences by taking tonics o r other medicines. It is still 
worse for a person to indulge in his animal passion s and escape the 
consequences of his acts. Nature is relentless and will have full revenge for any 
such violation of her laws. Moral results can only be produced by moral 
restraints. All other restraints defeat the very pu rpose for which they are 
intended. The reasoning underlying the use of artif icial methods is that 
indulgence is a necessity of life. Nothing can be m ore fallacious. Let those who 
are eager so see the births regulated explore the l awful means devised by the 
ancients and try to find out how they can be revive d. An enormous amount of 
spade work lies in front of them. Early marriages a re a fruitful source of adding My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 135  to the population. The present mode of life has als o a great deal to do with the 
evil of unchecked procreation. If these causes are investigated and dealt with, 
society- will be morally elevated. If they are igno red by impatient zealots and 
if artificial methods become the order of the day, nothing but moral 
degradation can be the result. A society that has a lready become enervated 
through a variety of causes will become still furth er enervated by the adoption 
of artificial methods. Those men therefore who are light-heartedly advocating 
artificial methods cannot do better than study the subject afresh, stay their 
injurious activity and popularize  brahmacharya  both for the married and the 
unmarried. That is the only noble and straight meth od of birth-control. 
Young India , 12-3-'25, pp. 88-89 
 
D. NON-POSSESSION OR POVERTY 
Possession implies provision for the future. A seek er after Truth, a follower of 
the law of Love, cannot hold anything against tomor row. God never stores for 
the morrow: He never creates more than what is stri ctly needed for the 
moment. If therefore we repose faith in His provide nce, we should rest assured 
that He will give us every day our daily bread, mea ning everything that we 
require. Saints and devotees, who have lived in suc h faith, have always derived 
a justification for it from their experience. Our i gnorance or negligence of the 
Divine Law, which gives to man from day to day his daily bread and no more, 
has given rise to inequalities with all the miserie s attendant upon them. The 
rich have a superfluous store of things which they do not need, and which are 
therefore neglected and wasted, while millions are starved to death for want of 
sustenance. If each retained possession only of wha t he needed, no one would 
be in want, and all would live in contentment. As i t is, the rich are 
discontented no less than the poor. The poor man wo uld fain become a 
millionaire, and the millionaire a multimillionaire . The rich should take the 
initiative in dispossession with a view to a univer sal diffusion of the spirit of 
contentment. If only they keep their own property w ithin moderate limits, the 
starving will be easily fed, and will learn the les son of contentment along with My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 136  the rich. Perfect fulfillment of the ideal of Non-p ossession requires that man 
should, like the birds, have no roof over his head,  no clothing and no stock of 
food for the morrow. He will indeed need his daily bread, but it will be God's 
business, and not his, to provide it. Only the fewe st possible, if any at all, can 
reach this ideal. We ordinary seekers may not be re pelled by the seeming 
impossibility. But we must keep the ideal constantl y in view, and in the light 
thereof, critically examine our possessions, and tr y to reduce them. 
Civilization, in the real sense of the term, consis ts not in the multiplication, 
but in the deliberate and voluntary reduction of wa nts. This alone promotes 
real happiness and contentment, and increases the c apacity for service. 
We thus arrive at the ideal of total renunciation, and learn to use the body for 
the purpose of service so long as it exists, so muc h so that service, and not 
bread, becomes with us the staff of life. We eat an d drink, sleep and wake, for 
service alone. Such an attitude of mind brings us r eal happiness, and the 
beatific vision in the fullness of time. Let us all  examine ourselves from this 
standpoint. 
We should remember that Non-possession is a princip le applicable to thoughts, 
as well as to things. A man who fills his brain wit h useless knowledge violates 
that inestimable principle. Thoughts, which turn us  away from God, or do not 
turn us towards Him, constitute impediments in our way. 
From Yeravda Mandir , 1945, pp. 23-26 
 
A certain degree of physical harmony and comfort is  necessary, but above that 
level, it becomes a hindrance instead of help. Ther efore the ideal of creating 
an unlimited number of wants and satisfying them se ems to be a delusion and a 
snare. The satisfaction of one's physical needs, ev en the intellectual needs of 
one's narrow self must meet at a point a dead stop,  before it degenerates into 
physical and intellectual voluptuousness. A man mus t arrange his physical and 
cultural circumstances so that they may not hinder him in his service of 
humanity, on which all his energies should be conce ntrated. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 137  Harijan , 29-8-'36, p. 226 
 
I own no property and yet I feel that I am perhaps the richest man in the world. 
For I have never been in want either for myself or for my public concerns. God 
has always and invariably responded in time. I can recall several occasions 
when almost the last penny had been spent for my pu blic activities. Moneys 
then came in from the most unexpected quarters. The se responses have made 
me humble and filled me with a faith in God and His  goodness that will stand 
the strain of utter distress if it ever becomes my lot in life. It is open to the 
world, therefore, to laugh at my dispossessing myse lf of all property. For me 
the dispossession has been a positive gain. I would  like people to compete with 
me in my contentment. It is the richest treasure I own. Hence it is perhaps 
right to say that though I preach poverty, I am a r ich man. 
This Was Bapu,  R. X. Prabhu, 1954, p. 120 
 
I doubt if the Steel Age is an advance on the Flint  Age. I am indifferent. It is the 
evolution of the soul to which the intellect and al l our faculties have to be de-
voted. 
Young India,  13-10-'21, p. 325 
 
E. NON-STEALING 
It is impossible that a person should steal, and si multaneously claim to know 
Truth or cherish Love. Yet every one of us is consc iously or unconsciously more 
or less guilty of theft. 
It is theft to take something from another even wit h his permission if we have 
no real need of it. We should not receive any singl e thing that we do not need. 
Theft of this description generally has food for it s object. It is theft for me to 
take any fruit that I do not need, or to take it in  a larger quantity than is 
necessary. We are not always aware of our real need s, and most of us 
improperly multiply our wants, and thus unconscious ly make thieves of 
ourselves. If we devote some thought to the subject , we shall find that we can My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 138  get rid of quite a number of our wants. One who fol lows the .observance of 
Non-stealing will bring about a progressive reducti on of his own wants. Much of 
the distressing poverty in this world has arisen ou t of breaches of the principle 
of Non-stealing. 
There is besides another kind of theft subtler and far more degrading to the 
human spirit. It is theft mentally to desire acquis ition of anything belonging to 
others, or to cast a greedy eye on it. 
One, who observes the principle of Non-stealing, wi ll refuse to bother himself 
about things to be acquired in the future. This evi l anxiety for the future will 
be found at the root of many a theft. Today we only  desire possession of a 
thing; tomorrow we shall begin to adopt measures, s traight if possible, crooked 
when thought necessary, to acquire its possession. 
Ideas may be stolen no less than material things. O ne who egotistically claims 
to have originated some good idea, which, really sp eaking, did not originate 
with him, is guilty of a theft of ideas. Many learn ed men have committed such 
theft in the course of world history. 
One who takes up the observance of Non-stealing has  therefore to be humble, 
thoughtful, vigilant and in habits simple. 
From Yeravda Mandir , 1945, pp. 19-22 
 
I suggest that we are thieves in a way. If I take a nything that I do not need for 
my own immediate use, and keep it, I thieve it from  somebody else. I venture 
to suggest that it is the fundamental law of Nature , without exception, that 
Nature produces enough for our wants from day to da y, and if only everybody 
took enough for himself and nothing more, there wou ld be no pauperism in this 
world, there would be no man dying of starvation in  this world. But so long as 
we have got this inequality, so long we are thievin g. I am no socialist and I do 
not want to dispossess those who have got possessio ns; but I do say that, 
personally, those of us who want to see light out o f darkness have to follow this 
rule. I do not want to dispossess anybody. I should  then be departing from the My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 139  rule of Ahimsa. If somebody else possesses more tha n I do, let him. But so far 
as my own life has to be regulated, I do say that I  dare not possess anything 
which I do not want. In India we have got three mil lions of people having to be 
satisfied with one meal a day. You and I, who ought  to know better, must 
adjust our wants, and even undergo voluntary starva tion in order that they may 
be nursed, fed and clothed. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi , p. 384 
 
If we are to be non-violent, we must not wish for a nything on this earth which 
the meanest or the lowest of human beings cannot ha ve. 
With Gandhiji in Ceylon,  1928, by Mahadev Desai, p. 132 
 
1 Published by the Navajivan Publishing House, Ahme dabad-14. Price Rs. 1-50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 140   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION SEVEN: THE GOALS OF MY RELIGION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 141   
29. RELIGION TO PERVADE ALL SPHERES OF LIFE 
The whole gamut of man's activities today constitut es an indivisible whole. You 
cannot divide social, economic, political and purel y religious work into 
watertight compartments. I do not know any religion  apart from human 
activity. It provides a moral basis to all other ac tivities which they would 
otherwise lack, reducing life to a maze of sound an d fury signifying nothing'. 
Harijan,  24-12-'38, p. 393 
 
We have to make truth and non-violence, not matters  for mere individual 
practice but for practice by groups and communities  and nations. That at any 
rate is my dream. I shall live and die in trying to  realize it. My faith helps me to 
discover new truths every day. Ahimsa is the attrib ute of the soul, and 
therefore, to be practised by everybody in all the affairs of life. If it cannot be 
practised in all departments, it has no practical v alue. 
Harijan,  2-3-'40, p. 23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 142   
30. IN THE SOCIAL SPHERE 
All Men Are Equal 
In my opinion there is no such thing as inherited o r acquired superiority. I 
believe in the rock-bottom doctrine of  advaita  (non-duality or oneness) and my 
interpretation of  advaita  excludes totally any idea of superiority at any st age 
whatsoever. I believe implicitly that all men are b orn equal. All—whether born 
in India or in England or America or in any circums tances whatsoever—have the 
same soul as any other. And it is because I believe  in this inherent equality of 
all men that I fight the doctrine of superiority wh ich many of our rulers 
arrogate to themselves. I have fought this doctrine  of superiority in South 
Africa inch by inch, and it is because of that inhe rent belief, that I delight in 
calling myself a scavenger, a spinner, a weaver, a farmer and a labourer. And I 
have fought against the Brahmanas themselves wherev er they have claimed any 
superiority for themselves either by reason of thei r birth, or by reason of their 
subsequently acquired knowledge. I consider that it  is unmanly for any person 
to claim superiority over a fellow-being. He who cl aims superiority at once 
forfeits his claim to be called a man. That is my o pinion. 
Young India , 29-9-'27, p. 329 
 
The forms are many, but the informing spirit is one . How can there be room for 
distinctions of high and low where there is this al l-embracing fundamental unity 
underlying the outward diversity? For that is a fac t meeting you at every step in 
daily life. The final goal of all religions is to r ealize this essential oneness. 
Harijan , 15-12-'33, p. 3 
 
Individualism  v.  Social Responsibility 
I value individual freedom but you must not forget that man is essentially a 
social being. He has risen to his present status by  learning to adjust his 
individualism to the requirements of social progres s. Unrestricted individualism My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 143  is the law of the beast of the jungle. We have to l earn to strike the mean 
between individual freedom and social restraint. Wi lling submission to social 
restraint for the sake of the well-being of the who le society, enriches both the 
individual and the society of which he is a member.  
Harijan , 27-5-'39, p. 144 
 
There is not a single virtue which aims at, or is c ontent with, the welfare of the 
individual only. Conversely, there is not a single moral offence which does not, 
directly or indirectly, affect many others besides the actual offender. Hence, 
whether an individual is good or bad is not merely his own concern, but really 
the concern of the whole community, nay, of the who le world. 
Ethical Religion,  By M. K. Gandhi, p. 55 
 
I believe in the essential unity of man and for tha t matter of all that lives. 
Therefore, I believe that if one man gains spiritua lly, the whole world gains 
with him and, if one man falls, the whole world fal ls to that extent. 
Young India , 4-12-'24 p. 398 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 144   
31. IN THE ECONOMIC SPHERE 
Love to be the Basis 
Man is an engine whose motive power is the soul. Th e largest quantity of work 
will not be done by this curious engine for pay or under pressure. It will be 
done when the motive force, that is to say, the wil l or spirit of the creature, is 
brought to its greatest strength by its own proper fuel, namely by the 
affections. The universal law of the matter is that , assuming any given quantity 
of energy and sense in master and servant, the grea test material result 
obtainable by them will be not through antagonism t o each other, but through 
affection for each other. Unselfish treatment will produce the most effective 
return. Treat the servant kindly with the idea of t urning his gratitude to 
account, and you will get, as you deserve, no grati tude nor any value for your 
kindness; but treat him kindly without any economic al purpose, and all eco-
nomical purposes will be answered; here as elsewher e whoever will save his life 
shall lose it, who so loses it shall find it. 
In most cases a youth entering a commercial establi shment is withdrawn 
altogether from home influence; his master must bec ome his father; else he 
has, for practical and constant help no father at h and. So that the only means 
which the master has of doing justice to the men em ployed by him is to ask 
himself sternly whether he is dealing with such sub ordinates as he would with 
his own son, if compelled by circumstances to take such a position. 
And as the captain of a ship is bound to be the las t man to leave his ship in case 
of wreck and to share his last crust with the sailo rs in case of famine, so the 
manufacturer, in any commercial crisis, is bound to  take the suffering of it with 
his men, and even to take more of it for himself th an he allows his men to feel; 
as a father would in a famine, shipwreck or battle,  sacrifice himself for his son. 
All this sounds very strange; the only strangeness in the matter being, 
nevertheless, that it should so sound. For all this  is true everlastingly and 
practically. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 145  Gandhiji's Paraphrase of Ruskin's  Unto This Last,  1951 pp. 8-11, 21-23 
 
The Economics of Justice 
True economics never militates against the highest ethical standard, just as all 
true ethics to be worth its name, must at the same time be also good 
economics. An economics that inculcates Mammon wors hip, and enables the 
strong to amass wealth at the expense of the weak, is a false and dismal 
science. It spells death. True economics, on the ot her hand, stands for social 
justice, it promotes the good of all equally includ ing the weakest, and is 
indispensable for decent life. 
Harijan , 9-10-'37, p. 292 
 
Under the new outlook we shall cease to think of ge tting what we can, but we 
shall decline to receive what all cannot get. 
Young India , 3-9-'25, p. 304 
 
If I pay due wages to a man, I shall not be able to  amass unnecessary riches, to 
waste money on luxuries and to add to the mass of p overty in the world. The 
workman who receives due wages from me will act jus tly to his I subordinates. 
Thus the stream of justice will not dry up, but gat her strength as it flows 
onward. And the nation with such a sense of justice  will be happy and 
prosperous. 
We thus find that the economists are wrong in think ing that competition is good 
for a nation. Competition only enables the purchase r to obtain his labour 
unjustly cheap, with the result that the rich grow richer and the poor poorer. In 
the long run it can only lead the nation to ruin. A  workman should receive a 
just wage according to his ability. Even then there  will be competition of a 
sort, but the people will be happy and skilful, bec ause they will not have to 
underbid one another, but to acquire new skills in order to secure employment. 
This is the secret of Government services in which salaries are fixed according My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 146  to the gradation of posts. The candidate for it doe s not offer to work on a 
lower salary but only claims that he is abler than his competitors. But in trade 
and manufacture there is oppressive competition, wh ich results in fraud, chica-
nery and theft. Rotten goods are manufactured. The manufacturer, the 
labourer, the consumer,—each is mindful of his own interest. This poisons all 
human intercourse. 
 Labourers starve and go on strike. Manufacturers b ecome rogues and 
consumers too neglect the ethical aspect of their o wn conduct. One injustice 
leads to many others, and in the end the employer, the operative and the 
customer are all unhappy and go to rack and ruin. T he very wealth of the 
people acts among them as a curse. 
True economics is the economics of justice. People will be happy in so far as 
they learn to do justice and be righteous. Ail else  is not only vain but leads 
straight to destruction. To teach the people to get  rich by hook or by crook is 
to do them an immense disservice. 
Gandhiji's Paraphrase of Ruskin's  Unto This Last,  1951, pp.50-53 
 
Economic Equality 
My idea of society is that while we are born equal,  meaning that we have a 
right to equal opportunity, all have not the same c apacity. It is, in the nature 
of things, impossible. For instance, all cannot hav e the same height or colour or 
degree of intelligence etc.; therefore, in the natu re of things, some will have 
ability to earn more and others less. People with t alents will have more and 
they will utilize their talents for this purpose. I f they utilize their talents 
kindly, they will be performing the work of the Sta te. Such people exist as 
trustees, on no other terms. I would allow a man of  intellect to earn more, I 
would not cramp his talent. But the bulk of his gre ater earnings must be used 
for the good of the State, just as the income of al l earning sons of the father go 
to the common family fund. 
Young India , 26-11-'31, p. 368 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 147  The real implication of equal distribution is that each man shall have the 
wherewithal to supply all his natural wants and no more. For example, if one 
man has a weak digestion and requires only a quarte r of a pound of flour for his 
bread and another needs a pound, both should be in a position to satisfy their 
wants. To bring this ideal into being the entire so cial order has got to be 
reconstructed. A society based on non-violence cann ot nurture any other ideal. 
We may not perhaps be able to realize the goal, but  we must bear in mind and 
work unceasingly to near it. To the same extent as we progress towards our 
goal we shall find contentment and happiness, and t o that extent too, shall we 
have contributed towards the bringing into being of  a non-violent society. 
Now let us consider how equal distribution can be b rought about through non-
violence. The first step towards it is for him who has made this ideal part of his 
being to bring about the necessary changes in his p ersonal life. He would 
reduce his wants to a minimum, bearing in mind the poverty of India. His 
earnings would be free of dishonesty. The desire fo r speculation would be 
renounced. His habitation would be in keeping with the new mode of life. 
There would be self-restraint exercised in every sp here of life. When he has 
done all that is possible in his own life, then onl y will he be in a position to 
preach this ideal among his associates and neighbou rs. 
Indeed at the root of this doctrine of equal distri bution must lie that of the 
trusteeship of the wealthy for superfluous wealth p ossessed by them. For 
according to the doctrine they may not possess a ru pee more than their 
neighbours. How is this to be brought about? Non-vi olently? Or should the 
wealthy be dispossessed of their possessions? To do  this we would naturally 
have to resort to violence. This violent action can not benefit society. Society 
will be the poorer, for it will lose the gifts of a  man who knows how to 
accumulate wealth. Therefore the nonviolent way is evidently superior. The 
rich man will be left in possession of his wealth, of which he will use what he 
reasonably requires for his personal needs and will  act as a trustee for the 
remainder to be used for the society. In this argum ent, honesty on the part of 
the trustee is assumed. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 148  If, however, in spite of the utmost effort, the ric h do not become guardians of 
the poor in the true sense of the term and the latt er are more and more 
crushed and die of hunger, what is to be done? In t rying to find out the solution 
of this riddle I have lighted on non-violent non-co operation and civil 
disobedience as the right and infallible means. The  rich cannot accumulate 
wealth without the cooperation of the poor in socie ty. If this knowledge were 
to penetrate to and spread amongst the poor, they w ould become strong and 
would learn how to free themselves by means of non- violence, from the 
crushing inequalities which have brought them to th e verge of starvation. 
Harijan , 25-8-'40, pp. 260-61 
 
A Non-violent Economic Structure 
I suggest that if India is to evolve along non-viol ent lines, it will have to 
decentralize many things. Centralization cannot be sustained and defended 
without adequate force. 
Harijan,  30-12-'39, p. 391 
 
You cannot build non-violence on a factory civiliza tion, but it can be built on 
self-contained villages. Rural economy, as I have c onceived it, eschews 
exploitation altogether and exploitation is the ess ence of violence. You have, 
therefore, to be rural-minded before you can be non violent. 
Harijan,  4-11-'39, p. 331 
 
Industrialization on a mass scale will necessarily lead to passive or active 
exploitation of the villagers as the problems of co mpetition and marketing 
come in. Therefore we have to concentrate on the vi llage being self-contained, 
manufacturing mainly for use. Provided this charact er of the village industry is 
maintained, there will be no objection to villagers  using even the modern 
machinery and tools that they can make and can affo rd to use. Only they should 
not be used as a means of exploitation of others. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 149  Harijan , 29-8-'36, p. 226 
 
Industrialization and large scale production are on ly of comparatively recent 
growth. We do not know how far they have contribute d to the development of 
our happiness, but we know this much that they have  brought in their wake the 
recent world wars (for raw materials and markets). ’ 
The Hindustan Standard,  6-12-'44 
 
The Good of All, the Goal 
A votary of Ahimsa cannot subscribe to the utilitar ian formula (of the greatest 
good of the greatest number). He will strive for th e greatest good of all and die 
in the attempt to realize the ideal. He will theref ore be willing to die, so that 
the others may live. He will serve himself with the  rest, by himself dying. The 
greatest good of all inevitably includes the good o f the greatest number, and 
therefore, he and the utilitarian will converge in many points in their career, 
but there does come a time when they must part comp any and even work in 
opposite directions. The utilitarian to be logical will never sacrifice himself. 
The absolutist will even sacrifice himself. 
Young India , 9-12-'26, p. 432 
 
Not the good of the few, not even the good of the m any, but it is the good of 
all that we are made to promote, if we are made in His own image'. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi,  1933, p. 350 
 
1Words in brackets are ours.—Ed. 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 150   
32. IN THE POLITICAL SPHERE 
Freedom through Love 
In the democracy which I have envisaged, a democrac y established by non-
violence, there will be equal freedom for all. Ever ybody will be his own master. 
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1942 -44,  p. 173 
 
True democracy or the Swaraj of the masses can neve r come through untruthful 
and violent means, for the simple reason that the n atural corollary to their use 
would be to remove all opposition through the suppr ession or extermination of 
the antagonists. That does not make for individual freedom. Individual freedom 
can have the fullest play only under a regime of un adulterated Ahimsa. 
Harijan , 27-5-'39, p. 143 
 
No All-powerful State 
Political power means capacity to regulate national  life through national 
representatives. If national life becomes so perfec t as to become self-
regulated, no representation becomes necessary. The re is then a state of 
enlightened anarchy. In such a State everyone is hi s own ruler. He rules himself 
in such a manner that he is never a hindrance to hi s neighbour. In the ideal 
State, therefore, there is no political power becau se there is no State. But the 
ideal is never fully realized in life. Hence the cl assical statement of Thoreau 
that that government is best which governs the leas t. 
Taxing India , 2-7-'31, p. 162 
 
I look upon an increase of the power of the State w ith the greatest fear, 
because, although while apparently doing good by mi nimizing exploitation, it 
does the greatest harm to mankind by destroying ind ividuality which lies at the 
root of all progress. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 151  The Modern Review,  1935, p. 413 
 
I have therefore endeavoured to show both in word a nd deed, that political 
self-government—that is self-government for a large  number of men and 
women—is no better than individual self-government,  and therefore, it is to be 
attained by precisely the same means that are requi red for individual self-
government or self-rule. 
With Gandhiji in Ceylon,  by Mahadev Desal, 1928, p. 93 
 
A Non-violent Political Structure 
True democracy cannot be worked by twenty men sitti ng at the centre. It has 
to be worked from below by the people of every vill age. 
Harijan , 18-1-'48, p. 519 
 
In this structure composed of innumerable villages,  there will be ever widening, 
never ascending circles. Life will not be a pyramid  with the apex sustained by 
the bottom. But it will be an oceanic circle whose centre will be the individual 
always ready to perish for the village, the latter ready to perish for the circle 
of villages, till at last the whole becomes one lif e composed of individuals 
never aggressive in their arrogance but ever humble , sharing the majesty of the 
oceanic circle of which they are integral units. 
Therefore, the outermost circumference will not wie ld power to crush the inner 
circle but will give strength to all within and der ive its own strength from it. I 
may be taunted with the retort that this is all Uto pian and, therefore, not 
worth a single thought. If Euclid's point, though i ncapable of being drawn by 
human agency, has an imperishable value, my picture  has its own for mankind 
to live. Let India live for this true picture, thou gh never realizable in its 
completeness. We must have a proper picture of what  we want, before we can 
have something approaching it. If there ever is to be a republic of every village 
in India, then I claim verity for my picture in whi ch the last is equal to the first, 
or in other words, no one is to be the first and no ne the last. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 152  Harijan,  28-7-'46, p. 236 
 
Under Swaraj based on non-violence nobody is anybod y's enemy, everybody 
contributes his or her due quota to the common good , all can read and write, 
and their knowledge keeps growing from day to day. Sickness and disease are 
reduced to the minimum. No one is a pauper and labo ur can always find 
employment. There is no place under such a governme nt for gambling, drinking 
and immorality or for class hatred. 
Harijan,  25-3-'39, p. 65 
 
Nationalism and Internationalism 
My patriotism is not exclusive; it is calculated no t only not to hurt another 
nation but to benefit all in the true sense of the word. India's freedom as 
conceived by me can never be a menace to the world.  
Young India,  3-4-'24 p. 109 
 
Just as the cult of patriotism teaches us today tha t the individual has to die for 
the family, the family has to die for the village, the village for the district, the 
district for the province and the province for the country, even so, a * country 
has to be free in order that it may die, if necessa ry, for the benefit of the 
world. There is no room for race-hatred there. 
Gandhiji in Indian Villages,  by Mahadev Desai, 1927, p. 170 
 
There is no limit to extending our services to our neighbours across State-made 
frontiers. God never made those frontiers. 
Young India,  31-12-'31, p. 427 
 
I believe in absolute oneness of God and therefore also of humanity. What 
though we have many bodies? We have but one soul. T he rays of the sun are 
many through refraction. But they have the same sou rce. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 153  Young India , 25-9-'24, p. 313 
 
My religion and my patriotism derived from my relig ion embrace all life. I want 
to realize brotherhood or identity not merely with the beings called human, but 
I want to realize identity with all life, even with  such things as crawl upon 
earth. I want, if I don't give you a shock, to i re alize identity with even the 
crawling things upon earth, because we claim descen t from the same God, and 
that being so, all life in whatever form it appears  must be essentially one. 
Young India , 4-4-'29, p. 107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 154   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION EIGHT: MY HINDUISM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 155   
33. RENUNCIATION AND DEDICATION ITS ESSENCE 
[For the first time at the public meeting in Quilon  Gandhiji summed up the credal belief of 
Hinduism in an Upanishadic  mantra, and thereafter at every meeting gave lucid and 
simple commentaries on the numerous implications of  that all-comprehensive  mantra.  The 
pure exposition without much of a commentary was gi ven on the previous day at Quilon 
and is reproduced below :] 
I have fixed upon one  mantra  that I am going to recite to you, as containing th e 
whole essence of Hinduism. Many of you, I think, kn ow the Ishopanishad. I read 
it years ago with translation and commentary. I lea rnt it by heart in Yeravda 
Jail. But it did not then captivate me, as it has d one during the past few 
months, and I have now come to the final conclusion  that if all the Upanishads 
and all the other scriptures happened all of a sudd en to be reduced to ashes, 
and if only the first verse in the Ishopanishad wer e left in tact in the memory of 
Hindus, Hinduism would live forever. 
Now this  mantra  divides itself in four parts. The first part is  ईशावा/glyph233य/glyph871मदं सव/glyph590 | 
यि/glyph216कं च जग/glyph216यां जगत | It means,  as I would translate, all I this that we see in 
this great Universe is pervaded by God. Then come t he second and third parts 
which read together, as I read them :  तेन /glyph216य/glyph201तेन भ ुंजीथा:| I divide these into 
two and translate them thus: Renounce it and enjoy it. There is another 
rendering which means the same thing : Enjoy what H e gives you. Even so you 
can divide it into two parts. Then follows the fina l and most important part,  मा 
गृध: क/glyph233यि/glyph233व/glyph623 धनम ् | which means: Do not covet anybody's  wealth or 
possession. All the other  mantras  of that ancient Upanishad are a commentary 
or an attempt to give us the full meaning of the fi rst  mantra. 
It seems to me to satisfy the craving of the social ist and the communist, of the 
philosopher and the economist. I venture to suggest  to all who do not belong to 
the Hindu faith that it satisfies their cravings al so. And if it is true— and I hold 
it to be true—you need not take anything in Hinduis m which is inconsistent with My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 156  or contrary to the meaning of this  mantra.  What more can a man in the street 
want to learn than this, that the one God and Great or and Master of all that 
lives pervades the Universe? The three other parts of the  mantra  follow directly 
from the first. If you believe that God pervades ev erything that He has created, 
you must believe that you cannot enjoy anything tha t is not given by Him. And 
seeing that He is the Greator of His numberless-chi ldren, it follows that you 
cannot covet anybody's possession. If you think tha t you are one of His 
numerous creatures, it behoves you to renounce ever ything and lay it at His 
feet. That means that the act of renunciation of ev erything is not a mere 
physical renunciation but represents a second or ne w birth. It is deliberate act, 
not done in ignorance. It is therefore a regenerati on. And then since he who 
holds the body must eat and drink and clothe himsel f, he must naturally seek 
all that he needs from Him. And he gets it as a nat ural reward of that 
renunciation. As if this was not enough the  mantra  closes with this magnificent 
thought: Do not covet anybody's possession. The mom ent you carry out these 
precepts you become a wise citizen of the world liv ing at peace with all that 
lives. It satisfies one's highest aspirations on th is earth and hereafter. 
[It is this  mantra  that Gandhiji described at another meeting as the golden key 
for the solution of all the difficulties and doubts  that may assail one's heart.] 
Remember that one verse of the Ishopanishad and for get all about the other 
scriptures. You can of course drown yourselves and be suffocated in the ocean 
of scriptures. They are good for the learned if the y will be humble and wise, 
but for the ordinary man in the street nothing but this  mantra  is necessary to 
carry him across the ocean: "God the Ruler pervades  all there is in this 
Universe. Therefore renounce and dedicate all to Hi m, and then  enjoy or use 
the portion that may fall to thy lot. Never covet a nybody's possession." 
Harijan , 30-1-'37, p, 405 
 
At this meeting 1 I would love to detain you for a few minutes on th e message of 
Hinduism I gave to the meeting in Quilon last night . My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 157  In this verse the seer has chosen no other epithet for the Deity but that of the 
Ruler, and he has excepted nothing from His jurisdi ction. He says everything 
that we see is pervaded by the Deity, and from that  naturally the other parts of 
the  mantra  follow. Thus he says, 'Renounce everything', i.e. everything that is 
on this Universe, the whole of the Universe, and no t only this tiny globe of 
ours, renounce it. He asks us to renounce it as we are such insignificant atoms 
that if we had any idea of possession it would seem  ludicrous. And then, says 
the Rishi, the reward of the renunciation is भु/glyph210जीथा : enjoyment of all you need. 
But there is a meaning in the word translated 'enjo y', which may as well be 
translated as 'use', 'eat', etc. It signifies, ther efore, that you may not take more 
than necessary for your growth. Hence this enjoymen t or use is limited by two 
conditions. One is the act of renunciation or, as t he author of the Bhagawat 
would say, enjoy in the spirit of  कृ/glyph232णाप/glyph110णम/glyph233त ु सव/glyph110म् | (or offering all to God). 
And every day in the morning everyone who believes in the Bhagawat Dharma 
has to dedicate his thoughts, words and deeds to Kr ishna, and not until he has 
performed that daily act of renunciation or dedicat ion has he the right of 
touching anything or drinking even a cup of water. And when a man has per-
formed that act of renunciation and dedication, he derives from that act the 
right of eating, drinking, clothing and housing him self to the extent necessary 
for his daily life. Therefore take it as you like, either in the sense that the 
enjoyment or use is the reward of renunciation, or that the renunciation is the 
condition of enjoyment, renunciation is essential f or our very existence, for our 
soul. And as if that condition given in the  mantra  was incomplete, the Rishi 
hastened to complete by adding : 'Do not covet what  belongs to another. Now I 
suggest to you that the whole of the philosophy or religion found in any part of 0 
the world is contained in this  mantra.  
Now I should like to apply this  mantra  to present-day conditions. If all that 
there is in the Universe is pervaded by God, that i s to say, if the Brahmana and 
the  bhangi, the learned man and scavenger, the Ezhava and the P ariah—no 
matter what caste they belong to—if all these are p ervaded by Lord God, in the My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 158  light of this mantra , there is none that is high and none that is low, all are 
absolutely equal, equal because all are the creatur es of that Creator. 
I would like the  mantra  I have recited to be enshrined in the hearts of al l our 
men and women and children, and if this contains, a s I hold, the essence of 
Hinduism, it should be inscribed on the portals of every temple. 
Harijan,  30-1-'37, pp. 407-08 
 
The seer to whom this  mantra  or verse was revealed was not satisfied with the 
magnificent statement that God was to be found ever ywhere. But he went 
further and said : 'Since God pervades everything n othing belongs to you, not 
even your own body. God is the undisputed, unchalle ngeable Master of 
everything you possess.' And so when a person who c alls himself a Hindu goes 
through the process of regeneration or a second bir th, as Christians would call 
it, he has to perform a dedication or renunciation of all that he has in 
ignorance called his own property. And then when he  has performed this act of 
dedication or renunciation, he is told that he will  win a reward in the shape of 
God taking good care of what he will require for fo od, clothing or housing. 
Therefore the condition of enjoyment or use of the necessaries of life is their 
dedication or renunciation. And that dedication or renunciation has got to be 
done from day to day, lest we may in this busy worl d forget the central fact of 
life. And to crown all, the seer says: 'Covet not a nybody's riches.' I suggest to 
you that the truth that is embedded in this very sh ort  mantra is calculated to 
satisfy the highest cravings of every human  being—whether they have 
reference to this world or the next. I have in my s earch of the scriptures of the 
world found nothing to add to this  mantra.  Looking back upon all the little I 
have read of the scriptures—it is precious little I  confess—I feel that everything 
good in all the scriptures is derived from this  mantra.  If it is universal 
brotherhood—not only brotherhood of all human being s, but of all living 
beings—I find it in this  mantra . If it is unshakable faith in the Lord and Master—
and all the adjectives you can think of—I find it i n this  mantra.  If it is the idea 
of complete surrender to God and of the faith that He will supply all that I need  My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 159  then again I say I find it in this  mantra.  Since He pervades every fibre of my 
being and of all of you, I derive from it the doctr ine of equality of all creatures 
on earth and it should satisfy the cravings of all philosophical communists. This  
mantra tells me that I cannot hold as mine anything that b elongs to God, and if 
my life and that of all who believe in this mantra  has to be a life of perfect 
dedication, it follows that it will have to be a li fe of continual service of our 
fellow creatures. 
This, I say, is my faith and should be the faith of  all who call themselves 
Hindus. And I venture to suggest to my Christian an d Mussalman friends that 
they will find nothing more in their scriptures if they will search them. 
I do not wish to hide from you the fact that I am n ot unaware of many 
superstitions that go under the name of Hinduism. I  am most painfully conscious 
of all the superstitions that are to be found masqu erading as Hinduism, and I 
have no hesitation to call a spade a spade. I have not hesitated to describe 
untouchability as the greatest of these superstitio ns. But in spite of them all, I 
remain a Hindu. For I do not believe that these sup erstitions form part of 
Hinduism. The very canons of interpretation laid do wn by Hinduism teach me 
that whatever is inconsistent with the truth I have  expounded to you, and 
which is hidden in the  mantra  I have named, must be summarily rejected as not 
belonging to Hinduism. 
Harijan , 30-1-'37, p. 410 
 
A follower of the Gita Dharma trains himself to do without things  with 
happiness  called equanimity in the Gita language, for happin ess of the Gita is 
not the opposite of unhappiness. It is superior to that state. The devotee of the 
Gita is neither happy nor unhappy. And when that st ate is reached, there is no 
pain, no pleasure, no defeat, no deprivation, no po ssession. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  1949, p. 250 
 
We must learn the art of never grieving over death,  no matter when and to 
whom it comes. I suppose that we shall do when we h ave really learnt to be My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 160  utterly indifferent to our own, and the indifferenc e will come when we are 
every moment conscious of having done the task to w hich we are called. 
Bapu’s Letters to Mira,  1949, p. 301  
 
1 From a speech delivered by Gandhiji at Haripad in T ravancore on 17-1-'37. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 161   
34. TEMPLE AND IDOL-WORSHIP 
An idol does not excite any feeling of veneration i n me. But I think that idol-
worship is part of human nature. We hanker after sy mbolism. Why should one 
be more composed in a church than elsewhere? Images  are an aid to worship. 
No Hindu considers an image to be God. I do not con sider idol-worship a sin. 
Young India,  6-10-'21, p. 318 
 
I am both an idolator and an iconoclast in what I c onceive to be the true senses 
of the terms. I value the spirit behind idol-worshi p. It plays a most important 
part in the uplift of the human race. And I would l ike to possess the ability to 
defend with my life the thousands of holy temples w hich sanctify this land of 
ours. 
I am an iconoclast in the sense that I break down t he subtle form of idolatry in 
the shape of fanaticism that refuses to see any vir tue in any other form of 
worshipping the Deity save one's own. This form of idolatry is more deadly for 
being more fine and evasive than the tangible and  gross form of worship that 
identifies the Deity with a little bit of a stone o r a golden image. 
Young India , 28-8-'24, p. 284 
 
Whether the temples should contain images or not is  a matter of temperament 
and taste. I do not regard a Hindu or a Roman Catho lic place of worship 
containing images as necessarily bad or superstitio us, and a mosque or a 
Protestant place of worship as good or free of supe rstition merely because of 
their exclusion of images. A symbol such as a Cross  or a book may easily 
become idolatrous, and therefore superstitious. And  the worship of the image 
of Child Krishna or Virgin Mary may become ennoblin g and free of all 
superstition. It depends upon the attitude of the h eart of the worshipper. 
Young India , 5-11-'25, p. 378 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 162  'If Hinduism became monotheistic,' suggested the Fa ther, 'Christianity and 
Hinduism can serve India in co-operation.' 
'I would love to see the co-operation happen', said  Gandhiji. 'I have my own 
solution, but in the first instance, I dispute the description that Hindus believe 
in many gods and are idolators. I believe that I am  a thorough Hindu but I never 
believe in many gods. Never even in my childhood di d I hold that belief, and no 
one ever taught me to do so.' 
'As for idol-worship, you cannot do without it in s ome form or other. Why does 
a Mussalman give his life for defending a mosque wh ich he cialls a house of 
God? And why does a Christian go to a church, and w hen he is required to take 
an oath he swears by the Bible? Not that I see any objection to it. And what is it 
if not idolatry to give untold riches for building mosques and tombs? And what 
do the Roman Catholics do when they kneel before Vi rgin Mary and before 
saints—quite imaginary figures in stone or painted on canvas or glass?' 
'But', objected the Catholic Father, 'I keep my mot her's photo and kiss it in 
veneration of her. But I do not worship it, nor do I worship saints. When I 
worship God, I acknowledge Him as Creator and great er than any human being.' 
'Even so, it is not the stone we worship, but it is  
God we worship in images of stone or metal however crude they may be.' 
'But villagers worship stones as God.' 
'No, I tell you they do not worship anything that i s less than God. When you 
kneel before Virgin Mary and ask for her intercessi on, what do you do? You ask 
to establish contact with God through her. Even so a Hindu seeks to establish 
contact with God through a stone image. I can under stand your asking for the 
Virgin's intercession. Why are Mussalmans filled wi th awe and exultation when 
they enter a mosque? Why, is not the whole universe  a mosque? And what about 
the magnificent canopy of heaven that spreads over you ? Is it any less than a 
mosque? But I understand and sympathize with the Mu slims. It is their way of 
approach to God. The Hindus have their own way of a pproach to the same My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 163  Eternal Being. Our media of approach are different,  but that does not make 
Him different.' 
Harijan , 13-3-'37, pp. 39-40 
 
Image-worship in the sense of investing one's ideal  with a concrete shape is 
inherent in man's nature, and even valuable as an a id to devotion. Thus we 
worship an image when we offer homage to a book whi ch we regard as holy or 
sacred. We worship an image when we visit a temple or a mosque with a 
feeling of sanctity or reverence. Nor do I see any harm in all this. On the 
contrary endowed as man is with a finite, limited u nderstanding, he can hardly 
do otherwise. 
The offering of vows and prayers for selfish ends, whether offered in churches, 
mosques, temples or before trees and shrines, is a thing not to be encouraged. 
Making a selfish request or offering of vows is not  related to image worship as 
effect and cause. A personal selfish prayer is bad whether made before an 
image or an unseen God. 
Young India,  26-9-'29, p. 320 
 
Temple-worship 
It is not necessary for any Hindu to go to a temple  to worship (the image of) 
Ramachandra. But it is for him  who cannot contemplate his Rama without 
looking at his image in a temple. It may be unfortu nate, but it is true that his 
Rama resides in that temple as nowhere else. I woul d not disturb that simple 
faith. 
Krishna of the Hindu devotee is a perfect being. He  is unconcerned with the 
harsh judgement of the critics. Millions of devotee s of Krishna and Rama have 
had their lives transformed through their contempla tion of God by these 
names. How this phenomenon happens I do not know. I t is a mystery. I have not 
attempted to prove it. Though my reason and heart l ong ago realized the 
highest attribute and name of God as Truth, I recog nize Truth by the name of My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 164  Rama. In the darkest hour of my trial, that one nam e has saved me and is still 
saving me. It may be the association of childhood, it may be the fascination 
that Tulsidas has wrought on me. But the potent fac t is there, and as I write 
these lines, ray memory revives the scenes of my ch ildhood when I used daily to 
visit the Ramji Mandir adjacent to my ancestral hom e. My Rama then resided 
there. He saved me from many fears and sins. It was  no superstition for me. 
The custodian of the idol may have been a bad man. I know nothing against 
him. Misdeeds might have gone on in the temple. Aga in I know nothing of them. 
Therefore, they would not affect me. What was and i s true of me is true of 
millions of Hindus. Temple-worship supplies the fel t spiritual want of the 
human race. It admits of reform. But it will live a s long as man lives. 
Harijan , 18-3-'33 p. 6 
 
Temples are to Hindus what churches are to Christia ns. Thousands of Hindus 
who visit temples in simple faith derive precisely the same spiritual benefit 
that Christians visiting churches in simple faith d o. Deprive a Hindu of his 
temple, and you deprive him of the thing he .genera lly prizes most in life. That 
superstition and even evil have grown round many Hi ndu temples is but too 
true. That, however, is an argument for temple refo rm, not for lowering their 
value. 
Harijan , 11-2-'33, p. 2 
 
I know of no religion or sect that has done or is d oing without its House of God, 
variously described as a temple, a mosque, a church , a synagogue or an  agiari . 
Nor is it certain that any of the great reformers i ncluding Jesus destroyed or 
discarded temples altogether. All of them sought to  banish corruption from 
temples as well as from society. Some of them, if n ot all, appear to have 
preached from temples. I have ceased to visit templ es for years, but I do not 
regard myself on that account as a better person th an before. My mother never 
missed going to the temple when she was in a fit st ate to go there. Probably 
her faith was far greater than mine, though I do no t visit temples. There are My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 165  millions whose faith is sustained through these tem ples, churches and mosques. 
They are not all blind followers of a superstition,  nor are they fanatics. 
Superstition and fanaticism are not their- monopoly . These vices have their 
root in our hearts and minds. 
To reject the necessity of temples is to reject the  necessity of God, religion 
and earthly existence. 
Harijan,  11-3-'33, p. 5 
 
What a reformer should be concerned with is a radic al change more in the 
inward spirit than in the outward form. If the firs t is changed, the second will 
take care of itself. If the first remains unchanged , the second, no matter how 
radically changed, will be like a whited sepulchre.  A mausoleum, however 
beautiful, is a tomb and not a mosque, and a bare p lot of consecrated ground 
may be a real Temple of God. 
Harijan,  29-4-'33, p. 6 
 
She (Miss Mayo in her book  Mother India)  says that the Vaishnava mark has an 
obscene meaning. I am a born Vaishnavite. I have pe rfect recollection of my 
visits to Vaishnava temples. Mine were orthodox peo ple. I used to have the 
mark myself as a child, but neither I nor anyone el se in our family ever knew 
that this harmless and rather elegant-looking mark had any obscene 
significance at all. . I asked a party of Vaishnavi tes in Madras where this article 
is being written. They knew nothing about the alleg ed obscene significance. I 
do not therefore suggest that it never had such sig nificance. But I do suggest 
that millions are unaware of the obscenity of many practices which we have 
hitherto innocently indulged in. It was in a missio nary book that I first learnt 
that Shivalingam had any obscene significance at al l, and even now when I see 
a Shivalingam neither the shape nor the association  in which I see it suggests 
any obscenity. It was again in a missionary book th at I learnt that the temples 
in Orissa were disfigured with obscene statues. Whe n I went to Puri it was not 
without an effort that I was able to see those thin gs. But I do know that the My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 166  thousands who flock to the temple know nothing abou t the obscenity 
surrounding these figures. The people are unprepare d and the figures do not 
obtrude themselves upon your gaze. 
Young India , 15-9-’27, p. 311 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 167   
35. INCARNATION 
My Krishna has nothing to do with any historical pe rson. I would refuse to bow 
my head to the Krishna who would kill because his p ride is hurt, or the Krishna 
whom 'non-Hindus portray as a dissolute youth. I be lieve in Krishna of my 
imagination as a perfect incarnation, spotless in e very sense of the word, the 
inspirer of the Gita and the inspirer of the lives of millions of human beings. 
But if it was proved to me that the Mahabharata is history in the same sense 
that modern historical books are, that every word o f the Mahabharata is 
authentic and that the Krishna of the Mahabharata a ctually did some of the 
acts attributed to him, even at the risk of being b anished from the Hindu fold, I 
should not hesitate to reject that Krishna as God i ncarnate. But to me, the 
Mahabharata is a profoundly religious book, largely  allegorical, in no way meant 
to be a historical record. It is the description of  the eternal duel going on 
within ourselves, given so vividly as to make us th ink for the time being, that 
the deeds described therein were actually done by t he human beings. Nor do I 
regard the Mahabharata as we have it now as a fault less copy of the original. 
On the contrary I consider that it has undergone ma ny emendations. 
Young India , 1-10-'25, p. 336 
 
In Hinduism, incarnation is ascribed to one who has  performed some 
extraordinary service of mankind. All embodied life  is in reality incarnation of 
God, but it is not usual to consider every living b eing an incarnation. Future 
generations pay this homage to one who, in his own generation, has been 
extraordinarily religious in his conduct. I can see  nothing wrong in this 
procedure; it takes nothing from God's greatness, a nd there is no violence done 
to Truth. There is an Urdu saying which means, "Ada m is not God but he is a 
spark of the Divine." And therefore he who is the m ost religiously behaved has 
most of the divine spark in him. It is in accordanc e with this train of thought 
that Krishna enjoys, in Hinduism, the status of the  most perfect incarnation. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 168  This belief in incarnation is a testimony of man's lofty spiritual ambition. Man is 
not at peace with himself till he has become like u nto God. The endeavour to 
reach this state is the supreme, the only ambition worth having. And this is 
self-realization. 
Young India , 6-8-'31, pp. 205-06 
 
God is not a person. To affirm that He descends to earth every now and again in 
the form of a human being is a partial truth which merely signifies that such a 
person lives near to God. In as much as God is omni present, He dwells within 
every human being and all may, therefore, be said t o be incarnations of Him. 
But this leads us nowhere. Rama, Krishna, etc., are  called incarnations of God 
because we attribute divine qualities to them. In t ruth they are creations of 
man's imagination. Whether they actually lived or n ot does not affect the 
picture of them in men's minds. The Rama and Krishn a of history often present 
difficulties which have to be overcome by all manne r of arguments. 
Harijan , 22-6-'47, p. 200 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 169   
36. VARNA AND CASTE 
The Law of Varna 
Varna  means pre-determination of the choice of man's pro fession. The law of  
varna  is that a man shall follow the profession of his a ncestors for earning his 
livelihood. Varna  therefore is in a way the law of heredity.  Varna is not a thing 
that is superimposed on Hindus, but men who were tr ustees for their welfare 
discovered the law for them. It is not a human inve ntion, but an immutable 
law- of nature—the statement of tendency that is ev er present and at work like 
Newton's law of gravitation. Just as the law of gra vitation existed even before 
it was discovered so did the law of  varna . It was given to the Hindus to discover 
that law. By their discovery and application of cer tain laws of nature, the 
people of the West have easily increased their mate rial possessions. Similarly, 
Hindus by their discovery of this irresistible soci al tendency have been able to 
achieve in the spiritual field what no other nation  in the world has achieved. 
Varna  has nothing to do with caste. Down with the monste r of caste that 
masquerades in the guise of  varna. It is this travesty of  varna  that has degraded 
Hinduism and India. Our failure to follow the law o f  varna  is largely responsible 
both for our economic and spiritual ruin. It is one  cause of unemployment and 
impoverishment, and it is responsible for untouchab ility and defections from 
our faith. 
The Rishis after incessant experiment and research arrived at this fourfold 
division, that of teaching, of defending, of wealth -producing, and of manual 
service. 
In ancient times there were automatic trade guilds,  and it was an unwritten 
law to support all the members of the profession. A  hundred years ago, a 
carpenter's son never wanted to become a lawyer. To day he does, because he 
finds the profession the easiest way to steal money .  
In ages gone by there was not the ambition of encro aching on another's 
profession and amassing wealth. In Cicero's time, f or instance, the lawyer's was My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 170  an honorary profession. And it would be quite right  for any brainy carpenter to 
become a lawyer for service, not for money. Later, ambition for fame and 
wealth crept in. Physicians served the society and rested content with what it 
gave them, but now they have become traders and eve n a danger to society. 
The medical and the legal professions were deserved ly called liberal when the 
motive was purely philanthropic. 
When I follow my father's profession, I need not ev en go to a school to learn it, 
and my mental energy is set free for spiritual purs uits, because my money or 
rather livelihood is ensured.  Varna  is the best form of insurance for happiness 
and for real religious pursuit. When I concentrate my energy on other pursuits, I 
sell away my powers of self-realization or sell my soul for a mess of pottage. 
We are talking with crooked notions of  varna.  When varna  was really practised, 
we had enough leisure for spiritual training. Even now, you go to distant 
villages and see what spiritual culture villagers h ave as compared to the town-
dwellers. These know no self-control. 
We need not, ought not, to seek new avenues for gai ning wealth. We should be 
satisfied with those we have inherited from our for efathers so long as they are 
pure. If my father is a trader and I exhibit the qu alities of a soldier, I may 
without reward serve my country as a soldier but mu st be content to earn my 
bread by trading. 
Young India , 24-11-'27, pp. 390, 391 & 395 
 
Varnashrama,  as I interpret it, satisfies the religious, social  and economic 
needs of a community. It satisfies the religious ne eds, because a whole 
community accepting the law is free to devote ample  time to spiritual 
perfection. Observance of the law obviates social e vils and entirely prevents 
the killing economic competition. And if it is rega rded as a law laying down, not 
the rights or the privileges of the community gover ned by it, but their duties, it 
ensures the fairest possible distribution of wealth , though it may not be an 
ideal, i.e. strictly equal, distribution. Therefore , when people in disregard of 
the law mistake duties for privileges and try to pi ck and choose occupations for My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 171  self-advancement, it leads to confusion of varna  and ultimate disruption of 
society. In this law, there is no question of compe lling any person to follow the 
parental occupation against his or her aptitude; th at is to say, there can be no 
compulsion from without as there was none for, perh aps, several thousand 
years, during which the law of  varnashrama  worked without interruption. By 
training, the people had recognized the duty and th e justice of the law, and 
they voluntarily lived under it. Today, nations are  living in ignorance and 
breach of that law and they are suffering for it. T he so-called civilized nations 
have by no means reached a state which they can at all regard with equanimity 
and satisfaction. 
Harijan , 4-3-'38, p. 5 
 
As I have interpreted  Varna Dharma,  there is no bar in any shape or form to the 
highest mental development. The bar altogether norm al is against change of 
hereditary occupation for the sake of bettering one 's material condition, and 
thus setting up a system of unhealthy and ruinous c ompetition which is today 
robbing life of all its joy and beauty. 
Harijan , 29-7-'33, p. 8 
 
Varna  is determined by birth, but can be retained only b y observing its 
obligations. One born of Brahmana parents will be c alled a Brahmana, but if his 
life fails to reveal the attributes of a Brahmana w hen he comes of age, he 
cannot be called a Brahmana. He will have fallen fr om Brahmanahood. On the 
other hand, one who is born not a Brahmana but reve als in his conduct the 
attributes of a Brahmana will be regarded as a Brah mana, though he will 
himself disclaim the label. 
Varna  thus conceived is no man-made institution but the law of life universally 
governing the human family. Fulfillment of the law would make life livable, 
would spread peace and content, end all clashes and  conflicts, put an end to 
starvation and pauperization, solve the problem of population and even end 
disease and suffering. My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 172  But if  varna  reveals the law of one's being and thus the duty o ne has to 
perform, it confers no right, and the idea of super iority or inferiority is wholly 
repugnant to it. All  varnas  are equal, for the community depends no less on on e 
than on another. Today  varna  means gradation of high and low. It is a hideous 
travesty of the original. The law of  varna  was discovered by our ancestors by 
stern austerities. They sought to live up to the la w to the best of their 
capacity. We have distorted it today and have made ourselves the laughing-
stock of the world. 
Though the law of  varna  is a special discovery of some Hindu seer, it has 
universal application. Every religion has some dist inguishing characteristic, but 
if it expresses a principle or law, it ought to hav e universal application. That is 
how I look at the law of  varna . The world may ignore it today but it will have to  
accept it in the time to come. It ordains that ever y one shall fulfil the law of 
one's being by doing in a spirit of duty and servic e that to which one is born. 
Harijan,  28-9-'34 p. 261-62 
 
Talks with an American Clergyman 
Gandhiji: "Why should my son not be a scavenger if I am one?” 
"Indeed? Do you go so far?" 
"I do, because I hold a scavenger's profession in n o way inferior to a 
clergyman's." 
"I grant that, but should Lincoln have been a wood-  chopper rather than 
President of the U.S.A.?” 
"But why should not a wood-chopper be a President o f the United States? 
Gladstone used to chop wood." 
''But he did not accept it as his calling." 
"He would not have been worse off if he had done so . What I mean is, one born 
a scavenger must earn his livelihood by being a sca venger, and then do 
whatever else he likes. For a scavenger is as worth y of his hire as a lawyer or My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 173  your President. That, according to me is Hinduism. There is no better 
communism on earth.  Varna Dharma  acts even as the law of gravitation. I 
cannot cancel it or its working by trying to jump h igher and higher day by 
day till gravitation ceases to work. That effort wi ll be vain. So is the effort to 
jump over one another. The law of  varna is the antithesis of competition which 
kills." 
Harijan , 6-3-'37, p. 27 
 
Caste 1 v.  Class 
Man being a social being has to devise some method of social organization. We 
in India have evolved caste; they in Europe have or ganized class. Neither has 
the solidarity and naturalness of a family which pe rhaps is a God- ordained 
institution. If caste has produced certain evils, c lass has not been productive of 
anything less. 
If class helps to conserve certain social virtues, caste does the same in equal, if 
not greater, degree. The beauty of the caste system  is that it does not base 
itself upon distinctions of wealth possessions. Mon ey, as history has proved, is 
the greatest disruptive force in the world. Even th e sacredness of family ties is 
not safe against the pollution of wealth,—says Shan karacharya. Caste is but an 
V extension of the principle of the family. Both ar e governed by blood and 
heredity. Western scientists are busy trying to pro ve that heredity is an illusion 
and that  milieu  is everything. The solid experience of many lands goes against 
the conclusion of these scientists; but even accept ing their doctrine of  milieu , 
it is easy to prove that milieu  can be conserved and developed more through 
caste than through class. 
The spirit behind caste is not one of arrogant supe riority; it is the classification 
of different systems of self- culture. It is the be st possible adjustment of social 
stability and progress. Just as the spirit of the f amily is inclusive of those who 
love each other and are wedded to each other by tie s of blood and relation, 
caste also tries to include families of a particula r way of purity of life (not My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 174  standard of life, meaning by this term, economic st andard of life). Only it does 
not leave the decision, whether a particular family  belongs to a particular type, 
to the idiosyncrasies or interested judgment of a f ew individuals. It trusts to 
the principle of heredity, and being only a system of culture does not hold that 
any injustice is done if an individual or a family has to remain in a particular 
group in spite of their decision to change their mo de of life for the better. As 
we all know, change comes very slowly in social lif e, and thus, as a matter of 
fact, caste has allowed new groupings to suit the c hanges in lives. But these 
changes are quiet and easy as a change in the shape s of the clouds. It is 
difficult to imagine a better harmonious human adju stment. 
Caste does not connote superiority or inferiority. It simply recognizes different 
outlooks and corresponding modes of life. But it is  no use denying the fact that 
a sort of hierarchy has been evolved in the caste-s ystem. 
Young India,  29-12-’20, p. 3 
 
I have frequently said that I do not believe in cas te in the modern sense. It is 
an excrescence and a handicap on progress. Assumpti on of superiority by any 
person over any other is a sin against God and man.  Thus caste, in so far as it 
connotes distinctions in status, is an evil. 
Young India,  25-3-'33, p. 3 
 
In the eye of religion all men are equal. Learning,  intellect or riches do not 
entitle one to claim superiority over those who are  lacking in these. 
The Hindu , 19-9-'45 
 
1 Gandhiji here uses the word caste in the same sen se as  varna . When he condemns caste, 
he condemns only the idea of superiority and inferi ority which it came later to acquire and 
not the principle of following hereditary occupatio n which he calls  varna  and of which he 
thoroughly approves.—Ed. 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 175   
37. UNTOUCHABILITY 
Love of the people brought the problem of untouchab ility early into my life. My 
mother said, 'You must not touch this boy, he is an  untouchable.' 'Why not?' I 
questioned back, and from that day my revolt began.  
Harijan , 24-12-'38, p. 393 
 
Untouchability is not a sanction of religion, it is  a device of Satan. The devil has 
always quoted scriptures.. But scriptures cannot tr anscend reason and truth. 
The spirit of the Vedas is purity, truth, innocence , chastity, humility, 
simplicity, forgiveness, godliness and all that mak es a man or woman noble and 
brave. There is neither nobility nor bravery in tre ating the great and un-
complaining scavengers of the nation as worse than dogs to be despised and 
spat upon. 
Young India , 19-1-'21 p. 22 
 
I have never been able to reconcile myself to untou chability. I have always 
regarded it as an excrescence. It is true that it h as been handed down to us 
from generations, but so are many evil practices ev en to this day. I should be 
ashamed to think that dedication of girls to virtua l prostitution was a part of 
Hinduism. Yet it is practised by Hindus in many par ts of India. I consider it 
positive irreligion to sacrifice goats to Kali and do not consider it a part of 
Hinduism. Hinduism is a growth of ages. The very na me, Hinduism, was given to 
the religion of the people of Hindustan by foreigne rs. There was, no doubt, at 
one time sacrifice of animals offered in the name o f religion. But it is not 
religion, much less is it Hindu religion. And so al so it seems to me, that when 
cow-protection became an article of faith with our ancestors, those who 
persisted in eating beef were excommunicated. The c ivil strife must have been 
fierce. Social boycott was applied not only to the recalcitrant, but their sins 
were visited upon their children also. The practice  which had probably its origin My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 176  in good intentions hardened into usage, and even ve rses crept into our sacred 
books giving the practice a permanence wholly undes erved and still less 
justified. Whether my theory is correct or not, unt ouchability is repugnant to 
reason and to the instinct of mercy, pity or love. A religion that establishes the 
worship of the cow cannot possibly countenance or w arrant a cruel and in-
human boycott of human beings. And I should be cont ent to be torn to pieces 
rather than disown the suppressed classes. As I lov e Hinduism dearer than life 
itself, the taint has become for me an intolerable burden. 
Young India , 6-10-'21, p. 318-19 
 
We are all tarred with the same brush, and are chil dren of one and the same 
Creator, and as such the divine powers within us ar e infinite. To slight a single 
human being is to slight those divine powers and th us to harm not only that 
being but with him the whole world. 
Autobiography , 1948, p. 337 
 
It is my certain conviction that, if the Hindu hear t is completely purged of the 
taint of untouchability, the event will have its in evitable influence not only 
upon all the communities in India but on the whole world. This belief is daily 
becoming stronger. I cannot remove from my heart un touchability regarding 
several millions of human beings and harbour it tow ards some other millions. 
The very act of the Hindu heart getting rid of dist inctions of high and low must 
cure us of mutual jealousies and distrust of and am ong other communities. It is 
for that reason that I have staked my life on this issue. In fighting this battle 
against untouchability, I am fighting for unity not  only among Hindu 'touchables' 
and Hindu 'untouchables' but among Hindus, Muslims,  Christians and all other 
different religious communities. 
Harijan,  17-11-'33, p. 4 
 
There should be not only no untouchability as betwe en Hindus and Hindus, but 
there should be no untouchability whatsoever betwee n Hindus, Christians, My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 177  Mussalmans, Parsis and the rest. I am convinced tha t if this great change of 
heart can be brought about, we should live in India  as one people trusting each 
other and without any mutual distrust or suspicion.  It is untouchability with all 
its subtle forms that separates us from one another  and makes life itself 
unlovely and difficult to live. 
Harijan,  26-1-34, p. 4 
 
Removal of untouchability means love for, and servi ce of, the whole world, and 
thus merges into Ahimsa. Removal of untouchability spells the breaking down of 
barriers between man and man, and between the vario us orders of Being. We 
find such barriers crected everywhere in the world.  
From Yeravda Mandir , 1945, pp. 33-34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 178   
38. COW PROTECTION 
Cow protection is the dearest possession of the Hin du heart. No one who does 
not believe in cow protection can possibly be a Hin du. It is a noble belief. Cow 
worship means to me worship of innocence. For me, t he cow is the 
personification of innocence. Cow protection means the protection of the weak 
and the helpless. As professor Vaswani truly remark s, cow protection means 
brotherhood between man and beast. It is a noble se ntiment that must grow by 
patient toil and  tapasya.  
Young India,  8-6-'21 p. 182 
 
Cow protection to me is one of the most wonderful p henomena in human 
evolution. It takes the human being beyond his spec ies. The cow to me means 
the entire subhuman world. Man through the cow is e njoined to realize his 
identity with all that lives. Why the cow was selec ted for apotheosis is obvious 
to me. The cow was in India the best companion. She  was the giver of plenty. 
Not only did she give milk but she also made agricu lture possible. The cow is a 
poem of pity. One reads pity in the gentle animal. She is the mother to millions 
of Indian mankind. Protection of the cow means prot ection of the whole dumb 
creation of God. The ancient seer, whoever he was, began with the cow. The 
appeal of the lower order of creation is all the mo re forcible because it is 
speechless. Cow protection is the gift of Hinduism to the world. And Hinduism 
will live so long as there are Hindus to protect th e cow. 
Young India , 6-10-'21, p. 318 
 
Our Rishis made the startling discovery, (and every day I feel more and more 
convinced of its truth) that sacred texts and inspi red writings yield their truth 
only in proportion as one has advanced in the pract ice of Ahimsa and truth. The 
greater the realization of truth and Ahimsa the gre ater the illumination. These 
same Rishis declared that cow protection was the su preme duty of a Hindu and 
that its performance brought one  moksha , i.e. salvation. Now I am not ready to My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 179  believe that by merely protecting the animal cow, o ne can attain  moksha.  For  
moksha  one must completely get rid of one's lower feeling s like attachment, 
hatred, anger, jealousy, etc. It follows, therefore , that the meaning of cow 
protection in terms of  moksha must be much wider and far more 
comprehensive than is commonly supposed. The cow pr otection which can bring 
one  moksha  must, from its very nature, include the protection  of everything 
that feels. Therefore, in my opinion, every little breach of the Ahimsa 
principle, like causing hurt by harsh speech to any  one, man, woman or child, 
to cause pain to the weakest and the most insignifi cant creature on earth 
would be a breach of the principle of cow protectio n, would be tantamount to 
the sin of beef-eating, differing from it in degree , if at all, rather than in kind. 
Young India,  29-1-'25, p. 39 
 
A Hindu who protects the cow should protect every a nimal. But taking all things 
into consideration, we may not cavil at his protect ing the cow because he fails 
to protect the other animals. The only question the refore to consider is 
whether he is right in protecting the cow. And he c annot be wrong in so doing if 
non-killing of animals generally may be regarded as  a duty for one who believes 
in Ahimsa. And every Hindu, and for that matter eve ry man of religion, does so. 
The duty of not killing animals generally and there fore protecting them must be 
accepted as an indisputable fact. It is then so muc h to the credit of Hinduism 
that it has taken up cow protection as a duty. And he is a poor specimen of 
Hinduism who stops merely at cow protection when he  can extend the arm of 
protection to other animals. The cow merely stands as a symbol, and protection 
of the cow is the least he is expected to undertake . 
The motive that actuates cow protection is not 'pur ely selfish', though selfish 
consideration undoubtedly enters into it. If it was  purely selfish, the cow would 
be killed as in other countries after it had ceased  to give full use. The Hindus 
will not kill the cow even though she may be a heav y burden. The numberless  
goshalas  that have been established by charitably-minded pe ople for tending 
disabled and useless cows is in a way an eloquent t estimony of the effort that is My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 180  being made in the direction. Though they are today very poor institutions for 
the object to be achieved the fact does not detract  from the value of the 
motive behind the act. 
The philosophy of cow protection, therefore, is in my opinion sublime. It 
immediately puts the animal creation on the same le vel with man so far as the 
right to live is concerned. 
Young India , 11-11-'26, p. 391-92 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 181   
39. WHAT I VALUE IN HINDUISM 
Just as in the West they have made wonderful discov eries in things material, 
similarly Hinduism has made still more marvelous di scoveries in things of reli-
gion, of the spirit, of the soul. But we have no ey e for these great and fine 
discoveries. We are dazzled by the material progres s that Western science has 
made. I am not enamoured of that progress. In fact,  it almost seems as though 
God in His wisdom had prevented India from progress ing along those lines, so 
that it might fulfill its special mission of resist ing the onrush of materialism. 
After all, there is something in Hinduism that has kept it alive up till now. It 
has witnessed the fall of Babylonian, Syrian, Persi an and Egyptian civilizations. 
Cast a look round you. Where are Rome and Greece? C an you find today any-
where the Italy of Gibbon, or rather the ancient Ro me, for Rome was Italy? Go 
to Greece. Where is the world-famous Attic civiliza tion? Then come to India, go 
through the most ancient records and then look roun d you and you would be 
constrained to say, 'Yes, I see here ancient India still living.' True, there are 
dung-heaps, too, here and there, but there are rich  treasures buried under 
them. And the reason why it has survived is that th e end which Hinduism set 
before it was not development along material but sp iritual lines. 
Among its many contributions the idea of man's iden tity with the dumb creation 
is a unique one. To me cow-worship is a great idea which is capable of 
expansion. The freedom of Hinduism from the modern proselytization is also to 
me a precious thing. It needs no preaching. It says , 'Live the life.' It is my 
business, it is your business to live the life, and  then we shall leave its 
influence on ages. Then take its contribution in me n: Ramanuja, Chaitanya, 
Ramakrishna, not to speak of the more modern names,  have left their impress 
on Hinduism. Hinduism is by no means a spent force or a dead religion. 
Then there is the contribution of the four  ashramas 1, again a unique 
contribution. There is nothing like it in the whole  world. The Catholics have the 
order of celibates corresponding to  brahmacharis , but not as an institution, 
whereas in India every boy had to go through the fi rst ashrama.  What a grand My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 182  conception it was! Today our eyes are dirty, though ts dirtier and bodies dirtiest 
of all, because we are denying Hinduism. 
There is yet another thing I have not mentioned. Ma x Muller said forty years 
ago that it was dawning on Europe that transmigrati on is not a theory, but a 
fact. Well, it is entirely the contribution of Hind uism. 
Today  varnashrama dharma  and Hinduism are misrepresented and denied by its 
votaries. The remedy is not destruction, but correc tion. Let us reproduce in 
ourselves the true Hindu spirit, and then ask wheth er it satisfies the soul or 
not. 
Young India , 24-11-'27, p. 396 
 
An American professor in Comparative Theology on a visit to India to study 
Indian religions intelligently, asked Gandhiji to t ell her in a nutshell the chief 
value of Hinduism. 
Replying to her Gandhiji said : "The chief value of  Hinduism lies in holding the 
actual belief that  all  life (not only human beings, but all sentient bein gs) is 
one, i.e. all life coming from the One Universal So urce. 
"This unity of  all  life is a peculiarity of Hinduism which confines s alvation not to 
human beings alone but says that it is not possible  for all God's creatures. It 
may be that it is not possible, save through the hu man form, but that does not 
make man the lord of creation. It makes him the ser vant of God's creation. Now 
when we talk of brotherhood of man, we stop there, and feel that all other life 
is there for man to exploit for his own purposes. B ut Hinduism excludes all 
exploitation. There is no limit whatsoever to the m easure of sacrifice that one 
may make in order to realize this oneness with all life, but certainly the 
immensity of the ideal sets a limit to your wants. That, you will see, is the 
antithesis of the position of modern civilization w hich says: 'Increase your 
wants.' Those who hold that belief think that incre ase of wants means an 
increase of knowledge whereby you understand the In finite better. On the My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 183  contrary Hinduism rules out indulgence and multipli cation of wants as these 
hamper one's growth to ultimate identity with the U niversal Self." 
Harijan , 26-12-'36, p. 365 
 
In the purest type of Hinduism a Brahmana, an ant, an elephant and a dog-
eater ( shwapacha ) are of the same status. And because our philosoph y is so 
high, and we have failed to live up to it, that ver y philosophy today stinks in 
our nostrils. Hinduism insists on the brotherhood n ot only of all mankind but of 
all that lives. It is a conception which makes one giddy, but we have to work up 
to it. The moment we have restored real living equa lity between man and man, 
we shall be able to establish equality between man and the whole creation. 
When that day comes we shall have peace on earth an d goodwill to men. 
Harijan , 28-3-'36, p. 51 
 
Sanatana- Hinduism 
I call myself a  Sanatani  Hindu, because, 
1. I believe in the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Pu-rana s and all that goes by 
the name of Hindu scriptures, and therefore in  avataras  and rebirth; 
2. I believe in the  varnashrama dharma  in a sense, in my opinion, strictly 
Vedic but not in its present popular and crude sens e; 
3. I believe in the protection of the cow in its much larger sense than the 
popular; 
4. I do not disbelieve in idol-worship. 
The reader will note that I have purposely refraine d' from using the word divine 
origin in reference to the Vedas or any other scrip tures. For I do not believe in 
the exclusive divinity of the Vedas. I believe the Bible, the Koran, and the Zend 
Avesta to be as much divinely inspired as the Vedas . My belief in the Hindu 
scriptures does not require me to accept every word  and every verse as divinely 
inspired. Nor do I claim to have any first-hand kno wledge of these wonderful 
books. But I do claim to know and feel the truths o f the essential teaching of My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 184  the scriptures. I decline to be bound by any interp retation, however learned it 
may be, if it is repugnant to reason or moral sense . 
I believe implicitly in the Hindu aphorism, that no  one truly knows the Shastras 
who has not attained perfection in Innocence (Ahims a), Truth (Satya) and self-
control (Brahmacharya ), and who has not renounced all acquisition or 
possession of wealth. I believe in the institution of gurus , but in this age 
millions must go without a  guru, because it is a rare thing to find a combination 
of perfect purity and perfect learning. But one nee d not despair of ever 
knowing the truth of one's religion, because the fu ndamentals of Hinduism, as 
of every great religion, are unchangeable, and easi ly understood. Every Hindu 
believes in God and His oneness, in rebirth and sal vation. 
I can no more describe my feeling for Hinduism than  for my own wife. She 
moves me as no other woman in the world can. Not th at she has no faults. I 
dare say she has many more than I see myself. But t he feeling of an indissoluble 
bond is there. Even so I feel for and about Hinduis m with all its faults and 
limitations. Nothing elates me so much as the music  of the Gita or the Rama-
yana by Tulsidas, the only two books in Hinduism I may be said to know. When I 
fancied I was taking my last breath the Gita was my  solace. I know the vice that 
is going on today in all the great Hindu shrines, b ut I love them in spite of their 
unspeakable failings. There is an interest which I take in them and which I take 
in no other. I am a reformer through and through. B ut my zeal never takes me 
to the rejection of any of the essential things of Hinduism. 
Hinduism is not an exclusive religion. In it there is room for the worship of all 
the prophets of the world. It is not a missionary r eligion in the ordinary sense of 
the term. It has no doubt absorbed many tribes in i ts fold, but this absorption 
has been of an evolutionary, imperceptible characte r. Hinduism tells everyone 
to worship God according to his own faith or  dharma , and so it lives at peace 
with all religions. 
Young India , 6-10-'21, pp. 317-18 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 185  Hinduism Is Ever Growing 
Hinduism is like the Ganga pure and unsullied at it s source, but taking in its 
course the impurities in the way. Even like the Gan ga it is beneficent in its 
total effect. It takes a provincial form in every p rovince, but the inner 
substance is retained everywhere. Custom is not rel igion. Custom may change, 
but religion will remain unaltered. 
Purity of Hinduism depends on the self-restraint of  its votaries. Whenever their 
religion has been in danger, the Hindus have underg one rigorous penance, 
searched the causes of the danger and devised means  for combating them. The 
Shastras are ever growing. The Vedas, the Upanishad s, the Smritis, the Puranas, 
and the Itihasas did not arise at one and the same time. Each grew out of the 
necessities of particular periods, and therefore th ey seem to conflict with one 
another. These books do not enunciate anew the eter nal truths but show how 
these were practised at the time to which the books  belong. A practice which 
was good enough in a particular period would, if bl indly repeated in another, 
land people into the 'slough of despond'. Because t he practice of animal-
sacrifice obtained at one time, shall we revive it today? Because at one time 
we used to eat beef, shall we also do so now? Becau se at one time, we used to 
chop off the hands and feet of thieves, shall we re vive that barbarity today? 
Shall we revive polyandry? Shall we revive child-ma rriage? Because we 
discarded a section of humanity one day, shall we b rand their descendants 
today as outcastes ? 
Hinduism abhors stagnation. Knowledge is limitless and so also the application 
of truth. Everyday we add to our knowledge of the p ower of Atman, and we 
shall keep on doing so. New experience will teach u s new duties, but truth shall 
ever be the same. Who has ever known it in its enti rety? 
Young India,  8-4-'26, pp. 131-32 
 
I have endeavoured in the light of a prayerful stud y of the other faiths of the 
world and, what is more, in the light of my own exp eriences in trying to live 
the teaching of Hinduism as interpreted in the Gita , to give an extended but in My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 186  no way strained meaning to Hinduism, not as buried in its ample scriptures, but 
as a living faith speaking like a mother to her ach ing child. What I have done is 
perfectly historical. I have followed in the footst eps of our forefathers. At one 
time they sacrificed animals to propitiate angry go ds. Their descendants, but 
our less remote ancestors, read a different meaning  into the word 'sacrifice' 
and they taught that sacrifice was meant to be of o ur baser self, to please not 
angry gods but one living God within. 
Harijan,  3-10-'36, p. 266 
 
It is wrong to call me an ascetic. The ideals that regulate my life are presented 
for acceptance by mankind in general. I have arrive d at them by gradual 
evolution. Every step was thought out, well-conside red, and taken with the 
greatest deliberation. Both my continence and non-v iolence were derived from 
personal experience and became necessary in respons e to the calls of public 
duty. The isolated life I had to lead in South Afri ca whether as a householder, 
legal practitioner, social reformer or politician, required, for the due fulfilment 
of these duties, the strictest regulation of sexual  life and a rigid practice of 
non-violence and truth in human relations, whether with my own countrymen 
or with the Europeans. I claim to be no more than a n average man with less 
than average ability. Nor can I claim any special m erit for such nonviolence or 
continence as I have been able to reach with labori ous research. I have not the 
shadow of a doubt that any man or woman can achieve  what I have, if he or she 
would make the same effort and cultivate the same h ope and faith. 
Harijan , 3-10-'36, p. 268 
 
My uniform experience has convinced me that there i s no other God than Truth. 
And if every page of these chapters does not procla im to the reader that the 
only means for the realization of Truth is Ahimsa, I shall deem all my labour in 
writing these chapters to have been in vain. And, e ven though my efforts in this 
behalf may prove fruitless, let the readers know th at the vehicle, not the great 
principle, is at fault. After all, however sincere my strivings after Ahimsa may My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 187  have been, they have still been imperfect and inade quate. The little fleeting 
glimpses, therefore, that I have been able to have of Truth can hardly convey 
an idea of the indescribable lustre of Truth, a mil lion times more intense than 
that of the sun we daily see with our eyes. In fact  what I have caught is only 
the faintest glimmer of that mighty effulgence. But  this much I can say with 
assurance, as a result of all my experiments, that a perfect vision of Truth can 
only follow a complete realization of Ahimsa. 
To see the universal and all-pervading Spirit of Tr uth face to face one must be 
able to love the meanest of creations as oneself. A nd a man who aspires after 
that cannot afford to keep out of any field of life . That is why my devotion to 
truth has drawn me into the field of politics; and I can say without the slightest 
hesitation, and yet in all humility, that those who  say that religion has nothing 
to do with politics do not know what religion means . 
Identification with everything that lives is imposs ible without self-purification; 
without self-purification the observance of the law  of Ahimsa must remain an 
empty dream; God can never be realized by one who i s not pure of heart. Self-
purification therefore must mean purification in al l the walks of life. And 
purification being highly infectious, purification of oneself necessarily leads to 
the purification of one's surroundings. 
But the path of self-purification is hard and steep . To attain to perfect purity 
one has to become absolutely passion-free in though t, speech and action to rise 
above the opposing currents of love and hatred, att achment and repulsion. I 
know that I have not in me as yet that triple purit y, in spite of constant, 
ceaseless striving for it. That is why the world's praise fails to move me, indeed 
it very often stings me. To conquer the subtle pass ions seems to me to be 
harder far than the physical conquest of the world by the force of arms. Ever 
since my return to India I have had experiences of the dormant passions lying 
hidden within me. The knowledge of them has made me  feel humiliated though 
not defeated. The experiences and experiments have sustained me and given 
me great joy. But I know that I have still before m e a difficult path to traverse. 
I must reduce myself to zero. So long as a man does  not of his own free will put My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 188  himself last among his fellow creatures, there is n o salvation for him. Ahimsa is 
the farthest limit of humility. 
Autobiography , 1948, pp. 614-16 
 
1 The four stages in a man's life—that of a student  pledged to chastity ( brahmacharya ), a 
householder, a meditator in the forest, ending up f inally as a wandering teacher.—Ed. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 189   
40. CONCLUSION 
The opinions I have formed and the conclusions I ha ve arrived at are not final. I 
may change them tomorrow; I have nothing new to tea ch the world. Truth and 
nonviolence are as old as the hills. All I have don e is to try experiments in both 
on as vast a scale as I could do. In doing so I hav e sometimes erred and learnt 
by my errors. Life and its problems have thus becom e to me so many 
experiments in the practice of truth and non-violen ce. 
Harijan , 28-3-'36, p. 49 
 
My faith in truth and non-violence is ever growing,  and as I am ever trying to 
follow them in my life I too am growing every momen t. I see new implications 
about them. I see them in a newer light every day a nd read in them a newer 
meaning. 
Harijan , 1-5-'37, p. 94 
 
At the time of writing I never think of what I have  said before. My aim is not to 
be consistent with my previous statements on a give n question; but to be 
consistent with truth as it may present itself to m e at a given moment. The 
result has been that I have grown from truth to tru th; I have saved my memory 
an undue strain; and what is more, whenever I have been obliged to compare 
my writing even of fifty years ago with the latest,  I have discovered no 
inconsistency between the two. But friends who obse rve inconsistency will do 
well to take the meaning that my latest writing may  yield unless, of course, 
they prefer the old. But before making the choice t hey should try to see if 
there is not an underlying and abiding consistency between the two seeming 
inconsistencies. 
If I can say so without arrogance and with due humi lity, my message and 
methods are, indeed, in their essentials for the wh ole world. 
Harijan,  30-9-'39, p. 288 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 190   
I believe in thought-power more than in the power o f the word, whether 
written or spoken. And if the movement that I seek to represent has vitality in 
it and has divine blessing upon it, it will permeat e the whole world without my 
physical presence in its different parts. 
Young India , 17-9-'25, p. 320 
 
I lay claim to nothing exclusively divine in me. I do not claim prophetship. I am 
but a humble seeker after Truth and bent upon findi ng It. I count no sacrifice 
too great for sake of seeing God face to face, 
Harijan , 6-5-'33, p. 4 
 
A persistent correspondent from Simla asks me wheth er I intend to found a sect 
or claim divinity. I have answered him by a private  letter. But he would have 
me make a public declaration for the sake of poster ity. I should have thought 
that I had in the strongest terms repudiated all cl aim to divinity. I claim to be a 
humble servant of India and humanity and would like  to die in the discharge of 
such service. I have no desire to found a sect. I a m really too ambitious to be 
satisfied with a sect for a following, for I repres ent no new truths. I endeavour 
to follow and represent truth as I know it. I do cl aim to throw a new light on 
many an old truth. I hope that this declaration wil l satisfy my inquirer and 
others like him. 
Young India,  25-8-'21, p. 267 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 191   
NON-ENGLISH WORDS WITH THEIR MEANINGS 
Agiari —a Zoroastrian temple; Parsi place of fire-worship  
Ahimsa —non-violence; love  
Allah —a Muslim term for God 
Ashram  —a place for spiritual retirement; Gandhiji's colo ny of workers 
Ashrama —one of the four stages in a man's life (student, h ouseholder, meditator in 
the forest, and wandering teacher), as enjoined by Hinduism  
Avatar —incarnation 
 
Bati —a thick bread  
Bhatti—a.  small open furnace 
Bhagavat—  a Purana or devotional book containing the life-hi story of Lord Krishna 
and other ancient stories  
Bhagavad Gita - Hindu scripture, often regarded as the New Testamen t of 
Hinduism  
Bhajan— a religious service consisting of devotional songs;  devotional song  
Bhangi —a scavenger; an 'untouchable'  
Brahmachari —one pledged to chastity; student  
Brahmacharya —chastity; continence Brahman —God; Supreme Being 
Brahmana— the highest Hindu caste, consisting of priests 
 
Dharma  —religious duty 
Dharmayuddha —righteous war 
 
Ezhavo —an outcaste of Malabar 
 
Gayatri — Vedic prayer addressed to the Sun God 
Gita —See  Bhagavad Gita  
Goshala —a dairy-, cattle farm 
Guru —religious teacher 
 My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 192  Himsa —violence 
Itihasa —Ancient Hindu Book of History  
 
Kali —a Hindu goddess of destruction; name of goddess Du rga 
Kalma— a Muslim prayer formula 
Karmayogi —religious person devoted to the path of action 
Khuda —a Muslim term for God 
Koran —a sacred book of Muslims 
 
Lota —a small vessel for water 
 
Mahabharata —a Hindu epic 
Mandir —a Hindu temple 
Mantra —a Vedic hymn or sacred prayer 
Moksha —salvation; liberation 
 
Nirvana —lit. extinction; extinction of desire; Buddhist co nception of salvation  
 
Pariah —an outcaste of the Tamils of South India  
Phooka —process of inserting a rod or pipe into the reprod uctive organ of the cow 
and blowing air into it to make the cow yield its l ast drop of milk  
 
Quran —See Koran 
 
Rama —a Hindu incarnation of God; God  
Ramanama —name of Rama or God 
Ramayana —a Hindu epic, describing the life-history of King Rama 
Rama Raj —Kingdom of Rama or God; the ideal political and so cial order  
Rishi—seer 
 
Sanatana —ancient; orthodox 
Sanatani —one who follows the ancient faith My Religion 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 193  Satyagraha —lit. clinging to Truth; non-violent resistance to untruth  
Satyagrahi —non-violent resister of untruth  
Shastra —Hindu sacred book 
Shivalingam —a stone idol or short pillar representing Shiva, a  Hindu god  
Shudra —the fourth or lowest Hindu caste consisting of man ual labourers  
Smriti —ancient book embodying Hindu law and tradition  
Swadeshi —the duty to serve one's neighbours and therefore to  use articles 
produced by them only  
Swaraj —self-government  
 
Tapas, Tapasya —austerity 
 
Upanishads —ancient philosophical treatises of Hinduism  
 
Varna —social groups numbering four based on pursuit of h ereditary occupations 
Varna Dharma —specific duties of the different social groups 
Varnashrama —four social groups and four stages of man's life 
Varnashrama Dharma —specific duties of four social groups and of four stages of 
man's life 
Vedas —earliest Hindu scriptures  
Vishnu —a Hindu god  
 
Yogi —one practising Yoga 
 
Zend Avesta —scriptures of the Parsis or Zoroastrians 
 
 