 
Nature Cure 
 
Written by : M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Edited by : Bharatan Kumarappa 
 
 
Foreword by : Morarji Desai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Mudranalaya 
Ahmedabad 380 014  (INDIA) 
  Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
FOREWORD 
Gandhiji had a passion to tend the sick and serve t he poor. He valued life close 
to nature for its simplicity and evolved and practi sed simple rule's of health. He 
had almost a religious faith in vegetarianism which  led him to carry out dietetic 
reform based on pragmatic results obtained from per sonal experiments. He was 
tremendously influenced by the writings of Dr. Kuhn e on Nature Cure. He 
believed that human body, mind and spirit could be maintained in a state of 
perfect health by observance of simple rules. He at tempted to discover causes 
of ordinary ill health and improvised simple remedi es of Nature Cure. He 
established a Nature Cure Centre at Uruli in pursua nce of his belief that the 
poor could not afford costly medicines and remedies  and that he owed it to 
them to let them have the benefit of his lifelong e xperiments in Health and 
Hygiene. 
The human body is a wonderful and perfect machine. If it gets out of order, it 
can set itself right without medicine, provided it is given a chance to adjust 
itself. If we are not abstemious in our habits of f ood etc. or if our mind is 
agitated by passion, emotion or anxiety, the body c annot eliminate all the 
refuse and that part which remains uneliminated tur ns into toxins whose 
presence gives rise to symptoms which we call disea se. Disease is an attempt of 
the body to get rid of toxins. If the body is helpe d in the process of elimination 
by fasting, cleansing of the bowels by enemas, bath s and massages, the body 
could be restored to its normal health. This is in brief what Gandhiji meant by 
Nature Cure. 
This book contains a valuable collection of Gandhij i's thoughts on Nature Cure 
etc. and is indeed as rich in its information as it  is constructive in its outlook. I 
commend this book for serious study by all those wh o are interested in cure of 
ailments through natural remedies. 
30th November, 1954       Morarji Desai 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3   
EDITOR'S NOTE 
Gandhiji had very early in life lost faith in moder n medicine. He was convinced 
that for good health all that was necessary was to live according to the laws of 
Nature in regard to diet, fresh air, exercise, clea n surroundings and a pure 
heart. Instead of this, man was tempted by modern m edical knowledge to 
indulge himself to his heart's content, break every  law of health and morality 
and then seek a cure through commercialized drugs. In revolt from this 
Gandhiji sought to discover for himself a sane way of overcoming disease with-
out the use of medicines. 
Besides, medicine tends to treat disease as merely a matter concerning the 
body. But Gandhiji viewing man as a whole finds tha t disease of the body is 
chiefly due to mental or spiritual causes and can b e permanently cured only 
when man's entire attitude to life is changed. The cure of bodily disease must 
therefore, according to him, be sought primarily in  the realm of the spirit, in 
self-discipline and self-mastery through brahmacharya,  in a thoughtful 
observance of the laws of Nature in regard to healt h, and in bringing about a 
physical and social environment conducive to the de velopment of a sound body 
and a sound mind. Gandhiji's conception of Nature C ure is therefore much 
wider than what is generally understood by that ter m. It is not merely a cure of 
disease after it has occurred but an attempt to pre vent disease altogether by 
living according to the laws of Nature which, accor ding to him, are the same as 
the laws of God. Accordingly it involves not only t he use of earth, water, air, 
sunlight, fasts and such like to cure disease, but even more a transformation of 
one's entire life —physical, mental, moral and soci al — through Ramanama or 
faith in God,  alias  His Law. Rama- nama is not, therefore, for him mer e magic 
which when uttered through the lips will work wonde rs of itself. It signifies, as 
already said, a complete change in the heart and mo de of life of the individual, 
whereby the individual comes to be in tune with the  infinite and so obtains 
never-failing disease- conquering life and strength  from the Source of all life. Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4  In arranging Gandhiji's writings under chapters, it  seemed well not to interrupt 
the thought by giving the titles of articles. Not a ll the articles or speeches are 
given in full, as repetitions had to be omitted. 
Extracts from Gandhiji's weeklies —the  Young India  and the Harijan  have dates 
affixed to them. So far as the other extracts go, t hey are from  Hind Swaraj,  
written in 1908,  Autobiography, written in 1925 and on, and  Key to Health,  
written in jail during 1942 to 1944. 
Extracts from his letters to workers at the Uruli K anchan Nature Cure Clinic and 
information about that Centre have been given in th e form of Appendices. The 
letters were translated by Shri A.L.Mazumdar from t he original Gujarati. 
Those desirous of pursuing further Gandhiji's ideas  in regard to health should 
supplement this book by reading his Key to Health  and  Diet and Diet Reform.  
Bombay, August, 1954      Bharatan Kumarappa 
 
 
TO THE READER 
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wr itings and to others who are 
interested in them that I am not at all concerned w ith appearing to be 
consistent. In my search after Truth I have discard ed many ideas and learnt 
many new things. Old as I am in age, I have no feel ing that I have ceased to 
grow inwardly or that my growth will stop at the di ssolution of the flesh. What I 
am concerned with is my readiness to obey the call of Truth, my God, from 
moment to moment, and, therefore, when anybody find s any inconsistency 
between any two writings of mine, if he has still f aith in my sanity, he would do 
well to choose the later of the two on the same sub ject. 
M. K. Gandhi 
Harijan. , 29-4-1933 p. 2 
 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5   
I 
INTRODUCTORY 
Doctors have almost unhinged us. Sometimes I think that quacks are better than 
highly qualified doctors. Let us consider: The busi ness of a doctor is to take 
care of the body, or, properly speaking, not even t hat. Their business is really 
to rid the body of diseases that may afflict it. Ho w do these diseases arise? 
Surely by our negligence or indulgence. I overeat, I have indigestion, I go to a 
doctor, he gives me medicine, I am cured. I overeat  again, I take his pills again. 
Had I not taken the pills in the first instance, I would have suffered the 
punishment deserved by me and I would not have over eaten again. The doctor 
intervened and helped me to indulge myself. My body  thereby certainly felt 
more at ease; but my mind became weakened. A contin uance of a course of 
medicine must, therefore, result in loss of control  over the mind. 
I have indulged in vice, I contract a disease, a do ctor cures me, the odds are 
that I shall repeat the vice. Had the doctor not in tervened, Nature would have 
done its work, and I would have acquired mastery ov er myself, would have 
been freed from vice and would have become happy. 
Hospitals are institutions for propagating sin. Men  take less care of their bodies 
and immorality increases. European doctors are the worst of all. For the sake of 
a mistaken care of the human body, they kill annual ly thousands of animals. 
They practise vivisection. No religion sanctions th is. All say that it is not 
necessary to take so many lives for the sake of our  bodies. 
These doctors violate our religious instinct. Most of their medical preparations 
contain either animal fat or spirituous liquors; bo th of these are tabooed by 
Hindus and Mahomedans. We may pretend to be civiliz ed, call religious prohi-
bitions a superstition and wantonly indulge in what  we like. The fact remains 
that doctors induce us to indulge, and the result i s that we have become 
deprived of self-control and have become effeminate . In these circumstances, Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6  we are unfit to serve the country. To study Europea n medicine is to deepen our 
slavery. 
It is worth considering why we take up the professi on of medicine. It is 
certainly not for the purpose of serving humanity. We become doctors so that 
we may obtain honours and riches. I have endeavoure d to show that there is no 
real service of humanity in the profession, and tha t it is injurious to mankind. 
Doctors make a show of their knowledge, and charge exorbitant fees. Their 
preparations, which are intrinsically worth a few p ence, cost shillings. The 
populace, in its credulity and in the hope of riddi ng itself of some disease, 
allows itself to be cheated. Are not quacks then, w hom we know, better than 
the doctors who put on an air of humaneness? 
Hind Swaraj,  1946, pp. 42  & 43 
 
If I had acquired perfect mastery over my thoughts,  I should not have suffered 
from pleurisy, dysentery and appendicitis as I have  during the last ten years.* I 
believe that when the soul is sinless, the body whi ch she inhabits is healthy too. 
That is to say, as the soul progresses towards free dom from sin, the body also 
tends to become immune from disease. But a healthy body, in this case, does 
not mean a strong body. A powerful soul lives only in a weak body. As the soul 
advances in strength, the body languishes. A perfec tly healthy body might yet 
be quite emaciated. A strong body is often diseased . Even if there be no 
disease, such a body catches infection soon, while a perfectly healthy body 
enjoys complete immunity from it. Pure blood has th e power of expelling all 
obnoxious germs. 
Navajivan,  25-5-'24 
 
Maintenance of perfect health should be considered almost an utter 
impossibility without  brahmacharya  leading to the conservation of the sexual 
secretions. To countenance wastage of a secretion w hich has the power of 
creating another human being is, to say the least, an indication of gross ignor-
ance. A firm grasp of the fact that semen is meant to be used only for Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  procreation and not for self-indulgence, leaves no room whatsoever for 
indulging in animal passion. Assimilation of the kn owledge that the vital fluid is 
never meant for waste should restrain men and women  from becoming crazy 
over sexual intercourse. It will never be resorted to in order to satisfy passion 
without the desire for a child. After intercourse w hich has been performed as a 
matter of duty, the desire to repeat the process sh ould never arise. 
The sexual glands are all the time secreting the se men. This secretion should 
be utilized for enhancing one's mental, physical an d spiritual energy. He, who 
would learn to utilize it thus, will find that he r equires very little food to keep 
his body in a fit condition. And yet he will be as capable as any of undertaking 
physical labour. Mental exertion will not tire him easily nor will he show the 
ordinary signs of old age. Just as a ripe fruit or an old leaf falls off naturally, so 
will such a brahmachari  when his time comes pass away with all his faculti es 
intact. Although with the passage of time the effec ts of the natural wear and 
tear must be manifest in his body, his intellect in stead of showing signs of 
decay should show progressive clarity. If all this is correct, the real key to 
health lies in the conservation of vital energy. 
Key to Health , 1948, pp. 46 to 49 
 
The Nature Cure man does not 'sell a cure' to the p atient. He teaches him the 
right way of living in his home, which would not on ly cure him of his particular 
ailment but also save him from falling ill in futur e. The ordinary doctor or 
vaidya  is interested mostly in the study of disease. The Nature Curist is 
interested more in the study of health. His real in terest begins where that of 
the ordinary doctor ends; the eradication of the pa tient's ailment under Nature 
Cure marks only the beginning of a way of life in w hich there is no room for 
illness or disease. Nature Cure is thus a way of li fe, not a course of 'treatment'. 
It is not claimed that Nature Cure can cure all dis ease. No system of medicine 
can do that or else we should all be immortals. 
Harijan,  7-4-'46 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8   
*I am a humble aspirant for perfection. I know my w ay to it also. But knowing the way is 
not reaching its end. If I was perfect, if I had ac quired full control over all my passions 
even in thought, I should be perfect in body I am f ree to confess that daily I am obliged to 
expend a great amount of mental energy in acquiring  control over my thoughts. When I 
have succeeded if I ever do, think what a store-hou se of energy would be set free for 
service! As 1 hold that appendicitis was a result o f infirmity of thought or mind, so do I 
concede that my submission to the surgical operatio n was an additional infirmity of mind. 
If I was absolutely free of egoism, I would have re signed myself to the inevitable; but I 
wanted to live in the present body. Complete detach ment is not a mechanical process. 
One has to grow into it by patient toil and prayer.  
Young India, 3-4-'24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9   
II 
NATURE CURE TREATMENT  
The science of natural therapeutics is based on a u se of the same five 
elements, in the treatment of disease, which consti tute the human body. These 
are earth, water, ether, sunlight and air. It is my  effort to point out how they 
can be utilized for-health purposes. 
Up till the year 1901, although I did not rush to t he doctors whenever I 
happened to get ill, I did use their remedies to a certain extent. I used to take 
fruit salt for constipation. The late Dr. Pranjivan  Mehta who had come to Natal 
introduced me to certain drugs to remove general la ssitude. This led me to 
read literature on the uses of drugs. Add to this a  little more knowledge I 
gained by a certain amount of work I had put in at a cottage hospital in Natal. 
This enabled me to carry on for some time, but none  of the drugs did me any 
good in the end. Headaches and loss of a sense of g eneral wellbeing persisted. I 
was very dissatisfied with this state of things and  what little faith I had in 
medicines began to fade. 
All through this interval my experiments in dieteti cs were continued. I had 
great faith in Nature Cure methods, but there was n obody to help me with 
practical guidance in their use. With the help of w hatever knowledge I could 
gather by reading a little of Nature Cure literatur e, I tried to treat myself by 
diet regulation. My habit of going out for long wal ks also stood me in good 
stead, and thanks to that habit I did not have actu ally to take to bed. While I 
was thus managing to keep going somehow, Mr. Polak handed me Just's book, 
called  Return to Nature.  
Key to Health,  pp. 57 & 58 
 
1. EARTH 
Just lays great emphasis on the use of earth. For c onstipation, he advises cold 
mud poultice on the lower abdomen. The mud poultice  should be 3" broad, 6" Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  long and ½" thick. Just claims that mud can cure a man bitten by a poisonous 
snake. He would pack wet earth all round the body. I mention this for what it is 
worth. I would like to put down here what I have te sted and proved for myself. 
It is my experience that a mud poultice applied to the head, relieves headache 
in most cases. I have tried it in hundreds of cases . Headache may be due to 
several causes, but whatever the cause, as a genera l rule, an application of 
mud poultice relieves it for the time being. 
Mud poultices cure ordinary boils. I have applied m ud to discharging abscesses 
as well. For these cases I prepare the poultice by packing the mud in a clean 
piece of cloth dipped in potassium permanganate lot ion, and apply it to the 
abscesses after washing it clean with permanganate lotion. In the majority of 
cases this treatment results in complete cure. I do  not remember a single case 
in which it has failed me. Mud application immediat ely relieves the pain of a 
wasp sting. I have used it in many cases of scorpio n bite, though with much less 
success. Scorpions have become a nuisance in Sevagr am. We have tried all the 
known treatments for scorpion bite, but none has pr oved infallible. I can say 
this that the results of mud application are not in ferior to those of any other 
form of treatment. 
In high fever, an application of mud poultice on th e head and abdomen is very 
useful. Although it does not always bring down the temperature, it does 
invariably soothe the patient and make him feel bet ter, so that the patients 
themselves ask for these applications. I have used it in several cases of typhoid 
fever. The-fever no doubt runs its own course but m ud applications seem to 
relieve restlessness and abate the suffering. We ha ve had about ten cases of 
typhoid fever in Sevagram with complete recovery in  every case, so that the 
inmates of the Ashram are no longer afraid of typho id fever. I have not used 
any drugs in the treatment of these cases. I have m ade use of other Nature 
Cure methods besides mud poultices, but about those  in their own place. 
In Sevagram we have made free use of hot mud poulti ces as a substitute for 
anti-phlogistine. A little oil and salt is added to  the mud and it is heated 
sufficiently long to ensure sterilization. Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  I have not told the reader what kind of earth shoul d be used for mud poultices. 
In the beginning I used to procure sweet smelling c lean red earth. It emits a 
delicate smell when it is mixed with water. But thi s kind of earth is not easy to 
obtain. In a city like Bombay it is a problem to ge t any kind of earth. It is safe 
to use soft alluvial clay, which is neither gritty nor sticky. One should never use 
earth taken from manured soil. Earth should be drie d, pounded, and passed 
through a fine sieve. If there is any doubt as to i ts cleanliness, it should be well 
heated and thus sterilized. Mud used as a poultice on a clean surface need not 
be thrown away after use. It can be used again and again after drying it in the 
sun or on fire and pounding and sieving it. I am no t aware that mud poultice 
made out of the same earth again and again as descr ibed above, is any the less 
efficacious. I have myself used it in this way and did not find it any the less 
efficacious for repeated use. Some friends who regu larly use mud poultices, tell 
me that mud from Yamuna's banks is particularly goo d for this purpose. 
Just writes that clean earth may be eaten in order to overcome constipation. 
Five to ten grams is the maximum dose. The rational e is said to be this. Earth is 
not digested. It acts as roughage and must pass out . The peristalsis thus 
stimulated pushes out the faecal matter as well. I have not tried it myself. 
Therefore those who wish to do so, should try on th eir own responsibility. I am 
inclined to think that a trial or two is not likely  to harm anyone. 
Key to Health,  pp. 58 to 62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12   
2. WATER 
Hydrotherapy is a well-known and ancient form of th erapy. Many books have 
been written on the subject but in my opinion the f orm of hydrotherapy 
suggested by Kuhne is simple and effective. Kuhne's  book on nature cure is very 
popular in India. It has been translated in several  languages of India. Andhra 
has the greatest number of Kuhne's followers. He ha s written a good deal about 
diet as well, but here I wish to confine myself to his experiments in 
hydrotherapy. 
Hip bath and sitz bath are the most important of Ku hne's contributions to 
hydrotherapy. He has devised a special tub for use though one can do without 
it. Any tub thirty to thirty- six inches long accor ding to the patient's height 
generally serves the purpose. Experience will indic ate the proper size. The tub 
should be filled with fresh cold water so that it d oes not overflow when the 
patient sits in it. In summer the water may be iced , if it is not cold enough, to 
give a gentle shock to the patient. Generally, wate r kept in earthen jars 
overnight answers the purpose. Water can also be co oled by putting a piece of 
cloth on the surface of the water and then fanning it vigorously. The tub should 
be kept against the bathroom wall and a plank put i n the tub to serve as 
backrest. The patient should sit in the tub keeping  his feet outside. Portions of 
the body outside water should be kept well covered so that the patient does 
not feel cold. After the patient is comfortably sea ted in the tub, gentle friction 
should be applied to his abdomen, with a soft towel . This bath can be taken for 
five to thirty minutes. When it is over, the body s hould be rubbed dry and the 
patient put to bed. 
Hip bath brings down the temperature in high fever and given in the manner 
described above it never does any harm, and may do much good. It relieves 
constipation and improves digestion. The patient fe els fresh and active after it. 
In cases of constipation, Kuhne advises a brisk wal k for half an hour 
immediately after the bath. It should never be give n on a full stomach. Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  I have tried hip baths on a fairly large scale. The y have proved efficacious in 
more than 75 cases out of 100. In cases of hyperpyr exia, if the patient's 
condition permits of his being seated in the tub, t he temperature immediately 
invariably falls at least two to three degrees and the onset of delirium is 
averted. 
The rationale of hip bath, according to Kuhne is th is. Whatever the apparent 
cause of fever, the real cause in every case is one  and the same, i.e., 
accumulation of waste matter in the intestines. The  heat generated by the 
putrefaction of this waste matter is manifested in the form of fever and several 
other ailments. Hip bath brings down this internal fever so that fever and other 
ailments which are the external manifestations ther eof subside automatically. 
How far this reasoning is correct I cannot say. The  speciality of Nature Cure 
methods lies in the fact that being natural, they c an be safely practised by 
laymen. If a man, suffering from headache, wets a p iece of cloth in cold water 
and wraps it round his head, it can do no harm. The  addition of earth to cold 
water enhances the utility of the cold pack. 
Now about the sitz or friction bath. The organ of r eproduction is one of the 
most sensitive parts of the body. There is somethin g illusive about the 
sensitiveness of the glans penis and the foreskin. Anyway, I know not how to 
describe it. Kuhne has made use of this knowledge f or therapeutic purposes. He 
advises application of gentle friction to the outer  end of the external sexual 
organ by means of a soft wet piece of cloth, while cold water is being poured. 
In the case of the male the glans penis should be c overed with the foreskin 
before applying friction. The method advised by Kuh ne is this: A stool should be 
placed in a tub of cold water so that the seat is j ust about the level of the 
water in the tub. The patient should sit on the sto ol with his feet outside the 
tub and apply gentle friction to the sexual organ w hich just touches the surface 
of the water in the tub. This friction should never  cause pain. On the contrary 
the patient should find it pleasant and feel rested  and peaceful at the end of 
the bath. Whatever the ailment, the sitz bath makes  the patient feel better for 
the time being. Kuhne places sitz baths higher than  hip baths. I have had much Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14  less experience of the former than of the latter. T he blame, I think, lies mostly 
with myself. I have been lax. Those whom I advised sitz bath, have not been 
patient with the experiment, so that I cannot expre ss an opinion on the 
efficacy of these baths, based on personal experien ce. It is worth a trial by 
everyone. If there is any difficulty about finding a tub, it is possible to pour 
water from a jug or a  lota  and take the friction bath. It is bound to make th e 
patient feel rested and peaceful. 
A few words about wet sheet packs will not be out o f place. It is very useful in 
pyrexia and insomnia. The method of giving wet shee t packs is this. Spread 
three or four thick broad woollen blankets on a cot  and on top of them a thick 
cotton sheet dipped in cold water with the water wr ung out. The patient lies 
flat on the wet sheet with his head resting on a pi llow outside the sheet. The 
wet sheet and the blankets are wrapped round the pa tient covering the whole 
body except the head which is covered with a damp t owel treated after the 
manner of the wet sheet. The sheet and the blankets  are wrapped round the 
patient, so that outside air cannot get inside. Tho ugh the patient feels a gentle 
shock when first laid in the wet sheet pack, he fin ds it pleasant afterwards. In a 
minute or two he begins to feel warm, unless the fe ver has become chronic, in 
about five minutes it begins to come down with swea ting. In resistant cases I 
have kept the patient wrapped in the wet sheet pack  up to half an hour. This 
has finally resulted in sweating. Sometimes, there is no sweating, but the 
patient goes off to sleep. In that case, he should not be awakened. The sleep 
indicates that the wet sheet pack has produced a so othing effect and he is 
quite comfortable. The temperature invariably falls  at least by one or two 
degrees as a result of the wet sheet pack. 
Wet sheet packs are also useful in the treatment of  prickly heat, urticaria, 
other forms of skin irritation, measles, smallpox e tc. I have tried them on a 
fairly large scale for these ailments. For smallpox  and measles cases, I added 
enough potassium permanganate to the water to give it a light pink colour. The 
sheet used for these patients, should afterwards be  sterilized by soaking it in Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15  boiling water and leaving it in it till it cools do wn sufficiently and then washed 
with soap and water 
In cases where circulation has become sluggish, the  leg muscles feel sore and 
there is peculiar ache and feeling of discomfort in  the legs, and ice massage 
does a lot of good. This treatment is more effectiv e in summer months. Massag-
ing a weak patient with ice in winter might prove a  risky affair. 
Now a few words about the therapeutics of hot water . An intelligent use of hot 
water gives relief in many cases. Application of io dine is a very popular remedy 
for all sorts of injuries and the like. Application  of hot water will prove equally 
effective in most of these cases. Tincture of iodin e is applied on swollen and 
bruised areas. Hot water fomentations are likely to  give equal relief, if not 
more. Again, iodine drops are used in cases of eara che. Irrigation of the ear 
with warm water is likely to relieve the pain in mo st of these cases. The use of 
iodine is attended with certain risks. The patient may have an idiosyncracy 
towards the drug. Iodine mistaken for something els e and taken internally 
might prove disastrous. But there is no risk whatso ever in using hot water 
Boiling water is as good a disinfectant as tincture  of iodine. I do not mean to 
belittle the usefulness of iodine or suggest that h ot water can replace it in all 
cases. Iodine is one of the few drugs which I regar d most useful and necessary, 
but it is an expensive thing. The poor cannot affor d to buy it and moreover its 
use cannot be safely entrusted to everybody. But wa ter is available 
everywhere. We may not despise its therapeutic valu e because it is obtained so 
easily. Knowledge of common household remedies ofte n proves a godsend in 
many a crisis. 
In cases of scorpion bite where all remedies have f ailed, immersion of the part 
in hot water has been found to relieve the pain to a certain extent. 
A shivering fit or a rigor can be made to subside b y putting buckets of hot 
boiling water all round the patient who is well wra pped up or by saturating the 
atmosphere of the room with steam by some other dev ice. A rubber hot water 
bag is a most useful thing, but it is not to be fou nd in every household. A glass 
bottle with a well fitting cork, filled with hot wa ter and wrapped in a piece of Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  cloth, serves the same purpose. Care should be take n to choose bottles that 
would not crack on hot water being poured into them . 
Steam is a more valuable therapeutic agent. It can be used to make the patient 
sweat. Steam baths are most useful in cases of rheu matism and other joint-
pains. The easiest as well as the oldest method of taking steam bath is this. 
Spread a blanket or two on a sparsely but tightly w oven cot and put one or two 
covered vessels full with boiling water under it. M ake the patient lie flat on the 
cot and cover him up in such a way that the ends of  the covering blankets touch 
the ground and thus prevent the steam from escaping  and the outside air from 
getting in. After arranging everything as above, th e lid from the vessels 
containing boiling water is removed and steam soon gets on to the patient lying 
between the blankets. It may be necessary to change  the water once or twice. 
Usually in India people keep an  angithi  under the pots to keep the water 
boiling. This ensures continuous discharge of steam  but is attended with risk of 
accidents. A single spark might set fire to the bla nkets or to the cot and 
endanger the patient's life. Therefore, it is advis able to use the method 
described by me even though it might seem slow and tedious. 
Some people add  neem  leaves or other herbs to the water used for genera ting 
steam. I do not know if such an addition increases the efficiency of steam. The 
object is to induce sweat and that is attained by m ere steam. 
In cases of cold feet or aching of the legs, the pa tient should be made to sit 
with his feet and legs immersed up to the knees in as hot water as he can bear. 
A little mustard powder can be added to the water. The foot bath should not 
last for more than fifteen minutes. This treatment improves the local 
circulation and gives immediate relief. 
In cases of common cold and sore throat a steam ket tle which is very much like 
an ordinary tea kettle with a long nozzle can be us ed for applying steam to the 
nose or throat. A rubber tube of required length ca n be attached to any 
ordinary kettle for this purpose. 
Key to Health,  pp. 63 to 75 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17   
3. AKASH (ETHER?) 
Akash  is a difficult word to translate as are indeed all  the other four elements 
so-called. For  pant  is not mere water in the original, nor  vayu  wind, or  prithvi  
earth, or  teja  light.  Akash  is ether least of all. Perhaps the nearest equival ent 
is emptiness taken in its literal sense. And it is horribly inexpressive of the 
original. All the five in the original are as livin g as life. It, however, we take 
ether as the nearest equivalent for  akash,  we must say that we know very little 
about ether itself and  akash much less. Our knowledge of its therapeutic uses is  
still more limited.  Akash  might be taken for the empty space surrounding the  
earth and the atmosphere round it. On a clear day, on looking up, one sees a 
beautiful mauve blue canopy which is known as the  akash  or sky. So far as we 
are concerned, this sky or the ether is limitless. We are surrounded by it on 
every side, and there is no nook or corner without it. Generally we imagine that 
the sky is something resting upon the high — it is the blue canopy above us. But 
the sky is as much above us as below and all round us. We move round and 
round with the earth. Therefore the  akash  is round and everybody is within it. 
It is an envelope whose outermost surface is measur eless. The lower strata of 
the  akash  for a number of miles are filled with air. But for  this man would 
become suffocated in spite of the emptiness. True, we cannot see the air but 
we can feel it when in motion. Sky or the ether is the abode of atmosphere. 
One can pump out air, say from an empty bottle and create a vacuum, but who 
can pump out the vacuum itself? That is akash.  
This  akash  we have to make use of to maintain or to regain he alth. Air being 
most essential to sustain life, Nature has made it omnipresent. But the 
omnipresence of air is only relative. It is not lim itless in reality. Scientists tell 
us that after a certain number of miles above the e arth there is no air. It is said 
that earthly creatures cannot exist outside this at mosphere. This statement 
may or may not be true. All that we are concerned w ith here is that  akash  
extends beyond the atmosphere. Some day the scienti sts might prove that what 
we call ether is also something which fills the emp ty space  —akash. Then we Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18  will have to discover a new name for the empty spac e that holds neither air nor 
the ether. Be that as it may, the mystery of this e mpty space all around us is 
most intriguing. We cannot solve it unless we can s olve the mystery of God 
himself. This much might be said that the more we u tilize this great element  
akash  the healthier we will be. The first lesson to be l earnt is this, that we 
should not put any partition between ourselves and the sky —the infinite—which 
is very near and very far away. If our bodies could  be in contact with the sky 
without the intervention of houses, roofs and even clothes, we are likely to 
enjoy the maximum amount of health. This is not pos sible for everyone. But all 
can and should accept the validity of the statement  and adapt life accordingly. 
To the extent that we are able to approach the stat e in practice, we will enjoy 
contentment and peace of mind. 
This train of thought will make the thinker keep hi s surroundings as open as 
possible. He will not fill the house with unnecessa ry furniture and will use the 
minimum of clothes that are necessary. Many househo lds are so packed with all 
sorts of unnecessary decorations and furniture whic h one can very well do 
without, that a simple living man will feel suffoca ted in those surroundings. 
They are nothing but means of harbouring dust, bact eria and insects. 
My desire to be in tune with the infinite has saved  me from many 
complications in life. It led not merely to simplic ity of household and dress but 
all round simplicity in the mode of my life. In a n utshell, and in the language of 
the subject under discussion I have gone on creatin g more and more contact 
with  akash.  With the increase in the contact went improvement in health. I had 
more contentment and peace of mind and the desire f or belongings almost 
disappeared. He who will establish contact with the  infinite possesses nothing 
and yet possesses everything. In the ultimate analy sis, man owns that, of which 
he can make legitimate use and which he can assimil ate. If everybody followed 
this rule, there would be room enough for all and t here would be neither want 
nor overcrowding. 
It follows that one should make it a point to sleep  in the open. Sufficient 
covering should be used to protect oneself against the inclemencies of the Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19  weather—against cold and dew. In rainy season an um brella-like roof without 
walls should be used for keeping the rain out. For the rest, the starlit blue 
canopy should form the roof, so that whenever one o pens one's eyes, he or she 
can feast them on the ever- changing beautiful pano rama of the heavens. He 
will never tire of the scene and it will not dazzle  or hurt his eyes. On the 
contrary, it will have a soothing effect on him. To  watch the different starry 
constellations floating in their majesty is a feast  for the eyes. One who 
establishes contact with the stars as living witnes ses to all his thoughts will 
never allow any evil or impurity to enter his mind and will enjoy peaceful, 
refreshing sleep. 
Let us descend from the  akash  above to the  akash  within and immediately 
about us. Thus the skin has millions of pores. If w e fill up the empty space 
within these pores, we simply die. Any clogging of the pores therefore must 
interfere with the even flow of health. Similarly w e must not fill up the 
digestive tract with unnecessary foodstuffs. We sho uld eat only as much as we 
need and no more. Often one overeats or eats indige stible things without being 
aware of it. An occasional fast, say once a week or  once a fortnight, will enable 
one to keep the balance even. If one is unable to f ast for the whole day, one 
should miss one or more meals during the day. That Nature abhors a vacuum is 
only partially true. Nature constantly demands a va cuum. The vast space 
surrounding us is the standing testimony of the tru th. 
Key to Health,  pp. 75 to 81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20   
4. SUNLIGHT 
As in the case of the other elements, which have be en already dealt with, man 
cannot do without sunlight. The sun is the source o f light and heat. If there was 
no sun, there would be neither light nor warmth. Un fortunately we do not 
make full use of sunlight and consequently we are u nable to enjoy perfect 
health. Sun-bath is as useful as ordinary water-bat h though the two cannot 
replace one another. In cases of debility and slow circulation, exposure of the 
uncovered body to the morning sun acts as an all-ro und general tonic and 
accelerates the metabolism. The morning sun has the  largest amount of ultra-
violet rays which are a most effective component of  the sun's rays. If the 
patient feels cold, he should lie in the sun covere d up and gradually expose 
more and more of his body as he gets used to it. On e can also take the sun-bath 
pacing up and down in the sun without any clothes o n, in a private enclosure or 
in any other place away from the public gaze. If su ch place is not within easy 
reach, one can just cover up the private parts by t ying a piece of cloth or a  
langoti  and expose the rest of the body to the sun. 
I know of many persons who have been benefited by s un-baths. It is a well-
known treatment for tuberculosis. Sun-baths or heli o-therapy is no longer 
confined to the sphere of naturopathy. Orthodox med icine has taken it up from 
naturopathy and developed it further. In cold count ries, special glass buildings 
have been constructed under medical supervision, so  that the glass lets in the 
sun's rays and at the same time protects patients a gainst the cold. Sun-
treatment often results in the cure of intractable ulcers. To produce sweating, I 
have made the patients lie in the sun at about 11 a .m., i.e. a little before 
midday. The experiment has been successful and the patients are soon bathed 
in sweat. In these cases the head should be protect ed from the sun by means of 
a cold mud poultice. Banana or any other leaves can  be used to cover up the 
head and face, and thus further help in keeping the  head cool and well 
protected. The head should never be exposed to stro ng sunlight. 
Key to Health,  pp. 81 to 83 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21   
5. AIR 
This fifth element is as important as the four alre ady discussed in the foregoing 
pages. The human body which is composed of the five  elements cannot do 
without any one of them. Therefore no one should be  afraid of air. Generally, 
wherever our people go, they make devices to keep o ut the sun and the air and 
thus jeopardize their health. If one cultivates the  habit of living in the open in 
the midst of plenty of fresh air, right from childh ood; the body will become 
hardened and he or she will never suffer from cold in the head and the like 
ailments. 
Key to Health,  p. 83 
 
Q.  It has been said that Nature Cure can be applied t o every disease. If so, 
can it cure short or long-sightedness, cataract and  other eye diseases? Can one 
avoid spectacles? Can hernia, tonsils etc. which ne ed the surgeon's knife be 
cured by Nature Cure? 
A.  I know that the claim attributed to Nature Cure ha s been made by its 
exponents. I do not count myself among them. This m uch, however, can be 
safely claimed. Disease springs from a wilful or ig norant breach of the laws of 
Nature. It follows, therefore, that timely return t o those laws should mean 
restoration. A person who has tried Nature beyond e ndurance, must either 
suffer the punishment inflicted by Nature or in ord er to avoid it, seek the 
assistance of the physician or the surgeon as the c ase may be. Every submission 
to merited punishment strengthens the mind of man, every avoidance saps it. 
Harijan,  l5-9-'46 
 
 
 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22   
III 
NATURE CURE EXPERIMENTS 
 
I. FAITH ON ITS TRIAL 
My second son, Manilal, who had already been throug h an acute attack of 
smallpox some years back, had a severe attack of ty phoid, combined with 
pneumonia and signs of delirium at night. 
The doctor was called in. He said medicine would ha ve little effect, but eggs 
and chicken broth might be given with profit. Manil al was only ten years old. To 
consult his wishes was out of the question. Being h is guardian I had to decide. 
The doctor was a very good Parsi. I told him that w e were all vegetarians and 
that I could not possibly give either of the two th ings to my son. 
I knew Kuhne's treatment and had tried it too. I kn ew as well that fasting also 
could be tried with profit. So I began to give Mani lal hip baths according to 
Kuhne, never keeping him in the tub for more than t hree minutes, and kept him 
on orange juice mixed with water for three days. 
But the temperature persisted, going up to 104°. At  night he would be 
delirious. I began to get anxious. What would peopl e say of me? What would my 
elder brother think of me? Could we not call in ano ther doctor? Why not have 
an Ayurvedic physician? What right had the parents to inflict their fads on their 
children? 
I was haunted by thoughts like these. Then a contra ry current would start. God 
would surely be pleased to see that I was giving th e same treatment to my son 
as I would give myself. I had faith in hydropathy a nd little faith in allopathy. 
The doctors could not guarantee recovery. At best t hey could experiment. The 
thread of life was in the hands of God. Why not tru st it to Him and in His name 
go on with what I thought was the right treatment? Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23  My mind was torn between these conflicting thoughts . It was night. I was in 
Manilal's bed lying by his side. I decided to give him a wet sheet pack. I got up, 
wetted a sheet, wrung the water out of it and wrapp ed it about Manilal, 
keeping only his head out and then covered him with  two blankets. To the head 
I applied a wet towel. The whole body was burning l ike hot iron, and quite 
parched. There was absolutely no perspiration. 
I was sorely tired. I left Manilal in the charge of  his mother, and went out for a 
walk on Chaupati to refresh myself. It was about te n o'clock. Very few 
pedestrians were out. Plunged in deep thought, I sc arcely looked at them. 'My 
honour is in Thy keeping, Oh Lord, in this hour of trial', I repeated to myself. 
Ramanama was on my lips. After a short time I retur ned, my heart beating 
within my breast. 
No sooner I entered the room than Manilal said, 'Yo u have returned, Bapu?' 
'Yes darling.' 
'Do please pull me out. I am burning.' 
'Are you perspiring, my boy?' 
'I am simply soaked, do please take me out.' 
I felt his forehead. It was covered with beads of p erspiration. The temperature 
was going down. I thanked God. 
'Manilal, your fever is sure to go now. A little mo re perspiration and then I will 
take you out.' 
'Pray, no. Do deliver me from this furnace. Wrap me  some other time if you 
like.' 
I just managed to keep him under the pack for a few  minutes more by diverting 
him. The perspiration streamed down his forehead. I  undid the pack and dried 
his body Father and son fell asleep in the same bed . 
And each slept like a log. Next morning Manilal had  much less fever. He went 
on thus for forty days on diluted milk and fruit ju ices. I had no fear now. It was 
an obstinate type of fever, but it had been got und er control. Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  Today Manilal is the healthiest of my boys. Who can  say whether his recovery 
was due to God's grace, or to hydropathy, or to car eful dietary and nursing?  
Let everyone decide according to his own faith. For  my part I was sure that God 
had saved my honour, and that belief remains unalte red to this day. 
Autobiography,  1948, pp. 302 to 305 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25   
2. EXPERIMENTS IN EARTH AND WATER TREATMENT 
With the growing simplicity of my life, my dislike for medicines steadily 
increased. While practising in Durban, I suffered f or some time from debility 
and rheumatic inflammation. Dr. P.J.Mehta, who had come to see me, gave me 
treatment, and I got well. After that, up to the ti me when I returned to India, I 
do not remember having suffered from any ailment to  speak of.  
But I used to be troubled with constipation and fre quent headaches, while at 
Johannesburg. I kept myself fit with occasional lax atives and a well-regulated 
diet. But I could hardly call myself healthy, and a lways wondered when I should 
get free from the incubus of these laxative medicin es. 
About this time I read of the formation of a 'No Br eakfast Association' in 
Manchester. The argument of the promoters was that Englishmen ate too often 
and too much, that their doctors' bills were heavy because they ate until 
midnight, and that they should at least give up bre akfast, if they wanted to 
improve this state of affairs. Though all these thi ngs could not be said of me, I 
felt that the argument did partly apply in my case.  I used to have three square 
meals daily in addition to afternoon tea. I was nev er a spare eater and enjoyed 
as many delicacies as could be had with a vegetaria n and spiceless diet. I 
scarcely ever got up before six or seven. I therefo re argued that, if I also 
dropped the morning breakfast, I might become free from headaches. So I tried 
the experiment. For a few days it was rather hard, but the headaches entirely 
disappeared. This led me to conclude that I was eat ing more than I needed. 
But the change was far from relieving me of constip ation. I tried Kuhne's hip 
baths, which gave some relief but did not completel y cure me. In the meantime 
the German who had a vegetarian restaurant, or some  other friend, I forget 
who, placed in my hands Just s  Return to Nature.  In his book I read about earth 
treatment. The author also advocated fresh fruit an d nuts as the natural diet of 
man. I did not at once take to the exclusive fruit diet, but immediately began 
experiments in earth treatment, and with wonderful results. The treatment 
consisted in applying to the abdomen a bandage of c lean earth moistened with Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  cold water and spread like a poultice on fine linen . This I applied at bedtime, 
removing it during the night or in the morning, whe never I happened to wake 
up. It proved a radical cure. Since then I have tri ed the treatment on myself 
and my friends and never had reason to regret it. I n India I have not been able 
to try this treatment with equal confidence. For on e thing, I have never had 
time to settle down in one place to conduct the exp eriments. But my faith in 
earth and water treatment remains practically the s ame as before. Even today I 
give myself the earth treatment to a certain extent  and recommend it to my 
co-workers, whenever occasion arises. 
Though I have had two serious illnesses in my life,  I believe that man has little 
need to drug himself. 999 cases out of a thousand c an be brought round by 
means of a well-regulated diet, water and earth tre atment and similar 
household remedies. He who runs to the doctor,-  vaidya  or  hakim  for every 
little ailment, and swallows all kinds of vegetable  and mineral drugs, not only 
curtails his life, but, by becoming the slave of hi s body instead of remaining its 
master, loses self- control, and ceases to be a man . 
Let no one discount these observations because they  are being written in a 
sickbed. I know the reasons for my illness. I am fu lly conscious that I alone am 
responsible for them, and it is because of that con sciousness that I have not 
lost patience. In fact I have thanked God for them as lessons and successfully 
resisted the temptation of taking numerous drugs. I  know my obstinacy often 
tries my doctors, but they kindly bear with me and do not give me up. 
However, I must not digress. Before proceeding furt her, I should give the 
reader a word of warning. Those who purchase Just's  book on the strength of 
this chapter should not take everything in it to be  gospel truth. A writer almost 
always presents one aspect of a case, whereas every  case can be seen from no 
less than seven points of view, all of which are pr obably correct by themselves, 
but not correct at the same time and in the same ci rcumstances. And then 
many books are written with a view to gaining custo mers and earning name and 
fame. Let those, therefore, who read such books as these do so with 
discernment, and take advice of some experienced ma n before trying any of Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27  the experiments set forth, or let them read the boo ks with patience and digest 
them thoroughly before acting upon them. 
Autobiography,  pp. 329 & 331 
 
 
 
 
 
3. NECESSITY OF MILK 
Whilst I was engaged on the recruiting campaign in Kheda, an error in diet laid 
me low, and I was at death's door. I tried in vain to rebuild a shattered 
constitution without milk. I sought the help of the  doctors,  vaidyas  and 
scientists whom I knew, to recommend a substitute f or milk. Some suggested 
mung  water, some  mowhra  oil, some almond-milk. I wore out my body in 
experimenting on these, but nothing could help me t o leave the sickbed. 
I might not take cow's or buffalo's milk, as I was bound by a vow. The vow of 
course meant the giving up of all milks, but as I h ad mother cow's and mother 
buffalo's only in mind when I took the vow, and as I wanted to live, I somehow 
beguiled myself into emphasizing the letter of the vow and decided to take 
goat's milk. I was fully conscious, when I started taking mother goat's milk, that 
the spirit of my vow was destroyed. 
I would therefore urge those who, on the strength o f the theory propounded by 
me, may have given up milk, not to persist in the e xperiment, unless they find 
it beneficial in every way, or unless they are advi sed by experienced physic-
ians, Up to now my experience here has shown me tha t for those with a weak 
digestion and for those who are confined to bed the re is no light and nourishing 
diet equal to that of milk. 
Autobiography,  pp. 333 & 334 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28   
4. TREATING A FRACTURED ARM 
On the boat bringing them (my wife and the children ) to South Africa, Ramdas, 
my third son, broke his arm while playing with the ship's captain. The captain 
looked after him well and had him attended to by th e ship's doctor. Ramdas 
landed with his hand in a sling. The doctor had adv ised that, as soon as we 
reached home, the wound should be dressed by a qual ified doctor. But this was 
the time when I was full of faith in my experiments  in earth treatment. I had 
even succeeded in persuading some of my clients who  had faith in my quackery 
to try the earth and water treatment. 
What then was I to do for Ramdas? He was just eight  years old. I asked him if he 
would mind my dressing his wound. With a smile he s aid he did not mind at all. 
It was not possible for him at that age to decide w hat was the best thing for 
him, but he knew very well the distinction between quackery and proper 
medical treatment. And he knew my habit of home tre atment and had faith 
enough to trust himself to me. In fear and tremblin g I undid the bandage, 
washed the wound, applied a clean earth poultice an d tied the arm up again. 
This sort of dressing went on daily for about a mon th until the wound was 
completely healed. There was no hitch, and the woun d took no more time to 
heal than the ship's doctor had said it would under  the usual treatment. 
This and other experiments enhanced my faith in suc h household remedies, and 
I now proceeded with them with more self-confidence . I widened the sphere of 
their application, trying the earth and water and f asting treatment in cases of 
wounds, fevers, dyspepsia, jaundice and other compl aints, with success on 
most occasions. But nowadays I have not the confide nce I had in South Africa, 
and experience has even shown that these experiment s involve obvious risks. 
The reference here, therefore, to these experiments  is not meant to 
demonstrate their success. I cannot claim complete success for any 
experiment. Even medical men can make no such claim s for their experiments. 
My object is only to show that he who would go in f or novel experiments must Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  begin with himself. That leads to a quicker discove ry of truth, and God always 
protects honest experimenter. 
Autobiography,  pp. 375 8c 376 
 
5. HAEMORRHAGE 
Now it happened that Kasturba, who had a brief resp ite, after her operation, 
had again begun getting haemorrhage, and the malady  seemed to be obstinate. 
Hydropathic treatment by itself did not answer. She  had not much faith in my 
remedies, though she did not resist them. She certa inly did not ask for outside 
help. So when all my remedies had failed, I entreat ed her to give up salt and 
pulse. She would not agree, however much I pleaded with her, supporting 
myself with authorities. At last she challenged me,  saying that even I could not 
give up these articles if I was advised to do so. I  was pained and equally 
delighted, —delighted in that I got an opportunity to shower my love on her. I 
said to her: 'You are mistaken. If I was ailing and  the doctor advised me to give 
up these or any other articles, I should unhesitati ngly do so. But there! Without 
any medical advice, I give up salt and pulses for o ne year, whether you do so or 
not.' 
She was rudely shocked and exclaimed, in deep sorro w: 'Pray forgive me. 
Knowing you, I should not have provoked you. I prom ise to abstain from these 
things, but for heaven's sake take back your vow. T his is too hard on me.' 
'It is very good for you to forego these articles. I have not the slightest doubt 
that you will be all the better without them. As fo r me, I cannot retract a vow 
seriously taken. And it is sure to benefit me, for all restraint, whatever prompts 
it, is wholesome for men. You will therefore leave me alone. It will be a test 
for me, and moral support to you in carrying out yo ur resolve.' 
So she gave me up. 'You are obstinate. You will lis ten to none', she said, and 
sought relief in tears. 
After this Kasturba began to pick up quickly—whethe r as a result of the saltless 
and pulseless diet or of the other consequent chang es in her food, I cannot say. Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  But she rallied quickly, haemorrhage completely sto pped, and I added 
somewhat to my reputation as a quack. 
Autobiography,  pp. 399 & 400 
 
6. PLEURISY 
The persistence of the pleurisy (in London) caused some anxiety, but I knew 
that the cure lay not in taking medicine internally  but in dietetic changes 
assisted by external remedies. 
I called in Dr. Allinson of vegetarian fame, who tr eated diseases by dietetic 
modifications and whom I had met in 1890. He thorou ghly overhauled me. I 
explained to him how I had pledged myself not to ta ke milk. He cheered me up 
and said: 'You need not take milk. In fact I want y ou to do without any fat for 
some days.' He then advised me to live on plain bro wn bread, raw vegetables 
such as beet, radish, onion, and other tubers and g reens, and also fresh fruit, 
mainly oranges. The vegetables were not to be cooke d but merely grated fine, 
if I could not masticate them. 
I adopted this for about three days, but raw vegeta bles did not quite suit me. 
My body was not in a condition to enable me to do f ull justice to the 
experiment. I was nervous about taking raw vegetabl es. 
Dr. Allinson also advised me to keep all the window s of my room open for the 
whole twenty-four hours, bathe in tepid water, have  an oil massage on the 
affected parts and a walk in the open for fifteen t o thirty minutes. I liked all 
these suggestions. 
My room had French windows which, if kept wide open , would let in the rain. 
The fanlight could not be opened. I therefore got t he glass broken, so as to let 
in fresh air, and I partially opened the windows in  a manner not to let in rain. 
All these measures somewhat improved my health, but  did not completely cure 
me. Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  Dr. Allinson, when he next called, relaxed his rest rictions and permitted me to 
have groundnut butter or olive oil for the sake of fat, and to take the 
vegetables cooked, if I chose, with rice. These cha nges were quite welcome, 
but they were far from giving me a complete cure. V ery careful nursing was 
still necessary, and I was obliged to keep mostly i n bed. 
Whilst things were going on in this way, Mr. Robert s one day came to see me 
and urged me very strongly to go home. 'You cannot possibly go to Netley in this 
condition. There is still severe cold ahead of us. I would strongly advise you to 
get back to India, for it is only there that you ca n be completely Cured.' 
I accepted his advice and began to make preparation s for returning to India. 
Dr. Jivraj Mehta had bandaged my ribs with 'Mede's Plaster' and had asked me 
not to remove it till we reached the Red Sea. For t wo days I put up with the 
discomfort, but finally it became too much for me. It was with considerable 
difficulty that I managed to undo the plaster and r egain the liberty of having a 
proper wash and bath. 
My diet consisted mostly of nuts and fruits. I foun d that I was improving every 
day and felt very much better by the time we entere d the Suez Canal. I was 
weak, but felt entirely out of danger, and I gradua lly went on increasing my 
exercise. The improvement I attributed largely to t he pure air of the temperate 
zone. 
Autobiography,  pp. 438 to 442 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32   
7. NEAR DEATH'S DOOR 
I very nearly ruined my constitution during the rec ruiting campaign. In those 
days my food principally consisted of groundnut but ter and lemons. I knew that 
it was possible to eat too much butter and injure o ne's health, and yet I 
allowed myself to do so. This gave me a slight atta ck of dysentery. I did not 
take serious notice of this, and went that evening to the Ashram, as was my 
wont every now and then. I scarcely took any medici ne those days. I thought I 
should get well if I skipped a meal, and indeed I f elt fairly free from trouble as 
I omitted the morning meal the next day. I knew, ho wever, that to be entirely 
free I must prolong my fast and, if I ate anything at all, I should have nothing 
but fruit juices. 
There was some festival that day, and although I ha d told Kasturba that I should 
have nothing for my midday meal, she tempted me and  I succumbed. As I was 
under a vow of taking no milk or milk products, she  had specially prepared for 
me a sweet wheaten porridge with oil added to it in stead of  ghee. She had 
reserved too a bowlful of  mung  for me. I was fond of these things, and I readily 
took them, hoping that without coming to grief I sh ould eat just enough to 
please Kasturba and to satisfy my palate. But the d evil had been only waiting 
for an opportunity. Instead of eating very little I  had my fill of the meal. This 
was sufficient invitation to the angel of death. Wi thin an hour the dysentery 
appeared in acute form. 
All the friends surrounded me deeply concerned. The y were all love and 
attention, but they could not relieve my pain. And my obstinacy added to their 
helplessness. I refused all medical aid. I would ta ke no medicine, but preferred 
to suffer the penalty for my folly. So they looked on in helpless dismay. I must 
have had thirty to forty motions in twenty- four ho urs. I fasted, not taking even 
fruit juices in the beginning. The appetite had all  gone. I had thought all along 
that I had an iron frame, but I found that my body had now become a lump of 
clay. It had lost all power of resistance. The moti ons still continued, leaving me 
completely exhausted. The exhaustion brought on a d elirious fever. The friends Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33  got more nervous, and called in more doctors. But w hat could they do with a 
patient who would not listen to them? 
I had now been trying hydropathy which gave some re lief, but it was a hard job 
to build up the body. The many medical advisers ove rwhelmed me with advice, 
but I could not persuade myself to take anything. O ne night, I gave myself up to 
despair. I felt that I was at death's door. 
Whilst I lay thus ever expectant of death, Dr. Talv alkar came one day with a 
strange creature. He hailed from Maharashtra. He wa s not known to fame, but 
the moment I saw him I found that he was a crank li ke myself. He had come to 
try his treatment on me. He swears by the ice treat ment, which he wanted to 
try on me. We gave him the name of 'Ice Doctor'. He  is quite confident that he 
has discovered certain things which have escaped qu alified doctors. It is a pity 
both for him and me that he has not been able to in fect me with his faith in his 
system. I believe in his system up to a certain poi nt, but 1 am afraid he has 
been hasty in arriving at certain conclusions. 
But whatever may be the merits of his discoveries, I allowed him to experiment 
on my body. I did not mind external treatment. The treatment consisted in the 
application of ice all over the body. Whilst I am u nable to endorse his claim 
about the effect his treatment had on me, it certai nly infused in me a new 
hope and a new energy, and the mind naturally react ed on the body. I began to 
have an appetite and to have a gentle walk for five  to ten minutes. The 
improvement was enough to give me interest in publi c activities. 
Autobiography,  pp. 551 to 555 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34   
IV 
NATURE CURE CLINIC 
Readers are aware that I have become a co-trustee w ith Shree Jehangir Patel 
and with Dr. Dinshah Mehta in his clinic at Poona. A condition of the Trust is 
that from January 1st this year the clinic should b ecome a clinic for the poor 
instead of for the rich. My fervent hope is that ri ch patients will, if they come, 
pay to their fullest capacity and yet live in the s ame wards as the poor. I 
believe that by doing so they will derive more bene fit from henceforth. Those 
unwilling to abide by this condition need not troub le to go to the clinic. This 
rule is necessary. 
In addition to treatment for their ailments, poor p atients will also be taught 
how to live healthy lives. It is a common belief to day that Nature Cure is 
expensive, more so than Ayurvedic or allopathic. If  this is proved to be true I 
shall have to admit failure. But I believe that the  opposite is true and my 
experience also bears out the belief. It is the dut y of a Nature Cure doctor not 
only to look after the body but also pay attention to and prescribe for the soul 
of a patient. This best prescription for the soul i s of course Ramanama (God's 
name). I cannot today go into the meaning of and me thod of applying 
Ramanama. I will only say that the poor do not stan d in need of much 
medicine. They die uncared for as it is. Their igno rance makes them blind to 
what Nature teaches us. If the Poona experiment suc ceeds, Dr. Dinshah Mehta's 
dream of a Nature Cure University will come true. 
Help of India's true Nature Cure doctors is needed in this great work for the 
country. There can be no question of making money i n it. The need is for those 
who are filled with the spirit of service to the po or, and only with a sufficient 
number of such doctors can the work progress. 
Harijan,  10-2-'46 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35  I feel that I know the method of Nature Cure for th e villagers of India. 
Therefore I should at once have known that Nature C ure for the villagers could 
not be attempted in Poona City. But a Trust was mad e. Very sober Jehangirji 
Patel permitted himself to be a co-trustee with Dr.  Mehta and me and I 
hastened to Poona to run for the poor, Dr. Mehta's erstwhile clinic which was 
designed for the rich. I suggested some drastic cha nges but last Monday the 
knowledge dawned upon me that I was a fool to think  that I could ever hope to 
make an institute for the poor in a town. I realise d that if I cared for the ailing 
poor, I must go to them and not expect them to come  to me. This is true of 
ordinary medical treatment. It is much more so of N ature Cure. How is a 
villager coming to Poona to understand and carry ou t my instructions to apply 
mud poultices, take sun cure, hip and friction sitz  baths or certain foods cooked 
conservatively? He would expect me to give him a po wder or a potion to 
swallow and be done with it. Nature Cure connotes a  way of life which has to 
be learnt; it is not a drug cure as we understand i t. The treatment to be 
efficacious can, therefore, only take place in or n ear a man's cottage or house. 
It demands from its physician sympathy and patience  and knowledge of human 
nature. When he has successfully practised in this manner in a village or 
villages, when enough men and women have understood  the secret of Nature 
Cure, a nucleus for a Nature Cure University is fou nded. It should not have 
required eleven days' special stay in the Institute  to discover this simple truth 
that I did not need a huge building and all its att endant paraphernalia for my 
purpose. I do not know whether to laugh or weep ove r my folly. I laughed at it 
and made haste to undo the blunder. This confession  completes the reparation. 
Harijan,  17-3-'46 
 
Many persons wish to come to Uruli-Kanchan in order  to learn Nature Cure. The 
Nature Cure of my conception for the villagers is l imited to rendering such aid 
as can be given to them through what can be procure d in the village. For 
example, I would not need either electricity or ice  for them. Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  Such work can only be for those like me who have be come village-minded, 
whose heart even while they live in a city is in th e village. Therefore, the 
Trustees have given over the work entirely to me. 
Now to my conception of Nature Cure. I have from ti me to time written a little 
about it, but as the idea is developing, it will be  a good thing to tell something 
regarding its limitations in Uruli-Kanchan. Human a ilments, whether of village 
or town, are of three kinds, viz. bodily, mental an d spiritual. And what applies 
to one individual applies generally to the other an d also to society as a whole. 
The majority of the inhabitants of Uruli-Kanchan ar e business folk. Mangs live 
on one side of the village. Mahars on another and p eople of the Kanchan caste 
on yet another. The name of the village is derived from this last group. There 
are some gypsies living here too, who are termed cr iminal tribes under the law. 
The Mangs earn their living by making ropes etc. Th ey were well off during the 
war but have  now fallen on bad days and are living from hand to mout h. The 
problem that faces the Nature Cure doctor is how to  deal with the malady of 
the Mangs, which is by no means an ailment to be ig nored. It is really the duty 
of the businessmen in Uruli- Kanchan to stamp out t his social disease. No 
medicines from any dispensary are going to avail in  this case and yet it is no 
less poisonous a disease than cholera. Some of the tenements of the Mangs are 
fit only for a bonfire. But burning will not provid e them with new dwellings. 
Where would they put their belongings, where would they seek shelter from 
rain and cold? These are the difficulties to be ove rcome and the Nature Cure 
physician cannot be blind to them. What can be done  for the criminal tribes? 
They do not deliberately commit crime for the joy o f it. They are victims of an 
age-long tradition and therefore labelled criminals . It becomes the duty of the 
residents of Uruli-Kanchan to free them from the ev il habit. The Nature Cure 
man may not neglect this work. Such problems will c ontinually face him. Thus 
on reflection we can see that the field of work for  him is very wide and that it 
is work for true Swaraj. It can succeed through God 's grace, only if all the 
workers and residents of Uruli-Kanchan are true and  determined to reach the 
goal. 
Harijan,  ll-8-'46 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37   
V 
RAMANAMA AND NATURE CURE 
During part of his illness my father was in Porband ar. There every evening he 
used to listen to the Ramayana. The reader was a gr eat devotee of Rama —
Ladha Maharaj of Bileshwar. It was said of him that  he cured himself of his 
leprosy not by any medicine, but by applying to the  affected parts  bilva  which 
had been cast away after being offered to the image  of Mahadeva in Bileshwar 
temple, and by regular repetition of Ramanama. His faith, it was said, had 
made him whole. This may or may not be true. We, at  any rate, believed the 
story. And it is a fact that when Ladha Maharaj beg an his reading of the 
Ramayana his body was entirely free from leprosy. 
Autobiography,  p. 48 
 
Perhaps I am right in saying that the potency of Ra manama was brought vividly 
home to me in Uruli-Kanchan. It was there that I as serted that the surest 
remedy for all our ills was Ramanama. He who can ma ke full use of it can show 
powerful results with very little outside effort. 
Harijan,  22-6-'47 
 
There is no connection between Ramanama of my conce ption and  jantar 
mantar  (charms). I have said that to take Ramanama from t he heart means 
deriving help from an incomparable power. The atom bomb is as nothing 
compared with it. This power is capable of removing  all pain. It must, however, 
be admitted that it is easy to say that Ramanama mu st come from the heart, 
but to attain the reality is very difficult. Nevert heless, it is the biggest thing 
man can possess. 
Harijan,  13-10-'46 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38  My conception of Nature Cure, like everything else,  has undergone a 
progressive evolution. And for years I have believe d that if a person is filled 
with the presence of God and has thus attained the state of dispassion, he can 
surmount handicaps against long life. I have come t o the conclusion, based on 
observation and scriptural reading, that when a man  comes to that complete 
living faith in the Unseen Power and has become fre e from passion, the body 
undergoes internal transformation. This does not co me about by mere wish. It 
needs constant vigilance and practice. In spite of both, unless God's grace 
descends upon one, human effort comes to naught. 
Press Report,  12-6-'45 
 
Nature Cure treatment means that treatment which be fits man. By "man" is 
meant not merely man as an animal, but as a creatur e possessing, in addition 
to his body, both mind and soul, tor such a being R amanama is the truest 
Nature Cure treatment. It is an unfailing remedy. T he expression Rama- bana or 
infallible cure is derived from it. Nature, too, in dicates that for man it is the 
worthy remedy. No matter what the ailment from whic h a man may be 
suffering, recitation of Ramanama from the heart is  the sure cure. God has 
many names. Each person can choose the name that ap peals most to him. 
Ishwara, Allah, Khuda, God mean the same. But the r ecitation must not be 
parrot-like, it must be born of faith of which ende avour will be some evidence. 
What should the endeavour consist of? Man should se ek out and be content to 
confine the means of cure to the five elements of w hich the body is composed, 
i.e., earth, water,  akash,  sun and air. Of course, Ramanama must be the 
invariable accompaniment. If in spite of this, deat h supervenes, we may not 
mind. On the contrary, it should be welcomed. Scien ce has not so far dis-
covered any recipe for making the body immortal. Im mortality is an attribute of 
the soul. That is certainly imperishable, but it is  man's duty to try to express its 
purity. 
If we accept the above reasoning, it will automatic ally limit the means 
permissible under Nature Cure. And man is thereby s aved from all the Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  paraphernalia of big hospitals, eminent doctors etc . The large majority of 
persons in the world can never afford these. Why, t hen, should the few desire 
what the many cannot have? 
Harijan,  3-3-'46 
 
Shri Ganeshshastri Joshi,  vaidya,  tells me after reading the above article, that 
in Ayurveda, too, there is ample testimony to the e fficacy of Ramanama as a 
cure for all disease. Nature Cure occupies the plac e of honour and in it 
Ramanama is the most important. When Charaka, Vagbh ata and other giants of 
medicine in ancient India wrote, the popular name f or God was not Rama but 
Vishnu. I myself have been a devotee *of Tulsidas f rom my childhood and have, 
therefore, always worshipped God as Rama. But I kno w that if, beginning with 
Omkar, one goes through the entire gamut of God's n ames current in all climes, 
all countries and all languages, the result is the same. He and His Law are one. 
To observe His Law is, therefore, the best form of worship. A man who becomes 
one with Law does not stand in need of vocal recita tion of the name. In other 
words, an individual with whom contemplation on God  has become as natural as 
breathing, is so filled with God's spirit that know ledge or observance of the Law 
becomes second nature, as it were, with him. Such a n one needs no other 
treatment. 
The question, then, arises as to why, in spite of h aving the prince of remedies 
at hand, we know so little about it; and why even t hose who know, do not 
remember Him or remember Him only by lip-service, n ot from the heart. 
Parrot-like repetition of God's name signifies fail ure to recognize Him as the 
panacea for all ills. 
How can they? This sovereign remedy is not administ ered by doctors,  vaidyas, 
hakims  or any other medical practitioners. These have no faith in it. If they 
were to admit that the spring of the Holy Ganga cou ld be found in every home, 
their very occupation or means of livelihood would go. Therefore, they must 
perforce rely on their powder and potions as infall ible remedies. Not only do 
these provide bread for the doctor, but the patient , too, seems to feel Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40  immediate relief. If a medical practitioner can get  a few persons to say: "So 
and so gave me a powder and I was cured," his busin ess is established. 
Nor, it must be borne in mind, would it really be o f any use for doctors to 
prescribe God's name to patients unless they themse lves were conscious of its 
miraculous powers. Ramanama is no copy-book maxim. It is something that has 
to be realized through experience. One who has had personal experience alone 
can prescribe it, not any other. 
The Vaidyaraj has copied out for me four verses. Ou t of these, Charaka's is the 
simplest and most apt. It means that if one were to  obtain mastery over even 
one out of the thousand names of Vishnu, all ailmen ts would vanish.* 
Harijan,  24-3-'46 
 
A noted Ayurvedic physician told me the other day: "All my life I have been 
administering drugs. But since you have prescribed Ramanama as a cure for 
physical ailments it has occurred to me that what y ou say has, too, the 
authority of Vagbhata and Charaka." The recitation of Ramanama as a remedy 
for spiritual ailments is as old as the hills. But the greater includes the less. And 
my claim is that the recitation of Ramanama is a so vereign remedy for our 
physical ailments also. A Nature Cure man would not  tell the patient: 'Invite me 
and I shall cure you of your ailment.' He will only  tell about the all-healing 
principle that is in every being, and how can one c ure oneself by evoking it and 
making it an active force in his life. If India cou ld realize the power of that 
principle, not only would we be free but we would b e a land of healthy 
individuals too —not the land of epidemics and ill-  health that we are today. 
The potency of Ramanama is, however, subject to cer tain conditions and 
limitations. Ramanama is not like black magic. If s omeone suffers from surfeit 
and wants to be cured of its after-effects so that he can again indulge himself 
at the table, Ramanama is not for him. Ramanama can  be used only for a good, 
never for an evil end, or else thieves and robbers would be the greatest 
devotees. Ramanama is for the pure in heart and for  those who want to attain 
purity and remain pure. It can never be a means for  self-indulgence. The Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41  remedy for surfeit is fasting, not prayer. Prayer c an come in only when fasting 
has done its work. It can make fasting easy and bea rable. Similarly, the taking 
of Ramanama will be a meaningless farce when at the  same time you are 
drugging your system with medicines. A doctor who u ses his talent to pander to 
the vices of his patient degrades himself and his p atient.* What worse 
degradation can there be for man than that instead of regarding his body as an 
instrument of worshipping his Maker, he should make  it the object of adoration 
and waste money like water to keep it going anyhow?  Ramanama, on the other 
hand, purifies while it cures, and, therefore, it e levates. Therein lies its use as 
well as its limitation. 
Harijan,  7-4-'46 
 
I have no doubt whatsoever that the spread of Raman ama and pure living are 
the best and cheapest preventives of disease. The t ragedy is that doctors,  
hakims  and  viadyas  do not make use of Ramanama as the sovereign of cu res. 
There is no place given to it in current Ayurvedic literature, except it be in the 
shape of a charm which will drive people further in to the well of superstition. 
Ramanama has, in fact, no connection with superstit ion. It is Nature's supreme 
law. Whoever observes it, is free from disease and vice versa. The same law 
which keeps one free from disease, applies also to its cure. An apt question is 
as to why a man who recites Ramanama regularly and leads a pure life should 
ever fall ill. Man is by nature imperfect. A though tful man strives after perfect-
ion, but never attains it. He stumbles on the way, however, unwittingly. The 
whole of God's law is embodied in a pure life. The first thing is to realize one's 
limitations. It should be obvious that the moment o ne transgresses those limits, 
one falls ill. Thus, a balanced diet eaten in accor dance with needs gives one 
freedom from disease. How is one to know what is th e proper diet for one? 
Many such enigmas can be imagined. The purport of i t all is that everyone 
should be his own doctor and find out his limitatio ns. The man who does so will 
surely live up to 125. Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  Doctor friends claim that they do nothing more than  investigating the laws and 
act accordingly and that, therefore, they are the b est Nature Cure men. 
Everything can be explained away in this manner. Al l I want to say is that 
anything more than Ramanama is really contrary to t rue Nature Cure. The more 
one recedes from this central principle, the farthe r away one goes from Nature 
Cure. Following this line of thought, I limit Natur e Cure to the use of the five 
elements. But a  vaidya  who goes beyond this and uses such herbs, as grow or 
can be grown in his neighbourhood, purely for servi ce of the sick and not for 
money, may claim to be a Nature Cure man. But where  are such  vaidyas  to be 
found? Today most of them are engaged in making mon ey. They do no research 
work and it is because of their greed and mental la ziness that the science of 
Ayurveda is at a low ebb. 
Harijan,  19-5-'46 
 
Gandhiji presented Ramanama to the village folk ass embled at Uruli-Kanchan as 
a natural Therapeutic No.l for the cure of bodily a ilments: "In the song that we 
have just sung the devotee says: 'O Hari, you are t he reliever of the people's 
distress.' The promise here is universal. It is not  qualified or restricted to any 
particular kind of ailment." He told them of the co nditions of success. The 
efficacy of Ramanama would depend on whether it was  or was not backed by a 
living faith. "If you are subject to anger, eat and  sleep for indulgence, not 
solely for sustenance, you do not know the meaning of Ramanama. Your 
recitation of it is mere lip-service. Ramanama, to be efficacious, must absorb 
your entire being during its recitation and express  itself in your whole life." 
Patients began to come in from the next morning. Th ere were about thirty of 
them. Gandhiji examined five or six of them and pre scribed for them all, more 
or less, the same treatment with slight variations,  according to the nature of 
each case, i.e. recitation of Ramanama, sun-bath, f riction and hip baths, a 
simple eliminative diet of milk, buttermilk, fruit and fruit juices with plenty of 
clean, fresh water to drink. "It has truly been obs erved," he explained at the 
evening prayer gathering, "that all mental and phys ical ailments are due to one Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43  common cause. It is, therefore, but natural that th ere should be a common 
remedy for them, too. There is a unity of cure, as there is in disease. The 
Shastras say so. Therefore, I prescribed Ramanama a nd almost the same 
treatment for all the patients who came to me this morning. But we have a 
knack of explaining away the Shastras in life, when  they do not suit our 
convenience. We have deluded ourselves into the bel ief that the Shastras are 
meant only for the benefit of the soul in the life to come, that the end of  
dharma  is*to acquire merit after death. I do not share th at view. If  dharma  has 
no practical use in this life, it has none for me i n the next. 
"There is hardly anyone in this world who is comple tely free from ailment 
whether bodily or mental. For some of these, there is no earthly cure. For 
instance, Ramanama cannot perform the miracle of re storing to you a lost limb. 
But it can perform the still greater miracle of hel ping you to enjoy an ineffable 
peace* in spite of the loss while you live, and rob  death of its sting and the 
grave its victory at the journey's end. Since death  must come soon or late to 
everyone, why should one worry over the time?" 
He then proceeded to give them his first discourse on Nature Cure principles. 
The following is its gist: 
"Man's physical body is composed of the five natura l elements. The most 
essential of these is air. Man can live without foo d for several weeks, without 
water for some time, but without air he cannot live  for more than a few 
minutes. God has, therefore, made air universally a vailable. Shortages of food 
or water there may be at times, but of air never. I n spite of it, we foolishly 
deprive ourselves of God's blessing of fresh and pu re air by sleeping within 
doors, with doors and windows shut. One may shut th e doors and windows if he 
is afraid of thieves at night. But why should one s hut oneself up? 
"To get fresh air, one must sleep in the open. But it is not good sleeping in the 
open only to breathe dust and dirt-laden air. The p lace where you sleep must 
be free from both. Some people cover their faces as  protection against dust 
and coal. It is a remedy worse than the disease. Th en, there is the evil habit of 
breathing through the mouth. Mouth is the organ of ingestion. It is not the Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44  organ of breathing. The air passing through the nas al passages is filtered and 
purified and at the same time warmed up before it e nters the lungs. 
"Anyone who fouls the air by spitting about careles sly, throwing refuse and 
rubbish or otherwise dirtying the ground, sins agai nst man and Nature. Man's 
body is the temple of God. Anyone who fouls the air  that is to enter that 
temple desecrates it. He takes the name of Rama in vain." 
Harijan,  7-4-'46 
 
Nature Cure consists of two parts. Firstly, to cure  diseases by taking the name 
of God or Ramanama; and secondly, to prevent illnes s by the inculcation of 
right and hygienic living. The report from the vill age says that the inhabitants 
are cooperating with them in keeping the village cl ean. I hold that where the 
rules of personal, domestic and public sanitation a re strictly observed and due 
care is taken in the matter of diet and exercise, t here should be no occasion for 
illness or disease. Where there is absolute purity,  inner and outer, illness 
becomes impossible. If the village people could but  understand this, they would 
not need doctors,  hakims  or vaidyas. 
In Kanchangaon, there are hardly any cows. That is unfortunate. There are 
some she-buffaloes. But all the evidence that has c ome to me so far shows that 
buffalo's milk is no match for cow's in the health- giving quality. The  vaidyas 
specially recommend cow's milk for patients. Milk i s an absolute necessity for 
health. 
Nature Cure implies an ideal mode of life and that,  in its turn presupposes ideal 
living conditions in towns and villages. The name o f God is, of course, the hub 
round which the Nature Cure system revolves. 
Harijan,  26-5-'46 
 
Nature Cure means a change for the better in one's outlook on life itself. It 
means regulation of one's life in accordance with t he laws of health. It is not a 
matter of taking free medicine from the hospital or  for fees. A man who takes Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  free treatment from the hospital accepts charity. T he man who accepts Nature 
Cure never begs. Self-help enhances self- respect. He takes steps to cure 
himself by eliminating poisons from the system and takes precautions against 
falling ill in the future. 
The central feature of Nature Cure treatment is Ram anama. But it must come 
from the heart. Right diet and balanced diet are al so necessary. Today our 
villages are as bankrupt as we are ourselves. To pr oduce enough vegetables, 
fruits and milk in the villages, is an essential pa rt of the Nature Cure scheme. 
Time spent on this should not be considered a waste . It is bound to benefit all 
the villagers and ultimately the whole of India. 
Harijan,  2-6-'46 
 
My Nature Cure is designed solely for villagers and  villages. Therefore, there is 
no place in it for the microscope, X-rays and simil ar things. Nor is there room in 
Nature Cure for medicines, such as quinine, emetin and penicillin. Personal 
hygiene and healthy living are of primary importanc e. And these should suffice. 
If everyone could achieve perfection in this art, t here could be no disease. And, 
while obeying all the laws of Nature in order to cu re illness, if it does come, 
the sovereign remedy ever lies in Ramanama. But thi s cure through Ramanama 
cannot become universal in the twinkling of an eye.  To carry conviction to the 
patient, the physician has to be a living embodimen t of the power of 
Ramanama. 
Harijan,  ll-8-'46 
 
The tendency of looking to the West in order to mak e progress in whatever we 
do, should be checked. If we have to go to the West  to learn Nature Cure, it 
cannot be of much use to India. Nature Cure is a th ing which everyone can 
practise in the home. The advice of Nature Cure exp erts should not be 
necessary for all time. It is such a simple thing t hat everyone can learn it. 
Ramanama is the very foundation of Nature Cure of m y conception. Nor should 
it be necessary to go across the seas in order to l earn the use of earth, water, Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46  ether, sun and air. This is self-evident. Whatever other knowledge is required 
in this direction can be had in our villages. For i nstance, if herbs are used, they 
must be village herbs. Ayurveda teachers know all a bout them. If some 
Ayurvedic physicians are scoundrels, they cannot be come good men and 
servants of the people by going abroad. The knowled ge of anatomy and 
physiology has come from the West. It is very usefu l and necessary for all 
physicians. But there are plenty of means of learni ng it in our own country. In 
short, whatever useful contribution to knowledge ha s been made by the West, 
it has reached everywhere and can be learnt everywh ere. I might add here that 
the knowledge of anatomy and physiology is not esse ntial for learning Nature 
Cure. 
The writings of Kuhne, just and Father Kneip, are s imple, popular and useful for 
all. It is our duty to read them. Practically every  Nature Cure physician knows 
something about them. Nature Cure has not been take n to the villages so far. 
We have not thought deeply and no one has thought o f it in terms of the 
millions. This is just the beginning. No one can sa y where we shall stand in the 
end. As in all great and good enterprises, sacrific e and dedication are required 
to make this successful. Instead of looking up to t he West, we should turn the 
search-light inwards. 
Harijan,  2-6-'46 
 
Here is fine banter from a friend: 
"I wonder whether this Nature Cure has any close re lation to what is being 
called Faith Cure. Of course, one should have faith  in treatment. But there are 
some exclusive faith cures, for example, for smallp ox, stomach pain, etc. For 
smallpox, as you might know, especially in the Sout h, no treatment is given but 
it is considered Divine Play. We do  poojas  to Goddess Mariamma and it is almost 
miraculous to see most of the cases come out succes sful. For stomach pain, 
even chronic cases, many make vows before the deity  at Thirupathi: and 
finding themselves cured, fulfil their ablutions an d other obligations. To give Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  you a fitting example, my mother had the same pain and after her visit to 
Thirupathi, she is now free from the disease. 
"Will you kindfy enlighten me on this, and may I as k why people should not have 
such faith in Nature Cure also and save the recurri ng expenditure to the doctors 
who, as Chaucer said, maintain a fin'e conspiracy w ith the apothecary to keep a 
patient always a patient, which is part of the natu ral order of things?" 
The examples that have been quoted are neither Natu re Cure nor yet 
Ramanama which I have included in it. But they do s how how Nature cures 
without any treatment in many cases. They are undou btedly cases which show 
the part superstition plays in Indian life. Ramanam a, which is the centre of 
Nature Cure is the enemy of superstition. Unscrupul ous men will abuse 
Ramanama as they will any other thing or system. Me re lip-recitation of 
Ramanama has nothing to do with cure. Faith Cure, i f I know it correctly, is 
blind cure such as the friend describes and thereby  ridicules the living name of 
the living God. The latter is not a figment of one' s imagination. It has to come 
from the heart. It is conscious belief in God and a  knowledge of His Law that 
make perfect cure possible without any further aid.  That Law is that a perfect 
mind is responsible for perfect health of the body.  A perfect mind comes from a 
perfect heart, not the heart known by a doctor's st ethoscope, but the heart 
which is the seat of God. It is claimed that realiz ation of God in the heart 
makes it impossible for an impure or an idle though t to cross the mind. Disease 
is impossible where there is purity of thought. Suc h a state may be difficult to 
attain. But the first step in the ascent to health is taken with its recognition. 
The next is taken when the corresponding attempt is  made. This radical 
alteration in one's life is naturally accompanied b y the observance of all other 
Nature's laws hitherto discovered by man. One canno t play with them and claim 
to have a pure heart. It can be said with justice t hat possession of a pure heart 
should do equally well without Ramanama. Only, I kn ow no other way of 
attaining purity. And it is the way trodden by the sages of old all over the 
world. They were men of God, not superstitious men or charlatans. Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48  If this is Christian Science, I have no quarrel wit h it. The way of Ramanama is 
not my discovery. It is probably much older than th e Christian era. 
A correspondent questions whether Ramanama avoids b onafide surgical 
operations. Of course, it does not. It cannot resto re a leg that is cut off in an 
accident. In many cases surgical operations are unn ecessary. Where they are 
required, they should be performed. But a man of Go d will not worry if a limb 
is lost. Recitation of Ramanama is neither an empir ical method nor a makeshift. 
Harijan,  9-6-'46 
 
A friend writes: 
"Regarding your suggested cure of malaria by Ramana ma, my problem is that I 
do not understand how to rely on a spiritual force for my physical ailments. I 
am also not sure if I deserve to be cured and if 1 am justified in praying for my 
salvation, when there is so much misery amongst my countrymen. The day I 
understand Ramanama, I shall pray for their salvati on. Otherwise, 1 would feel 
more selfish than I do today." 
This is from a friend whom I believe to be an earne st seeker of truth. I take 
public notice of his difficulty, as it is typical o f that of many like him. 
Spiritual force is like any other force at the serv ice of man. Apart from the fact 
that it has been used for physical ailments for age s, with more or less success, 
it would be intrinsically wrong not to use it, if i t can be successfully used for 
the cure of physical ailments. For, man is both mat ter and spirit, each acting 
on and affecting the other. If you get rid of malar ia by taking quinine, without 
thinking of the millions who do not get it, why sho uld you refuse to use the 
remedy which is within you, because millions will n ot use it through their 
ignorance? May you not be clean and well because mi llions of others will not be 
so, ignorantly or, may be, even cussedly? If you wi ll not be clean out of false 
notions of philanthropy, you will deny yourself the  duty of serving the very 
millions by remaining dirty and ill. Surely refusal  to be spiritually well or clean 
is worse than the refusal to be physically clean an d well. Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49  Salvation is nothing more and nothing less than bei ng well in every way. Why 
should you deny it for yourself, if thereby you sho w the way to others and 
beyond showing it, actually serve them in addition by reason of your fitness? 
But you are wholly selfish, when you take penicilli n in order to get well, 
although you have the certain knowledge that the ot hers cannot get it. 
The confusion lying behind my correspondent's argum ent is obvious. 
What, however, is true is that the taking of a pill  or pills of quinine is much 
easier than gaining the knowledge of the use of Ram anama. It involves much 
effort as against the mere cost of buying quinine p ills. The effort is worth 
making for the sake of the millions in whose name a nd on whose behalf my 
correspondent will shut Rama out of his heart. 
Harijan,  l-9-'46 
 
What is the mark of him who has Rama enthroned in h is heart? If we do not 
know this, there is danger of Ramanama being much m isinterpreted. Some 
misinterpretation is already in existence. Many spo rt rosaries and put the 
sacred mark on the forehead and vainly babble His n ame. It may well be asked 
whether I am not adding to the current hypocrisy by  continued insistence on 
Ramanama. I must not be deterred by such foreboding s. Silence thus brought 
about is harmful. The living voice of silence needs  to be backed by prolonged 
heartfelt practice. In the absence of such natural silence, we must try to know 
the marks of him who has Rama in his heart. 
A devotee of Rama may be said to be the same as the  steadfast one  
(sthitaprajna)  of the Gita. If one goes a little deeper it will b e seen that a true 
devotee of 1 God faithfully obeys the five elemental forces of Nature. If he so 
obeys, he will not fall ill. If perchance he does, he will cure himself with the 
aid of the elements. It is not for the dweller in t he body to get the body cured 
anyhow—he*who believes that he is nothing but body,  will naturally wander to 
the ends of the earth in order to cure the body of its ills. But he who realizes 
that the soul is something apart from, though in th e body, that it is 
imperishable in contrast to the perishable body, wi ll not be perturbed nor Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50  mourn if the elements fail. On the contrary he will  welcome death as a friend. 
He will become his own healer instead of seeking fo r medical men. He will live 
in the consciousness of the soul within and look to  the care, first and last, of 
the indweller. 
Such a man will take God's name with every breath. His Rama will be awake 
even whilst the body is asleep. Rama will always be  with him in whatever he 
does. The real death for such a devoted man will be  the loss of this sacred 
companionship. 
As an aid to keeping his Rama with him, he will tak e what the five elements 
have to give him. That is to say, he will employ th e simplest and easiest way of 
deriving all the benefits he can from earth, air, w ater, sunlight and ether. This 
aid is not complementary to Ramanama. It is but a m eans of its realization. 
Ramanama does not in fact require any aid. But to c laim belief in Ramanama 
and at the same time to run to doctors do not go ha nd in hand. 
A friend versed in religious lore who read my remar ks on Ramanama sometime 
ago wrote to say that Ramanama is an alchemy such a s can transform the body. 
The conservation of the vital energy has been liken ed to accumulated wealth, 
but it is in the power of Ramanama alone to make it  a running stream to ever-
increasing spiritual strength ultimately making a f all impossible. 
Just as the body cannot exist without blood, so the  soul needs the matchless 
and pure strength of faith. This strength can renov ate the weakness of all man's 
physical organs. That is why it is said that when R amanama is enshrined in the 
heart, it means the rebirth of man. This law applie s to the young, the old, man 
and woman alike. 
This belief is to be found in the West too. Christi an Sciences give a glimpse of 
it. But India needs no outside support for a belief  which has been handed down 
to her people from time immemorial. 
Hariian,  29-6-'47 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51  Q. I have been repeating Ramanama according to your  advice and I am getting 
better. I must add that the medical treatment for t uberculosis is also being 
followed. You have said that eating little and eati ng the right food enables a 
man to be healthy and promotes longevity. I have ob served the rule about 
eating sparely for the last twenty-five years. Why should I have fallen-a prey to 
tuberculosis? Would you say, I should attribute thi s ill luck to some evil deed in 
this life or in the previous one? 
You say a man can live up to 125 years. Then, why s hould God have carried 
away Mahadevbhai, who was so useful to you? He obse rved the rule of eating 
moderately and having a balanced diet, and he serve d you as his God. Why did 
he fall a prey to high blood-pressure? Why did Rama krishna Paramahamsa, who 
is looked upon as an incarnation of God, fall a pre y to cancer, as deadly a 
disease as tuberculosis? Why was he not able to fig ht it successfully? 
A. I have been expounding the rules of maintaining health as I know them. 
Spare and balanced diet may not be the same for eve rybody. It can be best 
worked out by the individual for himself through pr oper reading and careful 
thought. But that does not mean that the individual  cannot make mistakes or 
that his or her knowledge is complete. That is why life has been called a 
laboratory. One should learn from the experience of  others and go forward and, 
if he is not successful, he should not blame others  or even himself. One should 
not be too ready to find fault with the rule, but i f after careful thought, one 
comes to the conclusion that a certain rule is wron g, he should be able to tell 
the right one and declare it. 
So far as your own case is concerned, there may be several causes leading to 
your illness. Who can say whether you have made the  right use of the five 
'powers'* in your own case? So long as I believe in  the law of Nature as I know 
them I have to say that you must have erred somewhe re. As for Mahadev and 
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa to feel that even they must  have erred somehow is 
fitter than to say that the laws are wrong. These r ules are not my creation. 
They are the laws of Nature according to experience d men. I believe in them 
and try to live up to my belief. Man is after all a n imperfect creature. How can Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52  he know the whole truth? That the allopathic doctor s do not believe in them or, 
if they do, they do so in a different sense, does n ot impress me. What I have 
said, does not and should not in any way, detract f rom the greatness of the 
individuals mentioned. 
Harijan,  4-8-'46 
 
With reference to an Ashram worker who got mentally  deranged and became 
violent, and so had to be put in confinement, Gandh iji said: "He is a fine 
worker. After his recovery last year, he looked aft er the garden and kept the 
hospital accounts. He worked diligently and was hap py in his work. Then, he 
got malaria and was given a quinine injection becau se injection works quicker. 
He says the injection has gone to his head and is r esponsible for his mental 
affection. While I was working in my room this morn ing, I found him wandering 
to and fro outside, shouting and gesticulating. I w ent out to him and walked 
with him. He was quieted. But the moment I left him , he became 
uncontrollable again. He gets violent too, and list ens to no one. So, he had to 
be sent to jail. 
“It has naturally hurt me to think that one of our workers should be sent to jail. 
I may be asked: ‘What about your Ramanama which you  have claimed to be a 
cure-all?’ Even in the face of this failure, let me  reiterate that my faith remains 
intact. Ramanama can never fail. The failure only m eans a lack in us. We must 
seek the cause of failure within us.” 
Harijan,  1-9-'46 
 
*We want healers of souls rather than of bodies. Th e multiplicity of hospitals and medical 
men is no sign of civilization. The less we and oth ers pamper our body, the better for us 
and the world. 
Young India, 29-9-27 
 
There is no grater spell-binder of peace than the n ame of God. —Gandhiji, Press Report,  
10-l-'46 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53   
FROM AFTER-PRAYER DISCOURSES 
Gandhiji in today's discourse explained the conditi ons under which alone 
Ramanama could become an effective remedy. The firs t condition was that it 
should come from the heart. 
Ramanama could not come from the heart unless one h ad cultivated the virtues 
of truth, honesty and purity within and without. Ev ery day at the evening 
prayers, they repeated the shlokas  describing the man with a steadfast 
intellect. Every one of them, Gandhiji said, could become a  sthitaprajna —  man 
with steadfast intellect - if he kept his sense und er discipline, ate and drank 
and allowed himself enjoyment and recreation only t o sustain life for service. If 
one had no control over one's thoughts, if one did not mind, for instance, 
sleeping in a hole of a room with all doors and win dows shut, and breathing foul 
air or drinking dirty water, his recitation of Rama nama was in vain. 
That, however, did not mean that one should give up  reciting Ramanama on the 
ground that one had not the requisite purity. For, recitation of Ramanama was 
also a means of acquiring purity. "In the case of a  man who repeats Ramanama 
from the heart, discipline and self-control will co me easy. Observance of the 
rules of health and hygiene will become his second nature. His life will run an 
even course. He will never want to hurt anyone. To suffer in order to relieve 
other's suffering will become a part of his being a nd fill him with an ineffable 
and perennial joy." Let them, therefore, said Gandh iji, persevere and 
ceaselessly repeat Ramanama during all their waking  hours. Ultimately, it 
would remain with them even during their sleep and God's grace would then fill 
them with perfect health of body, mind and spirit. 
New Delhi, 25-5-'46 
 
In his after-prayer speech Gandhiji referred to sev eral letters and messages 
from friends expressing concern over his persistent  cough. His speech was 
broadcast and so was the cough which was often trou blesome in the evening Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54  and in the open. For the last four days, however, t he cough had been on the 
whole less troublesome and he hoped it would soon d isappear completely. The 
reason for the persistence of the cough had been th at he had refused all 
medical treatment. Dr. Sushila had said that if at the outset he had taken peni-
cillin he would have been all right in three days. Otherwise, it would take him 
three weeks to get over it. He did not doubt the ef ficacy of penicillin but he 
believed too that Ramanama was the sovereign remedy  for all ills and, 
therefore, superseded all other remedies. In the mi dst of the flames that 
surrounded him on all sides there was all the great er need for a burning faith in 
God. God alone could enable people to put down the fire. If He had to take 
work from Gandhiji, He would keep him alive, otherw ise He would carry him 
away. 
They had just heard the  bhajan  in which the poet had exhorted man to stick to 
Ramanama. God alone was the refuge of man. Therefor e, in the present crisis 
he wished to throw himself entirely on God and not accept ipedical aid for a 
physical ailment. New Delhi, 18-10-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55   
A THOUGHT FOR THE DAY 
 
To fall ill should be a matter of shame for anyone.  Illness implies some error or 
other. He whose body and mind are perfectly sound, should never suffer from 
illness. 
Sevagram, 26-12-'44 
 
An evil thought is also an indication of illness. T herefore, we should guard 
ourselves against evil thoughts.  
Sevagram, 27-12-'44 
 
An infallible remedy for evil thoughts is Ramanama.  The name should proceed 
not merely from the lips, but from the heart. 
Sevagram, 28-12-'44 
 
Diseases are numerous, so also are the physicians a nd their treatments. If we 
regard all diseases as one and consider Rama as one  and only physician, we are 
freed from most of our troubles.  
Sevagram, 29-12-'44 
 
How strange that We should be running after  vaidyas  and doctors who 
themselves die, but quietly forget Rama who is eter nal and is an unfailing  
vaidya!  
Sevagram, 30-12-'44 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56  But more strange than this is the fact that though we Know that we too have to 
die one day, and that as a result of doctor's treat ment we can at best prolong 
our existence by a few days more, we put ourselves to no end of trouble.  
Sevagram, 31-12-'44 
 
The young and the old, the rich and the poor—all di e before our very eyes. Still 
we will not sit at rest but do all that we can, exc ept relying on Rama, just to 
live a few days longer.  
Sevagram, 1-1-'45 
 
What a fine thing it would be if we understood this  and placing our reliance on 
Rama patiently put up with whatever ailment came ou r way and lived in real 
peace!  
Sevagram, 2-1-'45 
 
If a man regarded as religious is suffering from il lness, it means that something 
or other is lacking in him.  
Sevagram, 22-4-'45 
 
The more I think the more I realize that Ramanama r ecited from the heart and 
with knowledge is a cure-all for every kind of dise ase.  
Uruli, 22-3-'46 
 
The fear of illness accounts for more deaths than t he illness itself. 
Simla, 7-5-'46 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57  Nature Cure treatment brings us nearer to God. I wi ll have no objection 
whatever if we could do even without it. But why be  afraid of fast or avoid pure 
air? The meaning of Nature Cure is to go nearer Nat ure —God. 
From a letter written by Gandhiji, Sevagram, 9-1-'4 5 
 
 
APPENDIX A 
[Extracts from letters written by Gandhiji during t he years 1946 and 1947 to those in 
charge of the Uruli-Kanchan Clinic.] 
I 
Take only as many patients as you can attend to wel l. Our main object is to 
prevent disease. I would regard our treatment as pe rfect if we could teach the 
people there how to keep free from disease. So plea se explain our viewpoint to 
all there — to boys, girls and older folk. 
 
Never mind if no patient turns up. We should visit the houses of the people and 
teach them cleanliness. We may also go to schools t o teach it. Give every 
moment to this work. Cleanliness is the main thing to be taught as it includes 
most else. 
 
It is good that your work is proceeding well. It is  necessary for one to have  
kshetra sannyasa  for getting on with the work.  
 
No good work can be done in a day. If it could be a ccomplished within a day, it 
would have little value. We must cultivate patience , and for cultivating 
patience, we should develop an attitude of disinter estedness. Where there is 
disinterestedness, only good can result out of doin g what is good. Such is my 
firm faith. Therefore, pray do not bother about res ults. Just as we are free 
from anxiety knowing fully well that the sun will r ise tomorrow, similarly we Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58  should be free from anxiety in regard to every good  work. There may be a day 
when the sun will not rise but there will never com e a day when good does not 
result out of one's efforts from doing what is good . We should, therefore, 
persist in our work in the faith that someday peopl e will come to understand it. 
 
I shall be satisfied with the work at Uruli if it i s steady and sound. Never mind if 
the progress is slow.  
 
Children should not go without milk. It is certainl y desirable to raise a few cows 
there.  
 
I doubt if we can do without milk. It is difficult to come to a decision in this 
matter without experimenting oneself. You may certa inly try it with someone 
who can live entirely without milk.  
 
There is no harm if one takes  ghee  and milk along with purnanna.  If one gets on 
without milk, that is a different matter, and a gre at achievement, but I am 
afraid that it is not possible.  
 
I very much like the idea of  purnanna.  I myself want to try it If I succeed, I can 
free myself from great bother. But I am sorry I hav e not been able still to make 
the experiment. 
 
Rather than gruel in the morning it is perhaps bett er to take homemade biscuits 
which require to be chewed, and fruits. You may hav e milk immediately after 
that or in the afternoon. But this is only a sugges tion. 
 
Do you collect and make use of the seeds of the man go fruit or do you throw 
them away? Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59   
Does Dr.Bhagwat carry on experiments in diet? Here the water is unwholesome. 
Can he suggest a simple means of purifying it? 
 
I do not see any harm in providing the latrines wit h good septic tanks. Only you 
must realize that if they are not properly construc ted or if they are not 
satisfactorily looked after, they will prove danger ous.  
 
If the tub in which a diseased person has taken his  bath is disinfected with 
ashes hot as cinders, the tub becomes fit for use b y others, howsoever 
contagious the disease may have been. I myself woul d not mind bathing in such 
a tub. 
 
In the absence of planks you may have thick bamboos  tied together, they will 
serve as planks to step on. This will be very cheap  and will do as a bridge. Pits 
without such planks or bamboos are useless. One can  use even old iron rails in 
the place of planks. 
 
It is not proper if the land has been registered in  my name. I do not mind if I 
am declared as one of the trustees of the land If t he land is registered in my 
name, and I expire, it will create complications. I n such a contingency, you may 
make use of this letter and have all disputes arisi ng out of it cleared. You may 
then state, that the land is not mine personally, b ut that it is meant to be 
utilized for the preservation of the health of the poor inhabitants of Uruli-
Kanchan and for all other projects arising out of i t. 
 
It does not matter, if the Trust is drawn up as a p art of the Poona Trust, nor 
does it matter if it is an independent Trust. If it  is drawn up as a sub-Trust, Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60  local people must have a place in it, and we must a lso gather beforehand their 
views in the matter. 
Cow-activities cannot be included in the Trust. You  can do cow-work through 
the Goseva-Sangh* Else the work you are engaged in will come to naught. By 
attempting too much both the activities are likely to suffer. Or if someone 
there knows about cows, carry on the work in consul tation with him. You should 
try and make the Arogyabhavan (Health Home) self- s upporting. The shortness 
of funds will be set right. It is not necessary to put more men on that task (i.e. 
the collection of funds). Once your decisions are k nown, money can be obtain-
ed. A well is, of course, necessary. Have it dug. Y ou say that a boring-well can 
be had for a sum of Rs. 4,000/-. Well, personally I  feel inclined to go in for it or 
we can follow in this respect the methods of constr uction of water-wells 
adopted by the military and use them in the way the y did. I believe we can get 
enough water even from their water works. In our sc heme for the cows I am 
sure the buffalo can have no place. If we do not in sist upon having only cows 
(i.e. to the exclusion of buffaloes), they are as w ell as dead and gone and after 
them the buffaloes. Experts on animal breeding too are of this opinion. 
If you undertake agriculture on behalf of the insti tution, employing labour on 
wages, I believe you will come to grief. Though thi s is my opinion, I will accept 
and consent to whatever you finally decide upon aft er mutual consultations. 
 
I do not mind your carrying on the agriculture work  in partnership with others, 
but we cannot lend money for bullocks and such like . We are not capital-
owners, but trustees. Trustees are for a specific p urpose only. Our mission is 
the encouragement of Nature Cure. We cannot, theref ore, incur such expenses. 
We may do (in agriculture) only whatever we can by means of personal labour. 
Water is indispensable in every way, expenses on it  are justified: only of course 
we must make sure that water will be available if i t is to be a tube-well. We 
may do only that much sowing that we can personally  do with our own hands. 
We may grow vegetables or fruits required by us, bu t not grains. Milk is Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61  indispensable, so it is essential that we should ma intain some cows. Such 
expenses are unavoidable. 
 
I feel it is better that the work (at Uruli) should  go on independently (for 
whatever happens to the main, i.e. Poona Trust, it is desirable that Uruli work 
should continue). Besides, the whole responsibility  for the work is on the 
shoulders of Manibhai. For this reason also the Tru st should be an independent 
Trust. 
I do not see anything wrong in the work at Purandar  also being independent. A 
university is all right, but where are the workers?  There is not even a school 
much less a college to teach the science of Nature Cure. How then can one 
expect to have a university? Even if you get immers ed in the Purandar work, I 
do not fear, on that account, any harm to the Trust . If you get fully absorbed in 
the work wherever it is and are successful in carry ing on Nature Cure, I would 
think that it is a part of the Trust work that you are doing. In whatever way you 
succeed in the Nature Cure treatment, the Trust sta nds to gain. 
 
You may have, for Uruli, a local Trust, independent  of the main (Poona) Trust. 
If it is an independent Trust, you are free to carr y on, under the rules of the 
Trust, village reconstruction activities. These act ivities may include 
agriculture, cow-protection, weaving, oil-pressing,  etc. Nature Cure should be a 
part of the activities. I leave it to the local wor kers to decide whether the 
Trust should be an independent one or a part of the  main (Poona) Trust. If you 
wish to have it as an independent Trust, you should  be prepared to stand on 
your own legs and to do all the work with a full se nse of responsibility. If it is a 
part of the main (Poona) Trust you can act only acc ording to the rules of the 
main Trust. In that case you cannot undertake villa ge reconstruction activities. 
Agriculture, cow-protection, oil-pressing, etc. if desired to be carried on under 
the rules of the Trust, must be made self- supporti ng. You should be fully 
prepared to undertake all this. I would be glad if you could dispense with the Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62  use of the bullock in your activities. The local pe ople should be persuaded to 
take up the cow-protection work. Definitely our und ertaking should not be on a 
capitalist basis. For such activities as agricultur e, cow-protection, oil-pressing, 
etc., you could engage the services of local people , actuated with a spirit of 
service. Members of the families of persons engaged  by you should also be 
employed. The use of oil-engines is, of course, to be banned. 
If local patients do not take advantage of the hosp itals, patients from outside 
the village may be admitted. But local patients sho uld have the preference and 
the expenses for their treatment should be borne by  the institution. Outside 
patients should pay for treatment. 
The treatment for all must be simple. This must be incorporated in the Trust-
Deed. Men or women workers from outside, if willing  to work, may do so out of 
a spirit of service. No salaries can be given to th em. Servants must be procured 
locally. They should be given wages. Children from ten to twelve may be 
engaged on payment of wages. They should be educate d under the Wardha 
Scheme. A few workers actuated with a spirit of ser vice should be obtained 
from outside. Attempts should be made to train loca l workers and children. 
Patients should be admitted strictly according to t he capacity of the 
institution. The workers shall have to observe the rules of the Ashram. Easy 
rules may be framed for servants. 
Hospital equipment should be very simple. It would be much better if they 
could be locally made. Pots of kiln-baked earth may  be used for tubs. Tubs can 
be made even from tin. In place of cots, wooden pla nks, supported by bricks 
may be used. But these are mere suggestions. I beli eve meat cannot be used in 
any treatment. I do not say this from a religious p oint of view.  Kavo  can serve 
the purpose of tea. Coffee made from wheat flour mu st be used in the place of 
ordinary coffee. Bidi  can never be given. It does not matter if patients  do not 
turn up on account of this handicap. People should be taught in this regard. 
Patients suffering from dangerous diseases like tub erculosis should be admitted 
only if separate arrangements can be made for them.  Honey, without the killing 
of bees, (i.e. by means of bee-culture) should be l ocally obtained. The village- Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63  folk should be taught bee-keeping. You can have bee -rearing in the institution 
too. Arrangements should be made for the supply of cow-milk and cow-ghee. 
When cow-milk is not available, buffalo-milk or goa t-milk may be supplied. 
Additional expenditure may be incurred for the pres ervation of health, if 
needed. Every inmate of the Ashram must put in at l east seven hours of work. I 
do not like the idea of inmates cooking separately for themselves. 
 
Gradually you will be able to draw workers from Uru li itself. It will be a flaw in 
your work if you always depended upon workers from outside —it will be a 
defect in the work for Nature Cure. 
You will not have heavy work if you accept only as many patients as you can 
treat. If youngsters come forward, as volunteers, y ou can train them. You will 
require a lady worker from outside; but I am afraid  you will not be able to get 
one on your own. Let us see how things shape themse lves. 
 
I like the idea of your arranging a Primary Teacher s' Camp. Your assurance that 
it will entail no liability is welcome. 
 
If Premabahen does anything there on behalf of Kast urba Nidhi* it is indeed 
excellent; but we cannot shoulder any financial res ponsibility on that account. 
She should therefore do only what is covered by the  Kasturba Nidhi. 
 
In the end the village itself should meet all the e xpenses. If it cannot, it will be 
a question whether we can permanently settle there.  We cannot encourage 
Nature Cure in villages by means of outside funds. 
I regard this presentation of purse as of slight im portance. I require your fullest 
co-operation in the great work that we intend to ac complish here —and that 
work is the physical, mental and spiritual developm ent of Uruli. This calls for 
help from all—young and old, men, women and childre n of all communities. We Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64  can put an end to our threefold trouble (i.e. physi cal, mental and spiritual) 
only if we give up our communal and sectarian diffe rences. If Uruli-Kanchan can 
accomplish this, we may have hope for the seven lak hs of Indian villages. 
 
Nature Cure does not relate to the body only but al so to the mind. Ramanama 
is the only help in keeping up mental health; and a  person desiring to avail 
himself of it, should be pure, full of faith and de voted. Nature Cure without 
this has absolutely no value for me. 
 
The path of celibacy  (brahmacharya)  is as magnificent as it is difficult. The 
farther a man gets on it, the deeper is the sense o f magnificence, purity and 
cleanliness that he experiences. I know it is very important for one to know 
how to proceed on this path. Thinking much over it I am convinced that 
Ramanama (the constant muttering of the name of God  with faith) is the best 
help. But it must spring from the heart and not be merely muttered by the lips. 
Of course ceaseless service of others must accompan y it. Eating should be 
regarded as merely a necessary fee that we pay to o ur bodies. It should be 
well-balanced. Ramanama is not a substitute for the se, but it includes all this. 
It is also a mark of one's withdrawing into one's o wn soul. It is evident that 
there can be no celibacy as long as attachment (to worldly affairs) persists. 
 
I am prepared to answer questions on celibacy, but please understand that only 
what springs from your own inner self is real and s hould be followed. The 
articles of Vinoba are excellent, but for one who i s convinced of the greatness 
of celibacy the greatest support is Ramanama; since  once the greatness is 
acknowledged, it ceases to be a subject of the mind  and becomes a matter of 
the heart. And the heart is controlled by God as I have always experienced. He 
who acknowledges God as his Master cannot afford to  waste even a single 
moment. If you waver from celibacy even in thought,  take it that for that one 
moment you have shed vigilance, and the moment has gone waste. Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65   
Nature Cure, service of the village, and Ashram lif e are to me three facets of 
one homogeneous whole. From the standpoint of Natur e Cure they are 
indivisible. When you attain the highest state in N ature Cure, service to the 
village has already been achieved, and I cannot ima gine any system of Nature 
Cure divorced of the Ashram life. 
Do not expect to secure any one from outside with a  knowledge of Nature Cure. 
You should try to gather as much knowledge of it as  possible yourself. I would 
regard any Nature Cure specialist, unwilling to wor k within the limits of Ashram 
rules, unacceptable to us. 
 
We have no magic wand by means of which we can at o nce remove from our 
midst the evils of drinking or prostitution. But I firmly believe that if we have 
force of character, we shall succeed in the end. Yo u should try and find out 
what persons are addicted to drinking, and do what you can for them. You 
should discover from where they obtain their Liquor . I believe something can be 
done if you can trace the mischief- makers and disc over what kind of gambling 
is going on there, whether there are any houses of prostitution, etc. 
 
According to me Nature Cure is treatment both of th e body and the soul. So, if I 
succeed in curing the people here (Delhi) of their mental crookedness, it is 
bound to have a salutary effect on the Uruli work a lso. It will be a very fine 
example of Nature Cure indeed. 
 
*An association for the protection and welfare of c ows. 
* Fund collected in memory of Kasturba, the wife of  Mahatma Gandhi, to be utilized for 
carrying out schemes for the welfare of women and c hildren, more especially in the 
villages. 
 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66   
APPENDIX B 
REPORT OF THE URULI-KANCHAN CLINIC 
The Centre was opened by Gandhiji on the 23rd March  1946. He himself could 
give his direct supervision for a week only. Later on this work was entrusted to 
me and other co-workers here. The number of patient s which was daily 
increasing during Gandhiji's presence was much redu ced after his departure. 
The real work of treating patients started from the  second week of April and 
was going on throughout May and June. The number of  patients became smaller 
and smaller after the rainy season had started, as the villagers were busy in 
their fields and there was some difficulty of commu nication too. 
The total number of patients treated at the Centre was 567. Of these 23 were 
treated as indoor patients, on account of their ser ious condition. One delivery 
case of a woman was also successfully treated. Ten minor operations were per-
formed. Other patients were treated as outdoor pati ents by giving them 
enema, bath, hip bath etc. and were asked to observ e certain dietetic 
restrictions at home. Out of the above total number  of patients about 300 
might have taken full treatment till they were comp letely cured; others left 
the treatment, when they found that we gave no medi cines, or put restriction 
on their diet. 
The treatment includes plain water enema, hip bath,  simple bath, cold or warm 
pack, mud pack along with regulation of diet. The l atter includes lemon juice, 
honey, oranges and other acid fruits, soaked and ge rminated beans and nuts, 
salads, sweet fruits etc. Cooked food includes  bhakri  or  chapati and vegetables 
without salt, chillies and spices,  purnanna roti and  khichadi  are also used at 
times. Curds and buttermilk are freely used as one time meal when necessary. 
The daily expenditure per patient on an average ran ges from 8 annas minimum 
to 2 rupees maximum according to the circumstances and the financial 
condition of the patient. 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67   
Disease  Number  Disease  Number  
Scabies  84  Anaemia  5 
Malaria-enlarged 
spleen  58  Round Worms  5 
Constipation  56  T.B. Lungs  4 
Fever (Ordinary)  39  Acid Dyspepsia  4 
Otitis Media  34  Piles  4 
Wounds  30  Hemiplagia  3 
Stomach-ache  24  Obesity  3 
Conjunctivitis  19  Pleurisy  2 
Inflammation  17  Sprain  2 
Tooth Extraction  17  Hemicrania  2 
Diarrhoea  15  Mumps  2 
Flatulence  13  Gallstone  1 
Dyspepsia  13  Delivery  1 
Tooth-ache  12  Rheumatism  1 
Cough (Bronchitis)  11  Pneumonia  1 
Uterine Discharge  10  Biliousness  1 
Ringworm  8 Dog-bite not 
rabid  1 
Abscess  8 Fistulain anus  1 
Dysentery  8 Miscellaneous  31  
Eczema  7     
Headache  5 Total  567  
Asthma  5     
 
In our future plan of hospital work we shall have t o make some separate 
arrangements for a maternity home, and a small surg ical theatre. Besides this, 
we shall also have to organize  go-seva  for supplying pure milk to the patients. Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68  For this we shall have to erect a cowshed in the ne ar future for which we will 
have to undergo an expenditure of about Rs.5,000. I  hope we shall get co-
operation from the right sources at the right time.  
(An abridgement of Report by Dr. Bhagwat for the pe riod April to September, 
1946). 
Harijan,  15-12-'46 
 
 
APPENDIX C 
TO NATURE CURE SEEKERS 
Dr. A.K. Bhagwat writes from Uruli-Kanchan that sin ce the publication of his six 
monthly report, he is flooded with letters from Nat ure Cure seekers desiring 
admission into his clinic. It is necessary, therefo re, to inform the public that 
the Nature Cure Clinic of Uruli-Kanchan is mainly i ntended for local residents. 
There is no adequate accommodation for local indoor  patients even, and so it is 
working as an outdoor clinic only. Correspondents a re, therefore, requested not 
to apply for permission to go to Uruli-Kanchan, or to proceed to that place in 
the hope of getting admission. 
Those who are interested in Dr.Bhagwat's system can  get it from two Marathi 
books (price including postage, 10 and 14 annas res pectively) and an English 
pamphlet (price 7 annas including postage). The ord er should be sent directly 
to Dr. A.K. Bhagwat, Naturopath, Uruli-Kanchan, Dis trict Poona, along with the 
necessary remittance in postage stamps or money ord er. No order will be 
executed by V.P.P. 
Harijan,  12-l-'47 K.G.M. 
 
 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69   
APPENDIX D 
TRAINING AT THE URULI-KANCHAN CLINIC 
There is no arrangement yet for giving a regular tr aining in Nature Cure. But 
the Clinic will be prepared to accept a few trainee s, at their own cost, if they 
would be satisfied with what training they might ge t while they perform their 
duties. Persons desirous of dedicating their lives to this Ashram and leading 
Ashram life may also be permitted. There is need fo r a few of them particularly 
ladies. 
The Nature Cure methods employed in this Clinic are  limited to the following 
items laid down by Gandhiji: Regulation of diet, fa st, sun-bath, fomentations, 
steam-bath, mud- bandage, massage and non-injurious  indigenous herbs. 
For further particulars and rules of the Clinic ple ase apply with stamps for reply 
to: 
MANIBHAI DESAI 
Manager, Nisargopachar Ashram, 
Uruli-Kanchan (Poona) 
Harijan,  23-l-'49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70   
NON-ENGLISH WORDS WITH THEIR MEANINGS 
Akash —ether 
Angithi—a small coal stove 
Ashram — a place of spiritual retirement; Gandhiji's colony  of workers 
Ayurveda —  the science of health or medicine, regarded as a s upplement to 
Atharvaveda, which is one of the four Vedas or Hind u sacred books  
Bapu—father 
Bhajan—hymn, prayer in the form of song Bhakri— flat, hard, unleavened bread 
Bidi— indigenous cigarettes in which tobacco is wrapped in hand-twisted dry leaves 
Bilva —leaf of a sacred tree of that name,  Aegles Marmelos  or wood-apple  
Brahmacharya —chastity  
Chapati— flat, unleavened bread  
Dharma — law of conduct, duty 
Ghi, Ghee— clarified melted butter Go-seva—service of the cow 
Go-seva Sangh —an  association for the protection and welfare of cows  
Hakim— physician following Unani system of medicine  
Kavo—a hot beverage made up of water, cinnamon, cardamom , black pepper, etc.  
Khichadi—a  preparation of rice mixed with cooked  dal  or pulse  
Kshetra Sannyasa— restriction to a definite field of work to the excl usion of other fields  
Lakh—a.  hundred thousand  
Langoti—a small piece of cloth tied round the private parts 
Lota—a.  small metal vessel 
Mowhra—seed of Mowhra tree,  Bassia Latifolia  
Mung—a kind of pulse 
Neem—a tropical tree,  Melia Azaderach  
Pooja — ritualistic worship and offering 
Purnanna —  literally, complete diet; an experiment in which v egetables and two or 
three kinds of flour are steamed together possessin g complete food values  
Purnanna roti—a  bread steamed with vegetables in it and possessing  complete food 
values  
Ramanama  — name of Rama or God  Nature Cure 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71  Shastra—scripture; authoritative writing  
Shloka—ve rse  
Vaidya—Ayurvedic doctor 
 