 
NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
A Study of Martin Luther King Jr 
 
Edited by :  
 
G. RAMACHANDRAN T. K. MAHADEVAN 
 
 
 
First Published : 1968 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GANDHI PEACE FOUNDATION, NEW DELHI 
BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAWAN, BOMBAY 
 
NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 2   
PREFACE 
This booklet is based on the symposium of articles that appeared in Gandhi 
Marg  47 (July 1968)—a special issue which paid homage t o one of the greatest 
exponents of nonviolence after Gandhi, the late Mar tin Luther King Jr. Readers 
familiar with the work of that journal will not be surprised to encounter in the 
following pages a wide spectrum of opinion, some of  it quite critical, others 
quite appreciative, but none that can be dismissed as blind adulation. 
Great men before King and Gandhi have suffered from  the adulation of an 
uncritical minority and it has taken many years of patient scholarship to save 
their ideas from the pernicious distortions that fo llow such adulation. Nowhere 
perhaps has this myth-making tendency been in great er evidence than in India, 
where for trackless centuries we have excelled in t he art of weaving 
impenetrable cocoons around our great men, with res ults that have been truly 
disastrous for the onward march of ideas. 'Sraddhav an labhate jnanam' ('A man 
of faith alone attains knowledge') is an old tradit ion in India—but the tragedy is 
that we mistake an atrophying of critical judgement  for faith. Faith and an 
inquiring scepticism must go hand in hand in our se arch for truth. 
There were many who thought that nonviolence died w ith Gandhi. They lived to 
retract their words. There are many today who think  that nonviolence died 
with King. But the mortality of great ideas has not hing to do with the mortality 
of great men. Men come and go and are forgotten, bu t the ideas they leave 
behind them live forever. This is at once man's hop e and holocaust. For it is not 
the good ideas alone that survive our brief summers  here on earth, but the bad 
ones as well. And there's the rub. Our inheritance is a mixed one—part Hitler, 
part Gandhi. It is no use blaming our inheritance. We must learn to carry our 
Cross with patient dignity, not by erasing the memo ry of Hitler and the Ku Klux 
Klan, but by etching into our minds the memory of G andhi and King. This is the 
meaning of faith. 
But to that remembrance and faith must be added a m odicum of inquiring 
scepticism. For our duty is not to cower behind Gan dhi and King, in their NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 3  shadow, but to climb on their shoulders and look ah ead. The tides of history 
wait for no man. If in our ignorance and shortsight edness we neglect this little 
duty, we shall soon be washed ashore, to fester and  be forgotten. The future of 
nonviolence depends not on what Gandhi and King did  and said—but squarely on 
us. 
T. K. MAHADEVAN  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 4   
INTRODUCTION 
Human life is a continuous stream of experiences, w hose flow is registered in 
the consciousness of man. Since the discovery of wr iting this function of 
registering the experiences in living memory has be en extended to documents 
and books which serve mankind as externalised memor y. It is this fact which is 
helping man to expand his range of thought and refl ection. Though man is still 
largely a plaything of his elemental vital urges, t here is a growing tendency to 
control those urges and think of rationalising his whole life. 
Nonviolence is a rational principle based on the na tural social instincts of man. 
It is therefore a socialising influence and to that  extent it is a civilizing force. 
Pitirim Sorokin, the sociologist, has said that hum anity has been raised to 
higher levels of existence not by great conquerers or warriors or kings or even 
scientists, but by men of intuition like Buddha, Ch rist and others of that 
calibre. In the case of many of them, they had oppo rtunities to preach but very 
meager scope to practise and prove to the world the  efficacy of nonviolence. In 
the case of Gandhi, he could not only theories but inspire millions to make use 
of nonviolence to fight injustice and tyranny. He a lso predicted as early as 1936 
that the Negroes perhaps would prove further the ef ficacy of satyagraha. And 
so it has happened. 
Satyagraha, the doctrine of nonviolent resistance o f evil without ill- will, has 
proved a powerful weapon in the hands of Dr Martin Luther King Jr. and his 
followers. One need not therefore despair or be dep ressed at the passing away 
of the apostles of nonviolence. The principle is in herent in the very law of 
human evolution. It was a brilliant idea to invite writers to express their 
thoughts about nonviolence after twenty years of Ga ndhi's passing away and 
almost immediately after Dr Martin Luther King's de ath at the hands of an 
assassin. 
Man is mortal but the law of life is immortal. To d iscover it is to discover truth. 
To live according to it is real truthful life. The way to truth lies through NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 5  nonviolence and nonviolence itself is its own rewar d. It is the seed of future 
peace and harmony for mankind. 
We have here a collection of articles which deal wi th several aspects of 
nonviolence and its use in the social life of man. I am sure the study of these 
articles will leave the reader more enlightened abo ut this important principle 
of life. 
I may however add that nonviolence represents the p eripheral or external 
approach, from the action-end. It can become a perm anent possession of 
humanity only when the approach is central, that is , when love—the identity of 
interest and its inner experience—becomes the sourc e and inspiring fountain-
head of outer nonviolence. Humanity in its sadhana for perfection has to strive 
for that inner transformation which alone ensures i ts true destiny. 
R.R. DIWAKAR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 6   
MARTIN LUTHER KING 
TEN YEARS AGO , DURING THE PIERCING CHILL  of a January day and on the heels of the 
year-long Montgomery bus boycott, a group of approx imately 100 Negro leaders 
from across the South assembled in this church and agreed on the need for an 
organization to be formed that could serve as a cha nnel through which local 
protest organizations in the South could coordinate  their protest activities. It 
was this meeting that gave birth to the Southern Ch ristian Leadership 
Conference (SCLC). 
 
A Decade of Change  
When our organization was formed ten years ago, rac ial segregation was still a 
structured part of the architecture of Southern soc iety. Negroes with the pangs 
of hunger and anguish of thirst were denied access to the average lunch 
counter. The downtown restaurants were still off li mits for the black man. 
Negroes, burdened with the fatigue of travel, were still barred from the motels 
of the highways and the hotels of the cities. Negro  boys and girls in dire need of 
recreational activities were not allowed to inhale the fresh air of the big city 
parks. Negroes in desperate need of allowing their mental buckets to sink deep 
into the wells of knowledge were confronted with a firm 'no' when they sought 
to use the city libraries. Ten years ago, the legis lative halls of the South were 
still ringing loud with such words as 'interpositio n' and 'nullification'. All types of 
conniving methods were still being used to keep the  Negro from becoming a 
registered voter. A decade ago, not a single Negro entered the legislative 
chambers of the South except as a porter or chauffe ur. Ten years ago, all too 
many Negroes were still harried by day and haunted by night by a corroding 
sense of fear and a nagging sense of 'nobodyness'. 
But things are different now. In assault after assa ult, we caused the sagging 
walls of segregation to come tumbling down. During this era the entire edifice 
of segregation was profoundly shaken. This is an ac complishment whose 
consequences are deeply felt by every Southern Negr o in his daily life. It is no NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 7  longer possible to count the number of public estab lishments that are open to 
Negroes. Ten years ago, Negroes seemed almost invis ible to the larger society, 
and the facts of their harsh lives were unknown to the majority of the nation. 
But today, Civil Rights is a dominating issue in ev ery state, crowding the pages 
of the press and the daily conversation of white Am ericans. In this decade of 
change, the Negro stood up and confronted his oppre ssor. He faced the bullies 
and the guns, the dogs and the tear gas. He put him self squarely before the 
vicious mobs and moved with strength and dignity to ward them and decisively 
defeated them. The courage with which he confronted  enraged mobs dissolved 
the stereotype of the grinning, submissive Uncle To m. He came out of his 
struggle integrated only slightly in the external s ociety, but powerfully 
integrated within. This was a victory that had to p recede all other gains. 
In short, over the last ten years, the Negro decide d to straighten his back up, 
realizing that a man cannot ride on your back unles s it is bent. We made our 
government write new laws to alter some of the crue llest injustices that 
affected us. We made an indifferent and unconcerned  nation arise from 
lethargy and subpoena its conscience to appear befo re the judgement seat of 
morality on the whole question of Civil Rights.* We  gained manhood in the 
nation that had always called us 'boy'. It would be  hypocritical indeed if I 
allowed modesty to forbid my saying that the Southe rn Christian Leadership 
Conference stood at the forefront of all of the wat er-shed movements that 
brought about these monumental changes in the South . For this, we can feel a 
legitimate pride. 
But, despite a decade of significant progress, the problem is far from solved. 
The deep rumbling of discontent in our cities is in dicative of the fact that the 
plant of freedom has grown only a bud and not a flo wer. With all the struggle 
and all the achievements, we must face the fact tha t the Negro still lives in the 
basement of the Great Society. He is still at the b ottom, despite the few who 
have penetrated to slightly higher levels. Even whe re the door has been forced 
partially open, mobility for the Negro is still sha rply restricted. There is often 
no bottom from which to start. And where there is, there is almost no room at NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 8  the top. Consequently, Negroes are still impoverish ed aliens in an affluent 
society. They are too poor even to rise with the so ciety, too impoverished by 
the ages to be able to ascend by using their own re sources. The Negro did not 
do this to himself. It was done to him. For more th an half of his American 
history, he was enslaved. Yet he built the spanning  bridges, the grand 
mansions, the sturdy docks and stout factories of t he South. His unpaid labour 
made cotton king, and established America as a sign ificant nation in 
international commerce. Even after his release from  chattel slavery, the nation 
grew over him, submerging him. America became the r ichest, most powerful 
society in the history of man. But it left the Negr o far behind. So we still have a 
long, long way to go before we reach the promised l and of freedom. Yes, we 
have left the dusty soils of Egypt. We have crossed  the Red Sea that had for 
years been hardened by the long and piercing winter s of passive resistance. 
Before we reach the majestic shores of the promised  land there will still be 
gigantic mountains of opposition ahead and prodigio us hilltops of injustice. We 
still need some Paul Reveres of conscience to alert  every hamlet and every 
village of America that revolution is at hand. Yes,  we need a chart. We need a 
compass. Indeed we need some North Star to guide us  into a future shrouded 
with impenetrable uncertainties. 
 
The Good and Bad Things of Life  
Now, in order to answer the question, 'Where do we go from here?' which is our 
theme, we must first honestly recognize where we ar e now. When the 
Constitution was written a strange formula to deter mine taxes and 
representation declared that the Negro was only 60 per cent of a person. Today 
another curious formula seems to declare he is only  50 per cent of a person. Of 
the good things in life, the Negro has approximatel y one-half those of whites. 
Of the bad things of life, he has twice those of wh ites. Thus half of all Negroes 
live in substandard housing. And Negroes have half the income of whites. When 
we view the negative experiences of life, the Negro  has a double share. There 
are twice as many Negro unemployed. The rate of inf ant mortality among NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 9  Negroes is double that of whites; and there are twi ce as many Negroes dying in 
Vietnam as whites, in proportion to their size in t he population. 
In other spheres, the figures are equally alarming.  In elementary schools, 
Negroes lag one to three years behind whites and th eir segregated schools 
receive substantially less money per student than t he white schools. One 
twentieth as many Negroes as whites attend college.  Of employed Negroes, 75 
per cent hold menial jobs. 
 
The Challenge Ahead  
This is where we are: where then do we go from here ? First, we must massively 
assert our dignity and worth. We must stand up amid st a system that still 
oppresses us and develop an unassailable and majest ic sense of values. We 
must no longer be ashamed of being black. The job o f arousing manhood within 
a people that have been taught for so many centurie s that they are nobody is 
not easy. 
Even semantics have conspired to make that which is  black seem ugly and 
degrading. In Roget's Thesaurus there are 120 synon yms for blackness and at 
least 60 of them are offensive, as for example, blo t, soot, grim, devil and foul. 
And there are some 134 synonyms for whiteness and a ll are favourable, 
expressed in such words as purity, cleanliness chas tity and innocence. A 
whitejie is better than a black lie. The most degen erate member of a family is 
a 'black sheep'. Ossie Davis has suggested that may be the English language 
should be reconstructed so that teachers will not b e forced to teach the Negro 
child 60 ways to despise himself, and thereby perpe tuate his false sense of 
inferiority, and the white child 134 ways to adore himself, and thereby 
perpetuate his false sense of superiority. 
 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 10   
Black is Beautiful  
The tendency to ignore the Negro's contribution to American life and to strip 
him of his personhood, is as old as the earliest hi story books and as 
contemporary as the morning's newspaper. To upset t his cultural homicide, the 
Negro must rise up with an affirmation of his own O lympian manhood. Any 
movement for the Negro's freedom that overlooks thi s necessity is only waiting 
to be buried. As long as the mind is enslaved, the body can never be free. 
Psychological freedom, a firm sense of self-esteem,  is the most powerful 
weapon against the long night of physical slavery. No Lincolnian Emancipation 
Proclamation or Johnsonian Civil Rights Bill can to tally bring this kind of 
freedom. The Negro will only be free when he reache s down to the inner 
depths of his own being and signs with the pen and ink of assertive manhood his 
own Emancipation Proclamation. And, with a spirit s training toward true self-
esteem, the Negro must boldly throw off the manacle s of self-abnegation and 
say to himself and to the world, "I am somebody. I am a person. I am a man 
with dignity and honour. I have a rich and noble hi story. How painful and 
exploited that history has been. Yes, I was a slave  through my foreparents and I 
am not ashamed of that. I'm ashamed of the people w ho were so sinful as to 
make me a slave." Yes, we must stand up and say, "I 'm black and I'm beautiful", 
and this self- affirmation is the black man's need,  made compelling by the 
white man's crimes against him. 
Another basic challenge is to discover how to organ ize our strength in terms of 
economic and political power. No one can deny that the Negro is in dire need of 
this kind of legitimate power. Indeed, one of the g reat problems that the Negro 
confronts is his lack of power. From old plantation s of the South to newer 
ghettos of the North, the Negro has been confined t o a life of voicelessness and 
powerlessness. Stripped of the right to make decisi ons concerning his life and 
destiny he has been subject to the authoritarian an d sometimes whimsical 
decisions of this white power structure. The planta tion and ghetto were 
created by those who had power, both to confine tho se who had no power and NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 11  to perpetuate their powerlessness. The problem of t ransforming the ghetto 
therefore, is a problem of power: a confrontation o f the forces of power 
demanding change and the forces of power dedicated to the preservation of the 
status quo. Now power properly understood is nothin g but the ability to achieve 
purpose. It is the strength required to bring about  social, political, and 
economic change. Walter Reuther defined power one d ay. He said, "Power is 
the ability of a labour union like U.A.W. to make t he most powerful corporation 
in the world, General Motors, say 'yes' when it wan ts to say 'no'. That's power." 
 
Love and Power  
Now a lot of us are preachers, and all of us have o ur moral convictions and 
concerns, and so often have problems with power. Th ere is nothing wrong with 
power if power is used correctly. You see, what hap pened is that some of our 
philosophers got off base. And one of the great pro blems of history is that the 
concepts of love and power have usually been contra sted as opposites—polar 
opposites—so that love is identified with a resigna tion of power, and power 
with a denial of love. 
It was this misinterpretation that caused Nietzche,  who was a philosopher of 
the will to power, to reject the Christian concept of love. It was this same 
misinterpretation which induced Christian theologia ns to reject the Nietzchian 
philosophy of the will to power in the name of the Christian idea of love. Now, 
we've got to get this thing right. What is needed i s a realization that power 
without love is reckless and abusive and love witho ut power is sentimental and 
anaemic. Power at its best is love implementing the  demands of justice, and 
justice at its best is power correcting everything that stands against love. And 
this is what we must see as we move on. What has ha ppened is that we have 
had it wrong and confused in our own country, and t his has led Negro Ameri-
cans in the past to seek their goals through power devoid of love and con-
science. 
This is leading a few extremists today to advocate for Negroes the same 
destructive and conscienceless power that they have  justly abhorred in whites. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 12  It is precisely this collision of immoral power wit h powerless morality which 
constitutes the major crisis of our times. 
 
A New Program  
We must develop a program that will drive the natio n to a guaranteed annual 
income. Now, early in this century this proposal wo uld have been greeted with 
ridicule and denunciation, as destructive of initia tive and responsibility. At that 
time economic status was considered the measure of the individual's ability and 
talents. And, in the thinking of that day, the abse nce of worldly goods 
indicated a want of industrious habits and moral fi bre. We've come a long way 
in our understanding of human motivation and of the  blind operation of our 
economic system. Now we realize that dislocation in  the market operations of 
our econamy and the prevalence of discrimination th rust people into idleness 
and bind them to constant or frequent unemployment against their will. Today 
the poor are less often dismissed, I hope, from our  consciences by being 
branded as inferior or incompetent. We also know th at no matter how 
dynamically the economy develops and expands, it do es not eliminate all 
poverty. 
 
Work and Income  
The problem indicates that our emphasis must be two -fold. We must create full 
employment or we must create incomes. People must b e made consumers by 
one method or the other. Once they are placed in th is position we need to be 
concerned that the potential of the individual is n ot wasted. New forms of work 
that enhance the social good will have to be devise d for those for whom 
traditional jobs are not available. In 1879 Henry G eorge anticipated this state 
of affairs when he wrote in Progress and Poverty:  "The fact is that the work 
which improves the condition of mankind, the work w hich extends knowledge 
and increases power and enriches literature and ele vates thought, is not done 
to secure a living. It is not the work of slaves dr iven to their tasks either by the 
task, by the task-master, or by animal necessity. I t is the work of men who NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 13  somehow find a form of work that brings a security for its own sake and a state 
of society where want is abolished." 
Work of this sort could be enormously increased, an d we are likely to find that 
the problems of housing and education, instead of p receding the elimination of 
poverty, will themselves be affected if poverty is first abolished. The poor 
transformed into purchasers will do a great deal on  their own to alter housing 
decay. Negroes who have a double disability will ha ve a greater effect on 
discrimination when they have the additional weapon  of cash to use in their 
struggle. 
Beyond these advantages, a host of positive psychol ogical changes inevitably 
will result from widespread economic security. The dignity of the individual will 
flourish when the decisions concerning his life are  in his own hands, when he 
has the means to seek self-improvement. Personal co nflicts among husbands, 
wives, and children will diminish when the unjust m easurement of human worth 
on the scale of dollars is eliminated. 
Now our country can do this. John Kenneth Galbraith  said that a guaranteed 
annual income could be achieved for about 20 billio n dollars a year. And I say 
to you today, that if our nation can spend 35 billi on dollars a year to fight an 
unjust, evil war in Vietnam, and 20 billion dollars  to put a man on the moon, it 
can spend billions of dollars to put God's children  on their own two feet right 
here on earth. 
 
Violence and Nonviolence  
Now, let me say briefly that we must reaffirm our c ommitment to nonviolence. 
I want to stress this. The futility of violence in the struggle for racial justice has 
been tragically etched in all recent Negro riots. Y esterday, I tried to analyze 
the riots and deal with their causes. Today I want to give the other side. There 
is certainly something painfully sad about a riot. One sees screaming youngsters 
and angry adults fighting hopelessly and aimlessly against impossible odds. And 
deep within them, you can even see a desire for sel f-destruction, a kind of 
suicidal longing. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 14  Occasionally Negroes contend that the 1965 Watts ri ot and the other riots in 
various cities represented effective civil rights a ction. But those who express 
this view always end up with stumbling words when a sked what concrete gains 
have been won as a result. At best, the riots have produced a little additional 
anti-poverty money being allotted by frightened gov ernment officials, and a 
few water-sprinklers to cool the children of the gh ettos. It is something like 
improving the food in the prison while the people r emain securely incarcerated 
behind bars. Nowhere have the riots won any concret e improvement such as 
have the organized protest demonstrations. When one  tries to pin down 
advocates of violence as to what acts could be effe ctive, the answers are 
blatantly illogical. Sometimes they talk of overthr owing the racist State and 
local governments and they talk about guerrilla war fare. They fail to see that 
no internal revolution has ever succeeded in overth rowing a government by 
violence unless the government had already lost the  allegiance and effective 
control of its armed forces. Anyone in his right mi nd knows that this will not 
happen in the United States. In a violent racial si tuation, the power structure 
has the local police, the State Troopers, the Natio nal Guard and, finally, the 
army to call on—all of which are predominantly whit e. Furthermore, few if any 
violent revolutions have been successful unless the  violent minority had the 
sympathy and support of the non-resistant majority.  Castro may have had only 
a few Cubans actually fighting with him up in the h ills, but he could never have 
ovethrown the Battista regime unless he had the sym pathy of the vast majority 
of Cuban people. 
It is perfectly clear that a violent revolution on the part of American blacks 
would find no sympathy and support from the white p opulation and very little 
from the majority of the Negroes themselves. This i s no time for romantic 
illusions and empty philosophical debates about fre edom. This is a time for 
action. What is needed is a strategy for change, a tactical program that will 
bring the Negro into the mainstream of American lif e as quickly as possible. So 
far, this has only been offered by the nonviolent m ovement. Without 
recognizing this we will end up with solutions that  don't solve, answers that NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 15  don't answer and explanations that don't explain. 
 
The Most Potent Weapon  
And so I say to you today that I still stand by non violence. And I am still 
convinced that it is the most potent weapon availab le to the Negro in his 
struggle for justice in this country. And the other  thing is that I am concerned 
about a better world. I'm concerned about justice, I'm concerned about 
brotherhood, I'm concerned about truth. And when on e is concerned about 
these, he can never advocate violence. For through violence you may murder a 
murderer but you can't murder murder. Through viole nce you may murder a liar 
but you can't establish truth. Through violence you  may murder a hater, but 
you can't murder hate. Darkness cannot put out dark ness. Only light can do 
that. 
And I say to you, I have also decided to stick to l ove. For I know that love is 
ultimately the only answer to mankind's problems. A nd I'm going to talk about it 
everywhere I go. I know it isn't popular to talk ab out it in some circles today. 
I'm not talking about emotional bosh when I talk ab out love, I'm talking about a 
strong, demanding love. And I have seen too much ha te. I've seen too much 
hate on the faces of sheriffs in the South. I've se en hate on the faces of too 
many Klans- men and too many White Citizen's Counci llors in the South to want 
to hate myself, because every time I see it, I know  that it does something to 
their faces and their personalities and I say to my self that hate is too great a 
burden to bear. I have decided to love. If you are seeking the highest good, I 
think you can find it through love. And the beautif ul thing is that we are moving 
against wrong when we do it, because John was right , God is love. He who 
hates does not know God, but he who has love, has t he key that unlocks the 
door to the meaning of ultimate reality. 
 
A Man Without Love  
And so I say to you today, my friends, that you may  be able to speak with the 
tongues of men and angels. You may have the eloquen ce of articulate speech, NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 16  but if you have not love, it means nothing. Yes, yo u may have the gift of 
prophecy, you may have the gift of scientific predi ction and understand the 
behaviour of molecules. You may break into the stor ehouse of nature and bring 
forth many new insights. Yes, you may ascend to the  heights of academic 
achievement so that you have all knowledge. And you  may boast of your great 
institutions of learning and the boundless extent o f your degrees, but if you 
have not love, all of these mean absolutely nothing . You may even give of your 
goods to feed the poor. You may bestow great gifts to charity. You may tower 
high in philanthropy. But, if you have not love, yo ur charity means nothing. You 
may even give your body to be burned and die the de ath of a martyr, and your 
spilled blood may be a symbol of honour for generat ions yet unborn, and 
thousands may praise you as one of history's greate st heroes. But, if you have 
not love, your blood was spilt in vain. What I am t rying to get you to see is that 
a man may be self-centred in his self-denial and se lf-righteous in his self-
sacrifice. His generosity may feed his ego and his piety may feed his pride. So, 
without love, benevolence becomes egotism and marty rdom becomes spiritual 
pride. 
 
Restructuring American Society  
I want to say to you as I move to my conclusion—as we talk about 'Where do we 
go from here?'—that we must honestly face the fact that the Movement must 
address itself to the question of restructuring the  whole of American society. 
There are 40 million poor people here. And one day we must ask the question, 
"Why are there 40 million poor people in America?" And when you begin to ask 
that question, you are raising questions about the economic system, about a 
broader distribution of wealth. When you ask that q uestion, you begin to 
question the capitalistic economy. And I'm simply s aying that more and more, 
we've got to begin to ask questions about the whole  society. We are called upon 
to help the discouraged beggars in life's market pl ace. But one day we must 
come to see that an edifice which produces beggars needs restructuring. It 
means that questions must be raised. You see, my fr iends, when you deal with NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 17  this, you begin to ask the question, "Who owns the oil?" You begin to ask the 
question, "Who owns the iron ore?" You begin to ask  the question, "Why is it 
that people have to pay water bills in a world that  is two-thirds water?" These 
are questions that must be asked. 
Now, don't think that you have me in a 'bind' today . I'm not talking about 
Communism. What I'm talking about is far beyond Com munism. My inspiration 
didn't come from Karl Marx. My inspiration didn't c ome from F.ngels. My 
inspiration didn't come from Trotsky. My inspiratio n didn't come from Lenin. 
Yes, I read  The Communist Manifesto  and Das Kapital  a long time ago. And I 
saw that maybe Marx didn't follow Hegel enough. He took his dialectics, but he 
left out his idealism and his spiritualism, and he went over to a German 
philosopher by the name of Feuerbach and took his m aterialism and made it 
into a system that he called dialectical materialis m. I have to reject that. 
What I'm saying to you this morning is that Communi sm forgets that life is 
individual. Capitalism forgets that life is social,  and the Kingdom of 
Brotherhood is found neither in the thesis of Commu nism nor the antithesis of 
Capitalism but in a higher synthesis. It is found i n a higher synthesis that 
combines the truths of both. Now, when I say questi on the whole society, it 
means ultimately coming to see that the problem of racism, the problem of 
economic exploitation, and the problem of war are a ll tied together. These are 
the triple evils that are interrelated. 
If you will let me be a preacher just a little bit:  One night, a juror came to 
Jesus and he wanted to know what he could do to be saved. Jesus didn't get 
bogged down in the kind of isolated approach of wha t he shouldn't do. Jesus 
didn't say, "Now Nicodemus, you must stop lying". H e didn't say, "Nicodemus, 
you must stop cheating if you are doing that". He d idn't say, "Nicodemus, you 
must not commit adultery". He didn't say, "Nicodemu s, now you must stop 
drinking liquor if you are doing that excessively".  He said something altogether 
different, because Jesus realized something basic—t hat if a man will lie, he will 
steal. And if a man will steal, he will kill. So in stead of just getting bogged NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 18  down in one thing, Jesus looked at him and said. "N icodemus, you must be born 
again". 
He said, in other words, "Your whole structure must  be changed". A nation that 
will keep people in slavery for 244 years will 'thi ngify' them, make them things. 
Therefore they will exploit them, and poor people g enerally, economically. And 
a nation that will exploit economically will have t o have foreign investments 
and everything else, and will have to use its milit ary might to protect them. All 
of these problems are tied together. What I am sayi ng today is that we must go 
from this convention and say, "America, you must be  born again!" 
 
'Let Us Be Dissatisfied'  
So, I conclude by saying again today that we have a  task and let us go out with 
a 'divine dissatisfaction'. Let us be dissatisfied until America will no longer have 
a high blood-pressure of creeds and an anemia of de eds. Let us be dissatisfied 
until the tragic walls that separate the outer city  of wealth and comfort and 
the inner city of poverty and despair shall be crus hed by the battering rams of 
the forces of justice. Let us be dissatisfied until  those that live on the outskirts 
of hope are brought into the metropolis of daily se curity. Let us be dissatisfied 
until slums are cast into the junk heaps of history , and every family is living in a 
decent sanitary home. Let us be dissatisfied until the dark yesterdays of 
segregated schools will be transformed into bright tomorrows of quality, 
integrated education. Let us be dissatisfied until integration is not seen as a 
problem but as an opportunity to participate in the  beauty of diversity. Let us 
be dissatisfied until men and women, however black they may be, will be 
judged on the basis of the content of their charact er and not on the basis of 
the colour of their skin. Let us be dissatisfied. L et us be dissatisfied until every 
State capital houses a Governor who will do justly,  who will love mercy and 
who will walk humbly with his God. Let us be dissat isfied until from every city 
hall, justice will roll down like waters and righte ousness like a mighty stream. 
Let us be dissatisfied until that day when the lion  and the lamb shall lie down 
together, and every man will sit under his own vine  and fig tree and none shall NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 19  be afraid. Let us be dissatisfied. And men will rec ognize that out of one blood 
God made all men to dwell upon the face of the eart h. Let us be dissatisfied 
until that day when nobody will shout 'White Power! '—when nobody will shout 
"Black Power!' —but everybody will talk about God's  power and human power. 
A Rocky Road  
I must confess, my friends, the road ahead will not  always be smooth. There 
will still be rocky places of frustration and meand ering points of bewilderment. 
There will be inevitable setbacks here and there. T here will be those moments 
when the buoyancy of hope will be transformed into the fatigue of despair. Our 
dreams will sometimes be shattered and our ethereal  hopes blasted. We may 
again with tear- drenched eyes have to stand before  the bier of some 
courageous civil rights worker whose life has been snuffed out by the dastardly 
acts of bloodthirsty mobs. Difficult and painful as  it is, we must walk on in the 
days ahead with an audacious faith in the future. A nd as we continue our 
charted course, we may gain consolation in the word s so nobly left by that 
great bard who was also a great freedom fighter of esterday, James Weldon Jo 
hnson: 
Stony the road we trod, Bitter the chastening rod f elt in the days When hope 
unborn had died. 
Yet with a steady beat, have not our weary feet Com e to the place For which 
our fathers sighed? 
We have come over the way that with tears hath been  watered. We have come 
treading our paths through the blood of the slaught ered, 
Out from the gloomy past, till now we stand at last  where the bright gleam Of 
our bright star is cast. 
Let this affirmation be our ringing cry. It will gi ve us the courage to face the 
uncertainties of the future. It will give our tired  feet new strength as we 
continue our forward stride toward the city of free dom. When our days become 
dreary with low hovering clouds of despair, and whe n our nights become darker 
than a thousand midnights, let us remember that the re is a creative force in NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 20  this universe, working to pull down the gigantic mo untains of evil, a power that 
is able to make a way out of no way and transform d ark yesterdays into bright 
tomorrows. Let us realize that the arc of the moral  universe is long but it bends 
toward justice. 
Let us realize that William Cullen Bryant is right:  "Truth crushed to earth will 
rise again". Let us go out realizing that the Bible  is right: "Be not deceived, God 
is not mocked. Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." This is our 
hope for the future, and with this faith we will be  able to sing in some not too 
distant tomorrow with a cosmic past tense, "We have  overcome, we have 
overcome, deep in my heart, I did believe we would overcome".
 
□ Slightly abridged from Martin Luther King's last p residential report to the Southern 
Christian Leadership Conference, Atlanta, Georgia, 16 August 1967. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 21   
MAURICE FRIEDMAN 
MARTIN LUTHER KING , the man who brought Gandhi's nonviolent resistanc e to the 
social and racial conflict in America and who, like  Gandhi, became a living 
symbol of the fight for the human in man, was assas sinated like Gandhi, in the 
midst of the very tensions to which he had tried to  bring a word of justice and 
peace. Since his assassination, King has been compa red not only with Gandhi 
but with Christ, and some have spoken of him as 'th e first citizen of the world'. 
The world has, indeed, mourned the loss of one of i ts greatest sons, a man 
whose way of fighting confirmed even the enemy that  he fought against and 
rightly earned him the Nobel Peace Prize. We mourn him, and we bear witness 
to him. Whether we are ourselves religious or not, we cannot fail to pay honour 
to the man who, like Gandhi, proclaimed the insepar ability of the religious and 
the social revolution. 
Martin Luther King first became known to the world through his leadership of 
the Montgomery bus boycott in 1956. This boycott be gan because one Negro 
woman of integrity and courage, without any premedi tation or political 
strategy, refused to move to the back of the bus, a s the unconstitutional laws 
of Alabama required Negroes to do. It continued and  gained momentum as 
Martin Luther King, only twenty- nine years old at the time, took over the helm 
and held it steadfast in love and in prayer. Even w hen his own house was 
bombed and his wife and child nearly killed, he dis pelled the angry crowd of 
Negroes before his house with the declaration that  their  way was to be love not 
hate, nonviolence not violence. Yet, again like Gan dhi, not non-resistance, but 
nonviolent resistance, a struggle in which the mean s were as important as the 
end, in which the end informed the means. 
A few years ago on my way to a lecture I was to giv e on 'Man and the Space Age' 
I heard that J. Edgar Hoover, the director of the F ederal Bureau of 
Investigation, had just called Martin Luther King " the most notorious liar in the 
United States". I found this a depressing commentar y on our progress in the 
space age, but i was given new hope the next day by  the reply that Martin NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 22  Luther King made to this charge. He did not defend himself; he did not give 
way before the attack. He said instead that J. Edga r Hoover, in charge of 
handling one of the most difficult activities in th e United States, was obviously 
feeling the strain. In so doing, King was following  in the footsteps of a man one 
would not ordinarily think of in this connection—Jo b, the protagonist of the 
book of that name in the Hebrew Bible. Martin Luthe r King had to make 
another, very painful decision the day after the Al abama state police had 
charged the crowd with tear gas and clubs and then the thousand ministers and 
other people had come down to Alabama to march agai n from Selma. At this 
time there was a court injunction against the march  to Montgomery, and Martin 
Luther King had to decide whether to break the law for the first time in his 
nonviolent campaign. He decided that the people ass embled there had to 
march, but when they arrived at the bridge and the troopers were lined up to 
block their way, he accepted that limit and knelt t here and prayed. Again I 
would suggest that the prototype for these actions is Job, or what I call in my 
book, Problematic Rebel: An Image of Modern Man 1, the 'Modern Job'. 
Recently before giving a lecture at a college on "T he Modern Promethean and 
the Modern Job', I asked a student what he thought the title meant. "Well", he 
said, "a contrast between someone who does not conf orm and someone who 
does". The one who does not conform was obviously i n his mind Prometheus, 
who has been from of old a symbol of rebellion. But  that leaves Job as the one 
who conforms. This reply is typical of our general way of thinking in terms of 
simple opposites. Either you rebel, in which case y ou destroy the opposition 
and remove everything in sight, or you conform and submit to the opposition 
and allow it to trample upon you. We very seldom th ink in the terms that 
Martin Buber uses when he speaks in  I and Thou  of the 'I-Thou' relationship—the 
relationship of 'directness, mutuality, and opennes s—as teaching us to meet 
others  and  to hold our ground when we meet them. But this is exactly what 
Martin Luther King did, and this is why I sirfgle h im out as the Modern Job. He 
did not strike back in like fashion, trading insult  for insult. But neither did he 
give way. He allowed room for a point of view from the side of J. Edgar Hoover, 
and at the same time he did not slight his own poin t of view. In other words, NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 23  from the standpoint of Modern Job it is possible, a s Martin Buber has put it, to 
confirm an enemy even in opposing him—to confirm hi s right to stand where he 
stands. 
The answer the young man made to me also typifies w hat we have come to 
think about Job. Job's patience is proverbial, his rebellion is not. Yet to an 
unprejudiced reader of the Book of Job, it is not h is patience but his rebellion 
which stands out. Job is the prototype of the Bibli cal rebel. He is also the 
prototype of a type of rebellion which I hold to be  the most mature and the 
most indispensable for today. Yet from one writer t o the other, from one 
Sunday School lesson to the other, Job is seen only  as the man of faith who 
says, "The Lord giveth, the Lord taketh away. Bless ed be the name of the Lord"; 
the man who repents in dust and ashes at the end of  the book and confesses 
that he spoke words he did not know. 
The Job of the body of the poem is quite different.  In Chapter 9 Job indicts God 
with a bitterness unequalled in any religious scrip ture of which I know. "I am 
blameless, I regard not myself. I loathe my life, i t is all one. Therefore I say he 
destroys both the blameless and the wicked. When di saster brings sudden death 
he mocks at the calamity of the innocent. The earth  is given into the hands of 
the wicked; he covers the face of its judges. If it  is not he, who then is it?" If 
Job says, "He may slay me, I await it," he adds, "B ut I will argue my ways before 
him". The key to Job and what makes him the prototy pe of the Hebrew Bible 
and of the Modern Job is the fact that he trusts  and  contends, that the two go 
together, that his contending with God takes place in the dialogue with God, 
and that in that dialogue he stands his ground. He is like modern man in that he 
has no ground on which to stand but that of his cre ated existence and yet he 
stands. He says, "God would crush me without a reas on... There is no umpire 
between him and me." Yet he also says, in effect, " I care less about my life and 
the fact that I shall be crushed than to witness, a s I must, for the fact that I am 
suffering unjustly". 
Job is a Biblical rebel—the rebels who stands the g round of his created 
existence, whose rebellion is not incompatible with  his trust in God and whose NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 24  trust is not incompatible with that contending whic h makes Abraham say: "Shall 
the Lord of justice not do justice? ... I who am du st and ashes have taken it 
upon myself to speak to the Lord." When Jacob wrest led with the angel, or 
messenger, until dawn, he would not let him go unti l he blessed him. When the 
stranger finally blessed him, it was with the name 'Israel' which means, 'He who 
contends with the Lord'. That is the very meaning o f Israel. This is what is 
focussed in Job. Nor is it true that Job in the end  repents of his rebellion, as is 
customarily thought. On the contrary, Job is upheld  in his rebellion. The Lord 
says to Job's friends, "You have not spoken of me w hat is true as has my servant 
Job". What Job is censured for is stated very clear ly in Chapter 40, "Will you 
condemn me to justify yourself?" There is a distinc tion between witnessing for 
your own innocence and making comprehensive stateme nts about the nature of 
reality. 
This is the key to the 'Modern Job' as distinguishe d from the 'Modern 
Promethean'. When I suggest in  Problematic Rebel  that we live in an era of the 
'death of God', I do not mean that we cannot believ e in God but that we no 
longer possess an image of authentic human existenc e, that we have lost the 
real source of values—not in the sense of 'universa l values' but of a direction 
that makes this path rather than that a meaningful one. We western men stand 
in the heritage both of the Greeks and of the Hebre w Bible, and yet at the 
same time we are cut off from both. We have no orde r in which we can believe, 
no 'moira' with which we can become reconciled, lik e the Greek tragic hero. 
Nor do we stand in the Biblical dialogue with God; we lack Biblical man's trust 
in existence, and we know ourselves as more or less  alienated and in exile. 
Some people, to be sure, find many ways of escaping  from the alienation and 
not recognizing it. Others settle down in the exile . But there are also those who 
rebel against it. Among the rebels there is a disti nction which should be made, 
but seldom is, between the 'Modern Promethean' and the 'Modern Job'. 
The 'Modern Promethean', unlike the ancient one, do es not rebel on the ground 
of an order, on the ground of immortality, or on th e ground of foresight, as we 
find it in Aeschylus'  Prometheus Bound. Rather he rebels against all order. He NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 25  rebels not only because he wants to recapture the c reative freedom of man 
which has been alienated to the transcendent, but a lso because of the 
desperation which makes him believe that he stands in an all-or-nothing 
situation. He desperately defies the inhuman world which he sees as indifferent 
to man or the inhuman social and political order wh ich he sees as crushing man. 
As Captain Ahab in Melville's  Moby Dick  believes he must destroy the White 
Whale or it will destroy him, so the social and pol itical rebel believes he has to 
destroy his enemy or be destroyed by him, whether t hat enemy is seen as a 
ruling class, the government in power, another nati on, or a coalition of nations. 
Underneath his romantic rebellion lies a philosophy  of despair. For our human 
existence in the simplest terms is an existence whi ch places us over against the 
reality that comes to meet us, whether this be natu re or other men or other 
countries, and we cannot remove this facing quality  of our existence. If we 
cannot remove it, must we submit to whatever we mee t? No. It is possible to 
hold our ground before it. But to do this there has  to be that existential trust 
which the Modern Promethean does not have. Existent ial trust does not mean 
the belief that values already exist 'out there'. B ut it does mean an openness to 
finding values in genuine dialogue, even in the dia logue with the absurd. 
I know no better example of this trust than Martin Luther King, the Christian 
man of action, Martin Buber, the Jewish philosopher , and the atheist writer 
Albert Camus. If the early Camus began with the sub jective defiance of 'the 
absurd'-—that nostalgia that man has in the face of  an irrational universe, the 
later Camus moved clearly to the position of the Mo dern Job. In Camus' novel  
The Plague  the Modern Job is Dr Rieux himself, the man who di scovers the 
plague, who organizes the fight against it, who rec ognizes that it will come 
again. Dr Rieux will not submit to the unjust order  like the Catholic priest 
Father Paneloux, but neither does he want to be a v ictim or a 'saint without 
God' like the journalist Tarrou. Dr Rieux wants to be a healer. In commenting 
on Father Paneloux's sermon, he says, "Of course th e plague can elevate and 
uplift man like everything else, but still, you'd h ave to be a mad man or stone 
blind or deaf not to want to relieve the suffering when you encounter it." Even 
if God does exist, the religious man could do nothi ng better than fight against NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 26  the order of death while he sits above in silence. The struggle which Dr Rieux 
takes up—this fight against the order of death—is a  never-ending one which can 
never issue into victory; yet it is not a total def eat. Tarrou suggests to Dr Rieux 
that the difference between him and Father Paneloux  is that Father Paneloux 
believes in God and Rieux does not. Rieux says no, that is not it. "He is a city 
priest, an intellectual. He believes in truth with a capital T. But any parish 
priest who has sat by the bedside of a dying man ga sping for breath would know 
what I mean. He would want to relieve suffering rat her than to exalt it." It is Dr 
Rieux who in the end witnesses for the city, for th e outrage that it has 
suffered, and witnesses what he learned in the time  of plague—that "there is 
more to admire in man than to despise". Thus Dr Rie ux clearly states the third 
alternative to being a victim and an executioner, t he alternative which refuses 
to submit and refuses to withdraw. This is the Mode rn Job, the man who stands 
his ground. He is not a rebel on principle. He is a  rebel only where he is called 
to be one by the situation which confronts him. He meets what comes with 
clear-sighted trust, affirming where he can affirm,  and withstanding where he 
must withstand. 
"We cannot escape history", says Camus in his essay , 'Neither Victims nor 
Executioners'2; "We are in it up to our necks". But we can fight within it for that 
part which is man's, attacking all the ideologies t hat claim the day. In this time 
of abstractions, this 'vast conspiracy of silence' which threatens to destroy the 
living dialogue of mankind, someone is needed to gi ve a meaning to everyday 
life. This is the rebel to whom Camus points. He st ands in the realest sense in 
open contact with the reality that he meets, and in  this  sense he is like the 
Biblical Job. The same question of existential trus t that is central for the 
Biblical Job is central for the Modern Job. When I sent Martin Buber the 
baccalaureate address that I gave at the University  of Vermont, he wrote that I 
should not call Camus an atheist. Camus, he said, i s one of those men who 
destroy the images of God that have become inadequa te in order that the 
religious man may set out across the nameless reali ty for a new meeting with 
the nameless Meeter. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 27  A distinguished Jesuit theologian, taking part in a n interchange with Martin 
Buber, said to him that without Christ the life of dialogue must lead to Job's 
question. What he meant was that without Christ we would break asunder on 
the problem of evil, the reality of evil. Buber res ponded, however, in a very 
different way, the way of the Modern Job. "The dial ogue does indeed lead to 
Job's question", he replied. "My God will not allow  to be silent in the mouth of 
his creature the protest against the great injustic e of the earth. And even when 
this man knows peace because God has come near to h im again, this is not 
incompatible with the fight for justice." 
The all-embracing, all-suffocating 'cold war' and i ts cancerous outgrowth, the 
war in Vietnam, lend a special, dreadful relevance to what we have said about 
Martin Luther King and the Modern Job. We live in a n era which makes it 
increasingly meaningless for any nation to declare that it is perfectly willing to 
make peace  entirely on its own terms.  It is not just that this is contradictory to 
ordinary common sense; it has to do with the situat ion in which we find 
ourselves. We cannot make the world 'safe for democ racy' any more than the 
communist nations can make it safe for communism. E ach nation and each bloc 
of nations finds itself facing an enemy it must oft en oppose but cannot eli-
minate. If this is so, then the greater strength, t he greater nobility, the greater 
heroism, and the greater courage would be to emulat e Martin Luther King: that 
is, to hold our ground when we meet other countries  and cultures, yet to 
confirm them even in opposing. 
We are so used to the stereotype of the unreconcile d rebel that we interpret 
the ending of the Book of Job to mean that he was n o rebel at all. Yet the 
strongest rebellion is that which is able to hold i ts ground and  confirm the 
other. Only this double action prevents that transf ormation of rebellion into 
new tyranny against which Camus warns. The Modern P romethean's fight 
against what oppresses him—that fight which surely must have been in the 
hearts of many of those in Selma after the brutalit ies of the first day of the 
march and of other fighters for justice and equalit y on countless occasions 
since then—is part of us too; we cannot ignore it. Yet we have to bring it into NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 28  the larger framework of the Modern Job. In the Mode rn Job, exile and rebellion 
become a way of man—a way for individuals but also,  in this hour of 
confrontations, a way for races and for peoples. 
When Martin Luther stood before the German princes,  he said: "Here I stand. I 
can do no other." His namesake Martin Luther King h ad to bear witness in the 
same way. In 1963 it seemed as if King had reached a high point of influence 
with the famous March on Washington and King's grea t speech to 100,000 
people, "I have a dream"! Within two years after th is march, many of those who 
were concerned about civil rights in America became  equally concerned about 
the disastrous war in Vietnam. In the fall of 1966,  King had to make a difficult 
decision, and he made it unhesitatingly. At that po int he declared that the fight 
for civil rights could not be divorced from the dem and for peace in Vietnam. 
The immediate and all too realistic link was the fa ct that college students were 
being exempted from the draft and that the American  Negro, as a result, was 
bearing a disproportionate share of the fighting in  Vietnam. Relatively few 
American Negroes have had the education or have the  financial resources 
necessary for entering college, and for many young Negroes even volunteering 
in the army seemed better than eking out a subsiste nce living on the margin of 
unemployment and welfare. The more basic reason, fo r King, however, was the 
impossibility of separating into watertight compart ments the fight against 
injustice at home and the fight against injustice a broad. Immediately a number 
of the leaders of various branches of the Black Mov ement in the United States 
disclaimed King's action. None attempted to impeach  his sincerity or his 
patriotism, but all stated that this was not 'good strategy' in the fight for civil 
rights. 
It was at this point that my admiration for King re ached its highest peak. Here 
was a man prepared to bear witness for the right as  he saw it even at the 
expense of 'strategy'. Here was a social actionist and political leader ready to 
sacrifice influence and prestige rather than give i n to an argument of 
expediency. Knowing that King had on occasion quote d Martin Buber in his 
speeches, I was strongly tempted at this time to se nd him my translation of two NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 29  short pieces in Martin Buber's then unpublished boo k, A Believing Humanism.  As 
the American Martin Luther King was the disciple of  Gandhi on the path of 
nonviolent resistance, so Gandhi in his turn was de eply influenced by an 
American of a century ago—Henry Thoreau. Writing on  the centennial of 
Thoreau's death, Buber testified that reading Thore au's classic tract on 'Civil 
Disobedience' had had a strong impact on him in his  youth, but that it was only 
much later that he understood why. "It was the conc rete, the personal, the 
'here and now' in the writing that won my heart for  it. Thoreau did not 
formulate a general principle as such; he set forth  and grounded his attitude in 
a particular historical-biographical situation. He spoke to his reader in the 
realm of this situation common to them so that the reader not only learned why 
Thoreau at that time acted as he acted, but also—pr ovided that this reader was 
only honest and unbiased--that he himself, the read er, must have acted, should 
the occasion present itself, in just such a way if he was seriously concerned 
about making his human existence real."3 
In writing these words, Buber, like Thoreau, was no t just concerned with one of 
the many cases in which powerless truth struggles a gainst a power inimical to 
truth. For Buber as for Thoreau, it was "a question  of the wholly concrete 
indication of the point at which time and again thi s struggle becomes the duty 
of man  as man".  What Buber said to Thoreau must be said in still g reater 
measure of Gandhi and of Martin Luther King. Becaus e each of them spoke as 
concretely as he did from his historical situation,  he expressed in the right 
manner what is valid for all human history. 
This is what I felt impelled—though alas not to the  point of doing so!—to send to 
Martin Luther King. I also wanted to send him the l onger companion piece in 
which Buber applied the question of 'civil disobedi ence' to the international 
situation today. Civil disobedience, if it is to be  legitimate, must be obedience 
to a higher authority than the one that one here an d now obeys. But there is no 
general way of demonstrating the legitimacy of this  higher authority or of 
setting the limit to what we have to give to Caesar . Not at all times and places NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 30  but only in the particular situation, in the here a nd now, can this question be 
answered. 
In our situation, however, it is easier to answer t han ever before, for man is 
today on the point of letting the determination of his fate slip out of his hands. 
The all-embracing preparations and mutually outstri pping bellicose surprises on 
all sides in the 'cold war' may reach such a point of automation as to transform 
the human cosmos "into a chaos beyond which we can no longer think". If, as 
Buber thinks, the rulers of the hour cannot wake up  before it is too late, 
command a halt to the machinery, and learn to talk  to  instead of  past  one 
another, then who will come to the rescue while the re is still time but the 
'disobedient', those who personally set their faces  against the power that has 
gone astray? "Must not a planetary front of such ci vil disobedients stand ready, 
not for battle like other fronts, but for saving di alogue? But who are these if 
not those who hear the voice that addresses them fr om the situation—the 
situation of the human crisis—and obey it?"4 
Who can doubt that Martin Luther King was not just the representative of the 
Afro-Americans in their fight against racism and so cial inequality but a man who 
stood ready for saving dialogue, a man who heard an d obeyed the voice of the 
concrete situation, a man who discovered in the sit uation, both national and 
international, not just what affected his face but the wholly concrete 
indication of his duty  as man ? It was with great pride that I marched with 
400,000 others in New York City April 15, 1967, in a protest against the war in 
Vietnam led by Martin Luther King. 
The decisions which Martin Luther King had to make in the last months and 
weeks of his life may have been the most difficult and painful of all. During 
these months the extremists in the 'Black Power' mo vement no longer looked to 
King as their leader nor to nonviolence as their sp irit and their method. In the 
face of the riots that broke out in one after anoth er of the Negro ghettos in the 
great American cities, in the face of threats and i ncreasing danger of planned 
and spontaneous violence, King was placed before a cruel dilemma. If he tried 
to keep in the forefront of the civil rights moveme nt, would he have to counte-NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 31  nance or at least go along with the violence he had  so long opposed? If he failed 
to make common cause with the new forces in this mo vement, would he be 
forced into inaction as his only protection against  allowing his influence to 
increase the possibility of violence? Here too, in the face of an ever more 
polarized situation, King stood firm and walked the  way of the Modern Job. He 
increased his activity, if anything, joining in the  strike in Memphis and planning 
his great 'Poor People's Campaign'. Yet he refused to depart from the spirit and 
principles that had guided his social witness in th e dozen years since he had 
assumed leadership. 
The weekend before King's assassination I was givin g a seminar in a large mid-
western city in the United States. In the course of  the seminar we came to a 
discussion of the almost certain danger of still mo re terrible riots occurring in 
the American cities this summer and of the massive preparations of the police 
forces of those cities to meet those riots. I had n ot followed closely what had 
been happening in Memphis where King was marching w ith the strikers and was 
taken by surprise when one leading citizen after an other accused him in 
connection with the police violence against Negroes  that had occurred. Finally I 
saw a dark-skinned girl who had just come in raise her hand, and I called on 
her, expecting that she at least would do King Just ice. "By his very presence 
there he is inciting violence!" she exclaimed. (She  was not, as I had imagined, 
part Negro, but an American Arab who had been sent to interview me by the 
local Christian radio station.) "That is unfair!" I  replied. "If there is any man who 
stands for something, it is Martin Luther King. If a small group has used his 
activities as a cover for violence, that cannot be laid at his door, nor can he be 
expected to cease his activity because of it." My b elief in King was borne out by 
the facts that I later learned —that only a small g roup had incited violence, and 
King had resolutely opposed it. Five days later whe n the news of King's 
assassination reached me, I wondered what those fai thful church-going people 
in the Protestant church at which I had held the se minar, would be thinking. 
Would their words come back to them with shame? Or would they see precisely 
this event as a justification for what they said? T he possibility of his being 
murdered was nothing new to King. He and his wife a nd his co-workers in the NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 32  Southern Christian Leadership Conference lived with  that possibility every time 
he made an appearance anywhere. But are we going to  say then that when a 
man stands his ground, without flinching and withou t hatred, he must be held 
responsible for the fact that precisely such conduc t calls forth the murderous 
hatred and violence of the weak and the cowardly? 
The assassination of Martin Luther King is also a m urder of man as man. It is an 
eclipse of the image of man that so much else has o bscured and tarnished in 
our day. Yet Martin Luther King's presence •will re main with us—not just as an 
American Gandhi, a latter-day Thoreau, a suffering Christ, or even a Modern 
Job, but as himself in his unique personal witness.  He will remain for us an 
image of what—in this time of great confrontations and little dialogue—it means 
to be human. 
 
1. New York: Random House, 1963. 
2. In Paul Goodman, editor,  The Seeds of Liberation  (New York: George Brazillier Co., 
1965). 
3. Martin Buber,  A Believing Humanism: My Testament 1902-1965,  trans, with an 
Introduction and Explanatory Comments by Maurice Fr iedman (New York; Simon & 
Schuster Inc., 1968), "On 'Civil Disobedience' p. 1 91. 
4. Ibid., "More on 'Civil Disobedience' pp. 192 f. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 33   
MULFORD Q. SIBLEY 
THERE ARE SEVERAL PARALLELS  between the lives and deaths of Martin Luther King  
and Mohandas Gandhi. Both sought for nonviolent met hods of social change. 
Both saw nonviolence as a way of life, rather than as a mere technique. Both 
were willing to admit serious blunders. Both were a ssassinated. In death, both 
were praised almost universally; yet most of those who praised them refused to 
follow their ideas. Both were almost immediately el evated by some to the 
ranks of demi-gods. 
It is important, in assessing King, as in evaluatin g Gandhi, that we resist the 
tendency to make him a god. As in the case of Gandh i, there was a great deal 
of sentimentalism at his funeral and a tendency not  to see the ambiguities in 
his career. Americans have a peculiar predilection for spinning myths about 
their assassinated leaders. Thus the real Lincoln h as been lost—perhaps 
forever—in the often fuzzy legends which have devel oped since his passing. 
John Kennedy, who at the time of his murder was not  the most popular of 
Presidents, now is a new god in the American Panthe on; and to question his 
wisdom or virtue is in many circles little short of  sacrilege. 
To see King in perspective is to see him as a man w ith the shortcomings as well 
as the virtues associated with the human condition.  He was remarkable in many 
respects, to be sure. But he was also subject to se vere limitations. While 
millions throughout the world no doubt see him as t he symbol of nonviolence in 
America, we should never forget that he did not inv ent nonviolent direct 
action. It has been present throughout the American  experience. In relation to 
race relations, it was utilized in the nineteenth c entury. In the forties and 
fifties of the twentieth century, men like Bayard R ustin and James Farmer were 
experimenting with it while King was yet in school.  In some respects, events 
made King and he was less of a path-breaking pionee r than others. 
When he first became widely known, in 1955, as lead er of the Montgomery, 
Alabama bus strike, he was very uncertain of himsel f and was honest enough to 
admit that he often did not know which way to turn.  His brief public career NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 34  from that time to his death in 1968 was the story o f one who could learn from 
experience but who was sometimes less bold and imag inative than many would 
have liked. His failures were as significant as his  successes and even the latter 
were often clouded over with ambiguities. 
A highly intelligent man, he became keenly aware of  the great difficulties in 
applying general principles to concrete situations.  Thus he was often uncertain 
as to how the ethic of nonviolence should be spelle d out in the many serious 
confrontations of the civil rights movement. Althou gh he eventually came to 
justify civil disobedience—as in the Birmingham inc idents of 1963—he literally 
agonized over the problem of whether those who were  pressing for 
enforcement of desegregation laws could consistentl y at the same time 
advocate deliberate breaking of other laws. 
At times he was quoted as approving the use of Nati onal Guard and federal 
troops during civil rights disturbances, even thoug h he undoubtedly knew the 
mischief that resort to the military might cause— n ot to speak of its apparent 
incompatibility with the ethic of nonviolence. Once  I had a conversation with 
the late A.J. Muste about this problem and he inter preted King as saying, in 
effect: "According to those who don't believe in th e ethic of nonviolence, it is 
necessary to use federal troops and the National Gu ard to 'preserve order'. I am 
simply saying that, given their premises, the emplo yment of troops is a duty." 
But A.J. Muste's interpretation was not satisfactor y to me. On the other hand, 
the statement of a recent writer that "whenever the  going got a bit rough" King 
"invariably screamed for Federal troops" (Robert Ca lese in  Peace News,  April 26, 
1968, p. 6) is surely unjustified. Perhaps all that  we can say is that, as in the 
case of Gandhi's acting as a recruiting officer for  British troops in World War I 
(which some criticized as violating the ethic of no nviolence), the biographer 
must simply insert a large question mark. 
King never worked but the principles which might co nceivably distinguish 
between morally legitimate coercion, on the one han d, and illegitimate 
coercion—or violence—on the other. There can be no doubt about his 
commitment to nonviolence as a person and as leader  of a movement. Obvious NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 35  cases of violence, such as killing, seriously maimi ng, or war, he clearly 
rejected. He also recognized that nonviolent direct  action established, in his 
words, a "creative tension" which was often essenti al if negotiations were to 
take place: in effect, direct action had a large co ercive element in it. But it is 
impossible to discover in his writings any guidelin es as to how one can 
differentiate nonviolent from violent coercion. An economic boycott injures 
those boycotted and may deprive them of their livel ihood. King did not regard 
it as an act of violence. Yet he leaves the impress ion that any use of physical 
force, however restrained, must be barred—even thou gh it might cause less 
damage to soul or body than the boycott. King did n ot examine such issues, 
which also, unfortunately, remain somewhat unsettle d in the writings of 
Gandhi. 
King's greatest appeal as a leader was rooted in hi s understanding of the 
southern black man's religious culture. Theological ly highly sophisticated 
himself, he could still employ honestly and un-self consciously the deeply 
emotional religious imagery so characteristic of ru ral and small-town Negroes—
an imagery going back to the days of chattel slaver y. Much of that religion is 
embodied in Negro 'spirituals', those often- haunti ng songs which so frequently 
express the age-old yearning for freedom. Moses and  the Hebrew Promised 
Land have been ubiquitous in both the spirituals an d other facets of black men's 
religion. Men and women respond wholeheartedly when  King invoked such 
pictures. Thus just the night before his assassinat ion he spoke to 2,000 black 
folks. After expressing some striking premonitions about his coming death, he 
alluded to Moses on the mountain-top having glimpse s of the Promised Land: 
Well, I don't know what will happen now. We've got some difficult days ahead. 
But it really doesn't matter with me now. Because I 've been to the mountain-
top... Like anybody, I would like to live a long li fe... But I'm not concerned 
about that now. I just want to do God's will. And h e's allowed me to go up to 
the mountain. And I've looked over, and I've seen t he promised land. He also 
appealed to another facet of black southern religio us consciousness—that of 
redemption through suffering. Since the days of sla very, black men had seen NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 36  their suffering as preparing the way for freedom, v ery much as the 'suffering 
servant' passages of Isaiah view Israel's bruises a nd hardships as essential for 
emancipating the Jews and all mankind. Gandhi's con ception of nonviolence, 
which so impressed King (a portrait of Gandhi was p rominently displayed in his 
home), fitted well into this native Negro tradition . To be sure, the tradition 
could be used to rationalize an 'Uncle Tom' attitud e of sub-serviency. But King 
used it—as Gandhi employed nonviolence in India—to build a sense of solidarity, 
of personal worth, and of self-confidence. He saw t hat suffering, voluntarily 
endured for a cause, can be one of the most powerfu l and emancipating forces 
in the world. The 'terrible meek', refusing to reta liate in kind yet insisting on 
their basic rights as human beings, can make kings and ruling classes tremble. 
Some have contended, with a certain amount of justi fication, that King's 
influence was not as great in the northern parts of  the United States as in the 
southern regions. Perhaps this was due in part to t he fact that northern black 
men were less closely tied to traditional religion whose symbols were so central 
in King's messages. 
It is sometimes said that he moved too slowly and t hat he was often indecisive. 
In a measure, this criticism is just. On the other hand, once he did become 
persuaded that a proposed course of action should b e taken, he could not be 
moved by contrary pressures. He worried for a long time as to whether he 
should take a vigorous public stand against the war  in Vietnam. Privately, of 
course, he had opposed the war from the beginning. But some argued that 
public opposition would divide and weaken the Civil  Rights cause and, by 
alienating the American ruling class, cut off any b enefits the government might 
otherwise bestow. After much deliberation, however,  King reached the 
conclusion that he must speak out as a matter of co nscience and leave the 
consequences to God. Hence the last months of his l ife witnessed an 
interweaving of Civil Rights and anti-war arguments : he could not separate the 
cause of black emancipation from that of casting ou t human slavishness to war. 
Many Americans, now that he is dead, seem to deligh t in portraying him as a 
'moderate', by contrast, presumably, with such alle ged 'militants' as Rap Brown NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 37  and Stokeley Carmichael. Some members of the Americ an ruling classes would 
like to take King into their ranks posthumously. Bu t King was not a 'moderate', 
as that term is often used by respectable and comfo rtable whites. Particularly 
during the latter years of his life was he moving i n a radical direction. He 
repudiated violence, among other reasons, because h e thought that it would in-
hibit fundamental social change in the direction of  equality. To be sure, he 
began his career by seeking only relatively limited  objectives, such as the right 
of Negroes to eat at lunch counters. But experience  taught him that there was 
a fundamental malaise in the relations between whit e and black and that only 
very basic economic and social upheaval could elimi nate the evil. He went to 
Memphis, it should be remembered—where he was to me et death—to assist in a 
strike of garbage collectors, those 'untouchables' of the American scene. In the 
weeks before his assassination, he was preparing fo r the great Poor People's 
Campaign which had among its ultimate objectives a radical redistribution of 
income and the building of social solidarity across  race lines among all the poor 
of the land. Poor whites, poor blacks, poor Puerto Ricans, and poor American 
Indians were to be joined together in a great crusa de for drastic alteration of 
the property system. To be sure, some have argued t hat King was not fully 
aware of his crusade's implications for drastic cha nge; but even if he did not 
completely understand at the time of his death, he would most assuredly have 
grown in comprehension had he continued to live. 
Those who would portray King as a 'moderate' must b lot out the memory of his 
great  Letter from Birmingham Jail  which was written in 1963. In it he argued 
for the moral right and obligation of civil disobed ience and for an 'extremism' 
which ran contrary to the mainstream of conventiona l American thought: "Was 
not Jesus an extremist in Love?... Was not John Bun yan an extremist?—'I will 
stay in jail to the end of my days before I make a butchery of my conscience.'... 
So the question is not whether we will be extremist  but what kind of extremist 
will we be... Will we be extremists for the preserv ation of injustice— or will we 
be extremists for the cause of justice?" NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 38  Critics of King have sometimes argued that he was o blivious of the necessity for 
ordinary 'political' action through the electoral a nd judicial process and that his 
form of 'nonviolent direct action' is obsolete. But  King never thought of 
nonviolent resistance and orthodox processes as nec essarily opposed. 
Resistance might be a way of developing political c onsciousness, for example. 
King's movement was active in voter registration an d in elections, as well as in 
campaigns of direct action. King always recognized the pioneering efforts of 
the National Association for Advancement of Coloure d People in fighting 
important legal battles through the courts. To him,  orthodox and unorthodox 
actions supplemented each other. Sluggish administr ators and legislators had to 
be prodded through the shock tactics of direct acti on, just as direct actionists 
had to recognize that part of their objective was t o secure important changes 
of policy through the legislative process. 
Now that he is gone, there is much talk about the d eath of nonviolence. Some 
critics, like many of those who idolize him, appear  to think that he invented 
nonviolent resistance and that it therefore passes with him. But they are 
wrong. While he did, to be sure, contribute to our understanding of 
nonviolence, he built upon the labours of others an d upon realities in the 
general American and black communities. Those reali ties are still present. 
Among them are the black religious consciousness to  which King appealed; the 
proven efficiency of nonviolent direct action under  certain circumstances; the 
tendency for violence to impose reactionary imperat ives of its own; and 
widespread awareness that if blacks turn to violenc e it would simply provide a 
rationalization for those who wish to suppress the Negroes' stride toward 
freedom. Non-violent resistance and direct action m ay be far more needed in 
the future than in the past and their potentialitie s are still with us. 
At the time of his death, King was moving in the di rection of revolution through 
nonviolence. It is the only 'revolution' which is n ot spurious. His successors must 
be even clearer than he was about the meaning and t heory of nonviolence, for 
they confront a world in which enormous violence is  built covertly into existing 
social orders and in which the cult of violence has  unfortunately affected many NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 39  alleged revolutionaries. The political realists amo ng would-be revolutionaries 
are those who resist the temptation to violence bec ause they see in it a trap 
which will frustrate basic change, as it helped des troy revolutionary potential 
in the France of 1792, the Russia of 1920, and the Spain of 1936. The romantics 
are those who think that violence produces revoluti on, rather than reaction. 
The romantics are soft-headed; the advocates of non violence are hard-headed. 
It was King's great merit that, with all his ambigu ities, he saw this with 
increasing clarity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 40   
WILLIAM ROBERT MILLER 
"The king is dead", said a black American. "See wha t nonviolence gets you? I've 
made up my mind — it's not for me." In the period o f national mourning, many 
white reactionaries were silent; the few who were n ot said what they had 
always said — that Martin Luther King's 'so-called nonviolence' led to violence —
and they seemed to take satisfaction in his violent  death. 
There were journalistic pundits who said Martin Kin g had a premonition of his 
death. They ignored the simple fact that King lived  with the prospect of death 
for a dozen years. In January 1956 his home was bom bed. A year later another 
bomb was thrown on his porch but failed to explode.  In September 1958 he was 
stabbed. On May 11, 1963 the motel which was his he adquarters in Birmingham 
was bombed, and so was his brother's home. A year l ater his motel 
headquarters in St Augustine, Florida, was raked by  gunfire from three sides. 
Had he been in his room on either occasion, he woul d have been killed. Chur-
ches and homes were bombed or set on fire in Montgo mery, Albany, 
Birmingham. In 1965, Malcolm X was shot. James Reeb , Viola Liuzzo, Jimmie 
Lee Jackson, Jonathan Daniels, Bruce Klunder, Medga r Evers, James Chaney, 
Andrew Goodman, Michael Schwerner, Herbert Lee, the  six Birmingham 
children, President John F. Kennedy— all these and more have been killed in 
this violent land. It required no 'premonition' for  Martin Luther King to be 
acutely aware that his days were numbered. 
H. Rap Brown, one of the new demagogues of black po wer, has said, "Violence 
is as American as cherry pie". He was talking about  the violence of white 
power, the violence that virtually exterminated the  American Indian and has 
been diligently trying to do the same to the peasan try of Vietnam. Very few 
white Americans have died at the hands of black Ame ricans, even in self-
defence. To my knowledge, the only whites who died in the struggle for racial 
equality were those who championed the cause of the ir black brothers—those, 
in other words, who shared Martin Luther King's dre am of a new America, a 
dream of nonviolent revolution. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 41  The assassination of Martin Luther King brought in its wake riots in more than 
forty cities, an explosion of blind rage and frustr ation within the black ghettos. 
The death toll, at last report, was almost all Negr o. On Chicago's West Side, 
where King built his Union to End Slums, there were  teenage gangs, the Cobras 
and the Vice Lords, which held out against the loot ing and burning—they, of all 
people, were youths who heard and heeded King's mes sage of nonviolence. But 
listen to these words from the white editor of a Pr otestant denominational 
newspaper, commenting on the riots: "Who were these  who thus mocked the 
memory and methods of one of the greatest of their own race? They were a 
minuscule group of black men who had arson and larc eny in their hearts long 
before Dr King was killed. With the ring of the fat al shot, they said to 
themselves: 'They can't blame us now', and they pro ceeded to dishonour their 
race and their nation."1 
It is, I submit, precisely this kind of officious, insensitive moralizing that makes 
me fear for America's future. The author of these w ords is not a reactionary. I 
suppose he could be credited with all kinds of good  intentions and moral 
rectitude. What he leaves out of account is the fac t that "arson and larceny" 
(note the legalism in the choice of words) were pla nted in black men's hearts by 
the deeds of white men who, to begin with, herded t hem into the rat-infested 
ghettos and then turned a deaf ear to the urgent pl eas and warnings of men 
like Martin Luther King who told them repeatedly an d insistently of the 
consequences that would surely ensue unless the pro blems of the black ghetto 
were faced on a vast scale. The stage is now set fo r more and worse riots this 
summer. To become capable of rioting is paradoxical ly a sign of health, and 
affirmation of the will to live. In so far as Marti n King roused the people of the 
ghetto from their apathy, he made them capable of t aking their destiny in their 
own hands, capable of lashing out against a whole w eb of evils in which life had 
ensnared them. Life? What kind of life? The life de creed for them by white 
America, which rejected their right to life, libert y and the pursuit of good jobs, 
housing, schools and everything else which white Am erica reserved to itself. 
Now Whitey rebukes those who "mocked the memory and  methods of the 
greatest of their own race", and thereby reveals wh y he came to admire Martin NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 42  Luther King, not as a great American or a great Chr istian but as "one of  them".  
And in this resides a colossal misunderstanding. 
White America has consistently been blind to its ow n violence against others. 
Had it not been callous in the infliction of subtle , everyday violence, the 
violence that created and maintained the ghettos? I t not only tolerated crime 
but syndicated it and celebrated it. So long as the re was no damage to white 
property or white lives, the ravages of ghetto life  aroused little interest. And 
the same may generally be said of the life of the N egro everywhere in America. 
The 'good' white people of Montgomery, Alabama, all owed the 'bad' white 
people of that city to set the pattern of insult an d ill-treatment that caused the 
buses to be boycotted in 1956. Moreover, the 'good'  white Americans outside 
Montgomery were, at best, only mildly critical of t he whole system of racial 
injustice—to the extent that they noticed it at all . And for the most part they 
didn't even notice it until people like Martin Luth er King dramatically brought it 
to their attention. When he did, only a tiny minori ty took their stand with him. 
To most he remained 'one of them '—and as such they were relieved to know 
that he preached nonviolence and told his followers  not to retaliate. No white 
blood would be shed—how wonderful. They liked ^o he ar this, took reassurance 
from it and even to a certain extent responded char itably or with what they 
thought was generosity, sunning themselves with lib eral pieties of brotherhood 
which never even really began to enter into the dep ths of King's dream or of 
the black man's cry for recognition as a fellow hum an being. They could feel 
righteous indignation toward only the worst and mos t flagrant depradations of 
remote Southern police and sheriffs and Klansmen ag ainst Negroes. What they 
were really afraid of was the vengeance which, deep  in their psyche, white 
Americans knew they deserved. They came to apprecia te Martin Luther King for 
'cooling it', for sparing them from 'the fire next time'. But in this there was a 
good deal of ambivalence. White America would have preferred to be left alone 
altogether, to wallow in its orgies of safe televis ion violence. If it must have 
the nuisance and annoyance of 'racial unrest', let it be minimized by 
nonviolence. That is how they liked to think of it,  and that is why they NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 43  appreciated it to the extent they did. And then whe n the great man of 
nonviolence was dead, they mourned him with unbridl ed ambiguity. 
In a sense, America had already lost Martin Luther King as early as 1966, or 
even 1964, for the same processes which brought him  to the position of 
leadership in the freedom revolution also gave rise  to the demand for 'black 
power*. The first proponents of black power began a s dedicated apostles of 
nonviolence, and even as they raised the new slogan  in the summer of 1966 
they continued to adhere to a nonviolent discipline . It is only subsequently that 
black power advocates have talked of armed resistan ce. They have practised it 
only defensively and only in extreme situations. Th e slogan did not arise out of 
thin air but from a growing realization, over a per iod of years, that the white 
power structure was largely immune to moral suasion  alone; and that through-
out America there were so few white people willing to struggle against the 
white power structure that black men who wanted fre edom could not count on 
them as allies. That is a debatable point and a sou rce of division within the 
movement, but it is also a reality which changed th e movement's centre of 
gravity and made 'black power' the new rallying cry  rather than 'freedom now' 
or 'racial equality'. Martin Luther King thought th e slogan was unfortunate; he 
did not like its anti-white implications. But he en dorsed its basic meaning, 
which is that black people should attain political,  economic and other kinds of 
power and thus be able to control their own destini es instead of settling for fair 
treatment (which they usually couldn't get anyway) under conditions of white 
ownership and control. 
Intelligently understood, black power is a reasonab le aim and a necessary step 
toward a new America of racial equality. It represe nts a deepening of the 
struggle and a recognition that genuine racial inte gration is a more complex 
event than it first seemed to be. Martin Luther Kin g knew this; he always made 
a distinction between desegregation and integration . He hoped against hope for 
a breakthrough, clinging desperately to a faith in America which white America 
did little to vindicate. I shall never forget that moment in March 1965, at the 
end of the march from Selma to Montgomery, when Pre sident Lyndon B. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 44  Johnson declared, "We shall overcome. . . . The rea l hero of this struggle is the 
American Negro. ... He has called upon us to make g ood the promise of 
America." It seemed too good to be true, the Presid ent of the United States 
aligning himself with the freedom movement. And the n, as months passed, it  
was  too good to be true, if it had been true at all, i t was only for a moment. 
The crusade against racism and poverty was quietly scuttled as the war in 
Vietnam escalated. The Congress of the United State s could not find $40 million 
to exterminate rats in the festering slums of our c ities, but it could appropriate 
billions to conscript slum- dwellers and send them across the planet to kill 
'gooks'. Racism, by whatever name, triumphed at hom e and abroad, two sides 
of the same coin, making a mockery of all the hopef ul slogans of the 
Johnsonian Great Society—and throwing black people back upon their own 
resources. 
And there was, too, a 'white backlash'—a reaffirmat ion of white racism by those 
who complained that blacks were demanding too much.  Even white 'liberals', 
erstwhile supporters of Martin Luther King, fell aw ay, professing horror at the 
'threat' of black power. The road ahead is a rough and uncertain one. It is much 
too early to predict anything. As I write, Martin K ing's friend and jailmate, 
Ralph D. Abernathy, has established an encampment o f the poor in Washington, 
D.C., calling it 'Resurrection City'. One would lik e to hope that this would be a 
redemptive sequel to Martin King's death, but I am afraid that White America is 
not so kind nor so easily transformed. Even where t here are good intentions 
there is a lack of depth of understanding. It takes  a con- flagration like Watts, 
apparently, to stir many white liberals from their torpor—and at the same time 
the same events confirm others in opinions which ar e potentially genocidal. 
The genius of Martin Luther King was that he knew h ow to channel and to focus 
the legitimate discontents of black people. Both no nviolent demonstrations and 
unbridled rioting can dramatize black men's protest  against evil. The sad fact is 
that during the last two or three years of his life , Martin King's influence was 
waning, as was the capacity of black Americans to p rotest again and again 
without resorting to violence. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 45  In the past decade, while the nonviolent movement s cored important though 
inconclusive gains in the South, conditions in the urban black ghettos worsened. 
Poor people got poorer, while everyone else prosper ed and the rich got very 
much richer. In the private sector of the American economy there is more than 
enough wealth to eradicate poverty. If, say, all we alth above the level of one 
million dollars was allocated to A. Philip Randolph 's Freedom Budget, it would 
not be difficult to fill it to the $100 billion mar k. The money is here. It is the 
old old story of how it is distributed—'Them as has , gets'. Now rebellion is 
brewing in the ghettos. There are people there who feel that they have nothing 
to lose and who are fed up with being oppressed and  excluded. And a new black 
leadership is emerging, ready to articulate the ang er of the ghetto. If the 
successors of Martin Luther King do not succeed in bringing needed change 
through nonviolence, these black jacobins will undo ubtedly come to the helm. 
The solution to this dilemma is less in the hands o f Abernathy than it is in the 
hands of those in positions of responsibility—those  who control America's wealth 
and determine its priorities. 
The expressions of mourning which followed Martin L uther King's death were of 
unprecedented magnitude. It is possible that hearts  were changed as people 
mourned—but to what extent remains to be seen. To w hat extent will white 
Americans of good will re-dedicate themselves to th e dream he proclaimed? To 
what extent will they transform first themselves an d then their racist white 
neighbours? White America has deceived itself for a  long, long time. It has been 
blind to things which were only too clear to black Americans. The veneer of 
benignity has been peeled away by recent events. So me of us have become 
aware for the first time, for example, that police are generally racists and that 
in black ghettos they are generally a law unto them selves, and that they are 
frequently, as Martin Luther King observed in a per ceptive article in Saturday 
Review  in November 1965, involved in pervasive organized crime "designed, 
directed, and cultivated by white national crime sy ndicates". Idealistic young 
rookies soon learn that if they are to fit into the ir jobs as police officers they 
must become cynical and corrupt, catering to the pr ivileged. Nathan Wright in 
his recent book,  Ready to Riot, based on a detailed and largely first-hand study NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 46  of Newark and its racial violence, asserts that the  white power structure's 
concept of 'order' has little to do with law and st ill less to do with justice. The 
urban poor, predominantly black, are boxed in. They  must fight for their lives, 
intelligently or stupidly, through well-planned dem onstrations or through 
disorganized outbursts. 
The first words of the introduction to my book  Nonviolence  (London: Allen & 
Unwin, 1964) were, "Nonviolence is an idea whose ti me has come". The 
statement, paraphrasing Victor Hugo, is one that Ma rtin Luther King uttered on 
many occasions. Now, four years later, it may be as ked whether that idea's 
time has come  and gone.  History does not readily enthrone what is noble. T he 
martyrdoms of Jesus and Gandhi have prepared us for  that of Martin King, and 
we are not astonished. Nor are we astonished that C hristian  agape  and 
Gandhian Satyagraha have not taken the world by sto rm. Each in its time 
produced a harvest of good. Most of the civil right s laws enacted in the past 
decade would not have been adopted but for Martin L uther King's heroic and 
saintly work. How fitting it is that his last campa ign was waged on behalf of the 
Negro garbage-men of Memphis. For King was, of his kind, a Brahmin like 
Gandhi, and these were his Harijans. Their struggle  was, more than for 
anything else, for human dignity and the recognitio n of their humanity Like 
Jesus, whom he revered above all others, Martin Kin g embraced all mankind—
rich and poor, white and black, Brahmin and Harijan . He could have led a 
comfortable life, very successful 'as the world giv eth', within the bounds set by 
America's racial caste system. He chose otherwise, casting his lot with 'the 
wretched of the earth'. 
The King is dead. Brother Martin is dead. The legac y that remains to us is a 
mixed one, rife with the unsolved problems in which  he was enmeshed. His 
spirit lives on. Is that a trite thing to say? Yet I believe it does and will always, 
whether it is timely or not. Even among those who m ost ardently espouse the 
slogan of black power, there is honour for his memo ry and a will to take 
nonviolence as far as it will go before resorting t o other measures. We need 
such a reservoir of hope, for our situation is ever y bit as desperate as Martin NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 47  Luther King said it was. Time and again, he warned that if the white power 
structure did not come to terms with the nonviolent  revolution, it would have 
to face violence. He was not advocating the latter,  but recognizing the hand-
writing on the wall. If we share his faith and his commitment, we must above 
all share this heartbreaking concern. White America  must wake up and let black 
America come in out of the cold, or there will be g reat tragedy in store for all 
of us. That, it seems to me, is Martin Luther King' s most immediate and urgent 
message—let the disadvantaged enter into their righ tful inheritance. Make way 
for them. There must be an end to the rule of white  power over powerless 
blacks. Blacks must have power too, and the dignity  it confers. It was the 
capstone of Martin Luther King's crusade for freedo m that his wielding of 
nonviolence created such dignity and gave birth to a feeling of power on the 
part of the disadvantaged. The next move now is Whi tey's. 
 
□ Mr Miller has just completed a comprehensive biogr aphy, Martin Luther King, to be 
published in the U.S.A. in November 1968 .—Editors.  
1. Paul C. Allen, "Random Reactions during Those Te n Pays in April",  Crusader, May 1968, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 48   
PAUL F. POWER 
MARTIN LUTHER KING HAD TWO , interrelated roles. First, he was a righteous man  
with an ultimate vision who preached about the huma n condition. Second, he 
was an activist who used peaceful means to alter so cial institutions. Gifted with 
a prophetic mission, he helped to shape recent Amer ican history. 
If one looks at King as a prophetic figure, there i s the immediate fact that by 
family tradition, training and choice he became a P rotestant Minister in a non-
liturgical, evangelical tradition. Central to that tradition is the sermon which 
became his characteristic medium of expression. Thr ough it King revealed his 
particular message. Typical was a sermon in which h e adopted Scripture to 
justify and limit resistance. Speaking to fellow vi ctims of segregation, he said: 
"You must continue to work passionately and vigorou sly for your God-given and 
constitutional rights. It would be both cowardly an d immoral for you patiently 
to accept injustice... But as you continue your str uggle with Christian 
methods... be sure that the means you employ are as  pure as the end you seek"  
{Strength to Love,  1968 ed., p. 161). With a few changes this might h ave been 
Gandhi speaking. King expressed a debt to Gandhi, e specially to his method. 
The Negro leader could not go beyond this tribute b ecause his theological 
premises were different. 
The Christian character of King's assumptions may n eed no more comment that 
to recall that they existed and influenced his two roles. They also accounted 
for at least part of his visibility among sophistic ates. "The  belief  of Martin 
Luther King", Elizebeth Hardwick wrote in  The New York Review of Books  
shortly after King's funeral, "What an unexpected, peculiar strength it had!" 
Peculiar or not, this belief, centred in Christiani ty's founder, provided King with 
the basis for his social Christianity which bridged  his prophetic and reformist 
functions. Walter Rauschenbusch and William Temple were among the 
formative influences on King's commitment to social  reform as a necessary 
extension of faith. To his meliorism King brought a  conviction that evil would 
persist despite legal changes. Only redemption woul d overcome evil. Thus he NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 49  said that the "enforcement of civil rights laws wil l bring an end to segregated 
public facilities... but it cannot bring an end to fears, prejudice, pride and 
irrationality... These dark forces and demonic resp onses will be removed only 
as men are possessed by the invisible, inner law .. . [of agape ]." (ibid.,  p. 28). 
In addition to Biblical sources, belief in evil tra ced to Reinhold Niebuhr. The 
Negro leader credited Niebuhr with showing him the weakness of liberal 
Protestantism's optimism about man and reform and t he complex relation 
between morality and power  {Stride toward Freedom, 1964 ed., p. 81). King, 
however, showed more millenialism in his roles than  Niebuhr did in his later 
career. King considered and rejected Niebuhr's reas ons for withdrawing from 
pacifism, holding that the theologian confused it w ith non-resistance and did 
not see the potentialities of nonviolent opposition  developed by Gandhi. Yet 
King accepted part of Niebuhr's views and agreed wi th him that pacifists are not 
free of the dilemmas that trouble non-pacifists. Th is was one reason why King 
and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference di d not adopt an ideology of 
pacifism. In turn this condition helps to explain h ow they could act in 
conjunction with disbelievers in non-violence, prov ided that the latter did not 
insist on their methods None the less, there was a dividing line between the 
two groups. King came to accept the small radius of  his circle. This quality 
permitted the ashram to guard its norms and to infl uence others. His 
acceptance also came from certain realities. At fir st pledged to King's values, 
the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee turne d away from SCLC to 
more adventuresome leadership. Additionally, King w as unable to organize 
SCLC units in northern cities because of resistance  from such leaders as Adam 
Clayton Powell and social and intellectual factors at variance with the Southern 
Negro culture where the movement had begun. 
A summit of Dr King's prophetic role was his 'Let F reedom Ring' address to the 
1963 demonstration in Washington. The march itself orginated with A. Philip 
Randolph and owed its management to Bayard Rustin. King made a primary 
contribution to the event which helped to produce t he Civil Rights Act of 1964. 
Urban riots that summer when King visited New York City, the radicalization of NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 50  SNCC and the Congress of Racial Equality, and the r ise of anti-integrationist 
leaders to prominence seriously eroded SCLC's posit ion in the Negro rights 
movement. The Southern organization and its head tr ied to close the gap by 
adopting 'militant nonviolence' as their creed and economic justice 'now' as 
their program. The effort caused a shift from the B iblical to the neo-Sorelian, 
evident in SCLC's posters for the 1968 Poor People' s Campaign which show grim 
peasant faces that Diego Rivera might have drawn. P overty consciousness can, 
of course, be integrationist and nonviolent, and it  is these qualities which save 
SCLC's rationale for the Campaign from technical ag reement with several 
varieties of black power. 
Dr King's part in SCLC's effort to regain lost poli tical ground in the Negro 
community is found in his description of the Poor P eople's Campaign as "a last 
desperate demand to avoid the worst chaos, hatred a nd violence any nation has 
ever encountered". Is this the equivalent of Gandhi 's 1942 'Quit India' statement 
which frightened the war-time British government, n ot into granting 
concessions but into suppressing the party and jail ing its leaders until the end 
of the conflict? I think not. King held out the pic ture of violence while Gandhi 
did not, although some violence did follow his call . Another problem raised by 
the analogy is that of imperialism. Did King think that imperialism existed in 
the United States? Probably not, despite his increa sing radicalism and his 
discussions with Ben Bella in 1962 in New York City  on what the Algerian 
revolutionist called mutual problems. King worked f or and lived to see the 
ending of many kinds of legal segregation. After hi s assassination a previously 
reluctant Congress passed an open housing bill whic h he had sought. There is 
little evidence that he came to believe that he liv ed under foreign rule. 
Although the captivity idea is firmly fixed in King 's Old Testament role, in his 
political role he did not, like some of his success ors, interpret the American 
government as another Pharaoh. Although shaken, he continued to believe in 
the American promise. 
Dr King's jeremiad about the 1968 Washington demons tration cannot be put 
aside, however. It links up with similar comments t hat indicate how in his last NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 51  phase an apocalyptic aspect of his prophetic role m ay have outweighed his 
reformist function. About Operation Breadbasket, on e of SCLC's more 
constructive programs, he said in mid-1967 during r iots: "As long as people are 
devoid of jobs they will find themselves in moments  of despair that could lead 
to the continuation of these disorders". Clearly Ki ng deplored the earlier 
outbreaks in Watts where he visited and met both ap plause and disapproval. 
Still, the apocalyptic tendency was strong in his l ast few years. On the Report 
of the National Commission on Civil Disorders he sa id that it "is a physician's 
warning of approaching death, with a prescription f or life". Perhaps the Negro 
leader had become disenchanted with appeals to whit e conscience and decided 
on brinkmanship whereby his cause would borrow stre ngth from prophesies 
about impending disasters. More likely in the persp ective of his whole career 
was that his reforming had passed under the control  of a despairing side of his 
prophetic role. The result in either case was that his judgments were open to 
the interpretation that he had abandoned evolutioni st methods and that the 
moment of truth had arrived in a final struggle bet ween light and darkness. 
Accordingly those who disagreed with his philosophy  might well wait to see if 
the storm would bring him over to their camp. 
King's entrance into the controversy about the war in Vietnam requires special 
mention. Although he had long opposed nuclear weapo ns he joined the anti-war 
protest when his movement had economic, personnel a nd psychological needs. 
SCLC had been losing the donations, manpower and en ergies of radical white 
liberals and their supporters who had become concer ned with napalm than with 
the Mississippi Delta. Without their help the SCLC might have survived, but it 
would have lost a national political foothold and a n integrated following, 
thereby giving indirect aid to black separatists. K ing was also challenged by 
Negro leaders such as Julian Bond who denounced the  war and Negro partici-
pation in it. The decision to join the anti-Vietnam  coalition had its costs. 
Moderate public opinion deplored King's action, alt hough as the war became 
increasingly unpopular this reaction lessened in im portance. A different cost 
was in terms of the United States' reputation abroa d. The best known Negro 
leader in world opinion added his weight to charges  that the Johnson NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 52  Administration was trying to perpetuate white colon ialism and had committed 
Nazi-type aggression. Several Negro leaders disappr oved of King's joining of civil 
rights and the war issue, among them Ralphe Bunche,  Whitney Young, Jackie 
Robinson and Paul Anthony. Perhaps the most effecti ve response to the King-
SCLC decision came from the NAACP. In April 1967 it s directors rejected the 
move as serving neither civil rights nor peace, add ing that the former would 
have to win on their own merits, regardless of inte rnational conditions. 
For his part King grounded his decision on three ma in points: the War was 
undercutting domestic programs on poverty and civil  rights; an escalated 
conflict risked China's involvement and a nuclear w ar; and as an advocate of 
nonviolence he had to extend the ethic to foreign a ffairs. Throughout much of 
1967 King's attention was drawn to the Vietnamese c ontroversy to the 
detriment of advancing civil rights through peacefu l means. A turn came in the 
fall with the SCLC decision to organize the Poor Pe ople's Campaign to 
emphasize economic needs that could be met by a shi ft of resources from war 
to domestic reconstruction. Mindful of the past sum mer's upheavals, Congress 
and the Executive Branch reacted with concern about  the announced plans 
which included mention of the blocking of Washingto n facilities. Here another 
cost of Dr King's move into the anti-war circles, t he virtual cutting of 
communication with a President who had done much to  expedite civil rights 
and social legislation, adversely affected the fede ral government's reception of 
the news about the Poor People's Campaign. 
Why did the SCLC decide on a poverty issue rather t han to confront the war 
question directly? An interviewer probed for an ans wer to this question with 
King in early 1968 and was told that those in SCLC who wanted the 
demonstration to stress Vietnam were won with the a rgument that if the 
demands of the Poor People's Campaign are met, the war in Southeast Asia 
cannot be waged (Jose Yglesias,  New York Times Magazine , March 31, 1968). 
Another possible explanation is that before the Han oi-Washington peace talks 
were mooted Dr King and the SCLC had developed rese rvations about too close 
an association with the antiwar question and chose an issue of broad domestic NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 53  concern since at least the time of John F. Kennedy.  It remains to be seen how 
the issue is advanced by the SCLC-led Campaign and what reception it receives 
from the central government and the American voters  in an unpredictable and 
crucial Presidential election year. Regardless of i ts outcome, the fact that the 
Campaign was placed on a wide social question rathe r than on a racial or 
international issue is a tribute to Dr King. 
Although the SCLC leader had visited India, Africa and Europe, his international 
interests had been limited before he became a criti c of American policy in 
Vietnam. His typical political role was concerned w ith domestic affairs. His 
most impressive phase was when the role was regiona l and he led nonviolent 
protests in the South. Lasting until early 1965, th is phase was comparable to 
that part of Gandhi's South African period which st arted with his first civil 
disobedience campaign in 1906. Both leaders faced r epressive environments 
and both sought moral victories as much as practica l gains. For King this 
controlling outlook persisted from the Montgomery b us boycott through the 
disappointing Albany Movement of 1962, the turbulen t Birmingham episode the 
next year when he was arrested for the thirteenth t ime, and the 50-mile march 
in the Selma episode which helped to produce a voti ng rights law that promises 
to give the Southern Negro important power. Birming ham was the occasion for 
his writing of 'From Birmingham City Jail', an answ er to conservative clerics who 
mistook his Christian humanism for anarchism and wh o were told to look again. 
Of more substance than his Nobel Prize address in l ate 1964, the tract 
established him as a major theorist of civil disobe dience. 
During these regional activities Dr King's propheti c and reformist functions 
seemed to have been in particular harmony. There wa s a high correspondence 
between his role as an authorative witness and his part as an irenic activist. He 
was living out Romans 10: 14-15: "And how are they to hear without a preacher? 
And how can men preach unless they are sent?" 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 54   
BAYARD RUSTIN 
THE MURDER OF DR MARTIN LUTHER KING , JR . has thrust a lance into the soul of 
America. The pain is most shattering to the Negro p eople. We have lost a 
valiant son, a symbol of hope and an eloquent spiri t that inspired masses of 
people. Such a man does not appear often in the his tory of social struggle. 
When his presence signifies that greatness can inha bit a black skin, those who 
must deny this possibility stop at nothing to remov e it. Dr King now joins a long 
list of victims of desperate hate in the service of  insupportable lies, myths and 
stereotypes. 
For me, the death of Dr King brings deep personal g rief. I had known and 
worked with him since the early days of the Montgom ery bus protest in 1955, 
through the founding of the Southern Christian Lead ership Conference, the 
Prayer Pilgrimage in 1957, the youth marches for in tegrated schools in 1958 and 
1959 and the massive March on Washington in 1963. 
Though his senior by 20 years, I came to admire the  depth of his faith in 
nonviolence, in the ultimate vindication of the dem ocratic process and in the 
redeeming efficacy of social commitment and action.  And underlying this faith 
was a quiet courage grounded in the belief that the  triumph of justice, however 
long delayed, was inevitable. Like so many others, I watched his spirit take hold 
in the country, arousing long-slumbering conscience s and giving shape to a new 
social movement. With that movement came new hopes,  aspirations and 
expectations. The stakes grew higher. 
At such a time, so great a loss can barely be susta ined by the Negro people. But 
the tragedy and shame of April fourth darkens the e ntire nation as it teeters on 
the brink of crisis. And let no one mistake the sig ns: our country is in deadly 
serious trouble. This needs to be said because one of the ironies of life in an 
advanced industrialised society is that many people  can go about their daily 
business without being directly affected by the omi nous rumblings at the 
bottom of the system. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 55  Yet we are at one of the great crossroads in our hi story and the alternatives 
before us grow more stark with every summer's viole nce. In moments like these 
there is a strong temptation to succumb to utter de spair and helpless cynicism. 
It is indeed hard to maintain a clear perspective, a reliable sense of where 
events are heading. But this is exactly what we are  called upon to do. 
Momentous decisions are about to be made—consciousl y or by default—and the 
consequences will leave not one corner of this land , nor any race or class, 
untouched. 
Where, then, do we go from here? 
We are a house divided. Of this Dr King's murder is  a stunning reminder. Every 
analysis, strategy and proposal for a way out of th e American dilemma must 
begin with the recognition that a perilous polarisa tion is taking place in our 
society. Part of it is no doubt due to the war in V ietnam, part to the often 
remarked generational gap. But generations come and  go and so do foreign 
policies. The issue of race, however, has been with  us since our earliest 
beginnings as a nation. I believe it is even deeper  and sharper than the other 
points of contention. It has bred fears, myths and violence over centuries. It is 
the source of dark and dangerous irrationality, a c urrent of social pathology 
running through our history and dimming our brighte r achievements. 
Most of the time the reservoir of racism remains st agnant. But— and this has 
been true historically for most societies—when majo r economic, social or 
political crises arise, the backwaters are stirred and latent racial hostility 
comes to the surface. Scapegoats must be found, sim ple targets substituted for 
complex problems. The frustration and insecurity ge nerated by these problems 
find an outlet in notions of racial superiority and  inferiority. Very often we find 
that the most virulent hostility to Negroes exists among ethnic groups that only 
recently 'made it' themselves or that are still nea r the bottom of the ladder. 
They need to feel that somebody is beneath them. (T his is a problem which the 
labour movement has had to face more acutely perhap s than any comparable 
institution in American life. And it is a problem w hich some of labour's middle-
class critics have not had to cope with at all.) NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 56  Negroes are reacting to this hostility with a count er-hostility. Some say the 
white man has no 'soul'; others say he is barbaric,  uncivilized; others proclaim 
him racially inferior. As is so often the case, suc h a reaction  is the exaggerated 
obverse of the original  action.  
And in fact it incorporates elements of white stere otypes of Negroes. ('Soul' for 
example, so far as it is definable, seems to consis t in part of rhythm, 
spontaneity, pre-industrial sentimentality, a footl oose anti-regimentation, 
etc.— qualities attributed to Negroes by many white s, though in different 
words.) 
This reaction among Negroes is not so new as many w hite people think. What is 
new is the intensity with which it is felt among so me Negroes and the violent 
way it has been expressed in recent years. For this , the conservatives and 
reactionaries would blame the civil rights movement  and the federal 
government. And in the very specific sense, we must  conclude that they are 
right. 
One effect of the civil rights struggle in the past  10 years has been to convince 
a generation of young Negroes that their place in s ociety is no longer pre-
determined at birth. We demonstrated that segregati onist barriers could be 
toppled, that social relations were not fixed for a ll time, that change was on 
the agenda. The federal government reinforced this new consciousness with its 
many pronouncements that racial integration and equ ality were the official 
goals of American society. 
The reactionaries would tell us that these hopes an d promises were 
unreasonable to begin with and should never have be en advanced. They equate 
stability with the preservation of the established hierarchy of social relations, 
and chaos with the reform of that unjust arrangemen t. The fact is that the 
promises were reasonable, justified and long overdu e. Our task is not to rescind 
them—how do you rescind the promise of equality?—bu t to implement them 
fully and vigorously. 
This task is enormously complicated by the polariza tion now taking place on the 
race issue. We are caught in a vicious cycle; inact ion on the poverty and civil NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 57  rights fronts foments rioting in the ghettoes: the rioting encourages vindictive 
inaction. Militancy, extremism and violence grow in  the black community; 
racism, reaction and conservatism gain ground in th e white community. 
Personal observation and the law of numbers persuad e me that a turn to the 
'right' comprises the larger part of this polarizat ion. This of course is a perilous 
challenge not only to the Negro but also to the lab our movement, to liberals 
and civil libertarians, to all the forces for socia l progress. We must meet that 
challenge in 1968. 
Meanwhile, a process of polarization is also taking  place within the Negro 
community and, with the murder of Dr King, it is li kely to be accelerated. 
Ironically and sadly, this will occur precisely bec ause of the broad support Dr 
King enjoyed among Negroes. That support cut across  ideological and class 
lines. Even those Negro spokesmen who could not acc ept, and occasionally 
derided, Dr King's philosophy of nonviolence and re conciliation, admired and 
respected his unique national and international pos ition. They were moved by 
his sincerity and courage. Not perhaps since the da ys of Booker T. Washington—
when 90 per cent of all Negroes lived in the South and were occupationally and 
socially more homogeneous than today—had any one ma n come so close to 
being  the  Negro leader. He was a large unifying force and hi s assassination 
leaves an enormous vacuum. The diverse strands he l inked together have fallen 
from his hands. 
The murder of Dr King tells Negroes that if one of the greatest among them is 
not safe from the assassin's bullet, then what can the least of them hope for? In 
this context, those young black militants who have resorted to violence feel 
vindicated. "Look what happened to Dr King", they s ay, "he was nonviolent, he 
didn't hurt anybody. And look what they did to him.  If we have to go down, let's 
go down shooting. Let's take whitey with us." 
Make no mistake about it: a great psychological bar rier has now been placed 
between those of us who have urged nonviolence as t he road to social change 
and the frustrated despairing youth of the ghettoes . Dr King's assassination is 
only the latest example of our society's determinat ion to teach young Negroes NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 58  that violence pays. We pay no attention to them unt il they take to the streets 
in riotous rebellion. Then we make minor concession s—not enough to solve their 
basic problems, but enough to persuade them that we  know they exist. 
"Besides", the young militants will tell you, "this  country was built on violence. 
Look at what we did to the Indians. Look at our tel evision and movies. And look 
at Vietnam. If the cause of the Vietnamese is worth  taking up guns for, why 
isn't the cause of the black man right here in Harl em?" 
These questions are loaded and oversimplified, to b e sure, and they obscure 
the real issues and the programmatic direction we m ust take to meet them. But 
what we must answer is the bitterness and disillusi onment that give rise to 
these questions. If our answers consist of mere wor ds, they will fall on deaf 
ears. They will not ring true until ghetto-trapped Negroes experience 
significant and tangible progress in the daily cond itions of their lives—in their 
jobs, income, housing, education, health care, poli tical representation etc. 
This must be understood by those often well-meaning  people who, frightened 
by the polarization, would retreat from committed a ction into homilies about 
racial understanding. 
We are indeed a house divided. But the division bet ween race and race, class 
and class, will not be dissolved by massive infusio ns of brotherly sentiment. The 
division is not the result of bad sentiment and the refore will not be healed by 
rhetoric. Rather the division and the bad sentiment s are both reflections of vast 
and growing inequalities in our socio-economic syst em—inequalities of wealth, 
of status, of education, of access to political pow er. Talk of brotherhood and 
'tolerance' (are we merely to 'tolerate' one anothe r?) might once have had a 
cooling effect, but increasingly it grates on the n erves. It evokes contempt not 
because the values of brotherhood are wrong—they ar e more important now 
than ever—but because it just does not correspond t o the reality we see around 
us. And such talk does nothing to eliminate the ine qualities that breed 
resentment and deep discontent. 
The same is true of most 'Black Power' sloganeering , in which I detect powerful 
elements of conservatism. Leaving aside those extre mists who call for violent NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 59  'revolution', the Black Power movement embraces a d iversity of groups and 
ideologies. It contains a strong impulse toward wit hdrawal from social struggle 
and action, a retreat back into the ghetto, avoidan ce of contact with the white 
world. This impulse may, I fear, be strengthened by  the assassination of Dr 
King. 
This brand of Black Power has much in common with t he conservative white 
American's view of the Negro. It stresses self-help  ("why don't those Negroes 
pull themselves up by their own bootstraps like my ancestors did?"). It identifies 
the Negro's main problems in psychological terms, c alls upon him to develop 
greater self-respect and dignity by studying Negro history and culture and by 
building independent institutions. 
In all of these ideas there is some truth. But take n as a whole, the trouble with 
this thinking is that it assumes that the Negro can  solve his problems by 
himself, in isolation from the rest of the society.  The fact is, however, that the 
Negro did not create these problems for himself and  he cannot solve them by 
himself. 
Dignity and self-respect are not abstract virtues t hat can be cultivated in a 
vacuum. They are related to one's job, education, r esidence, mobility, family 
responsibilities and other circumstances that are d etermined by one's economic 
and social status in society. Whatever deficiencies  in dignity and self-respect 
may be laid to the Negro are the consequence of gen erations of segregation, 
discrimination and exploitation. Above all, in my o pinion, these deficiencies 
result from systematic exclusion of the Negro from the economic mainstream. 
This exclusion cannot be reversed—but only perpetua ted—by gilding the 
ghettos. A 'separate but equal' economy for black A mericans is impossible. In 
any case, the ghettoes do not have the resources ne eded for massive programs 
of abolishing poverty, inferior education, slum hou sing and the other problems 
plaguing the Negro people. These resources must com e primarily from the 
federal government, which means that the fate of th e Negro is unavoidably tied 
to the political life of this nation. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 60  It is time, therefore, that all of us, black and wh ite alike, put aside the rhetoric 
that obscures the real problems. It is precisely be cause we have so long swept 
these incendiary problems under the rug that they a re now exploding all around 
us, insisting upon our attention. We can divert our  eyes no longer. 
The life and death of Martin Luther King are profou ndly symbolic. From the 
Montgomery bus protest to the Memphis sanitation wo rkers' strike, his career 
embodies the internal development, the unfolding, t he evolution of the modern 
civil rights struggle. 
That. struggle began as a revolt against segregatio n in public accommodations—
buses, lunch counters, libraries, parks. It was aim ed at ancient and obsolete 
institutional arrangements and mores left over from  an earlier social order in 
the South, an order that was being undermined and t ransformed by economic 
and technological forces. 
As the civil rights movement progressed, winning vi ctory after victory in public 
accommodations and voting rights, it became increas ingly conscious that these 
victories would not be secure or far-reaching witho ut a radical improvement in 
the Negro's socio-economic position. And so the mov ement reached out of the 
South into the urban centres of the North and West.  It moved from public 
accommodations to employment, welfare, housing, edu cation—to find a host of 
problems the nation had let fester for a generation . 
But these were not problems that affected the Negro  alone or that could be 
solved easily with the movement's traditional prote st tactics. These injustices 
were imbedded not in ancient and obsolete instituti onal arrangements but in 
the priorities of powerful vested interests, in the  direction of public policy, in 
the allocation of our national resources. Sit-ins c ould integrate a lunch counter, 
but massive social investments and imaginative publ ic policies were required to 
eliminate the deeper inequalities. 
Dr King came to see that this was too big a job for  the Negro alone, that it 
called for an effective coalition with the labour m ovement. As King told the 
AFL-CIO convention in 1961: NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 61  "Negroes are almost entirely a working people. Ther e are pitifully few Negro 
millionaires and few Negro employers. Our needs are  identical with labour's 
needs—decent wages, fair working conditions, livabl e housing, old-age security, 
health and welfare measures, conditions in which fa milies can grow, have 
education for their children and respect in the com munity. 
"That is why Negroes support labour's demands and f ight laws which curb 
labour. 
"That is why the labour-hater and labour-baiter is virtually always a twin-
headed creature spewing anti-Negro epithets from on e mouth and anti-labour 
propaganda from the other mouth. 
"The duality of interest of labour and Negroes make s any crisis which lacerates 
you a crisis from which we bleed. As we stand on th e threshold of the second 
half of the twentieth century, a crisis confronts u s both. Those who in the 
second half of the nineteenth century could 
not tolerate organized labour have had a rebirth of  power and seek to regain 
the despotism of that era while retaining the wealt h and privileges of the 
twentieth century. 
...The two most dynamic and cohesive liberal forces  in the country are the 
labour movement and the Negro freedom movement. 
...I look forward confidently to the day when all w ho work for a living will be 
one, with no thought to their separateness as Negro es, Jews, Italians or any 
other distinctions. 
"This will be the day when we shall bring into full  realization the American 
dream—a dream yet unfulfilled. A dream of equality of opportunity, of privilege 
and property widely distributed, a dream of a land where men will not take 
necessities from the many to give luxuries to the f ew; a dream of a land where 
men will not argue that the colour of a man's skin determines the content of his 
character; a dream of a nation where all our gifts and resources are held not 
for ourselves alone but as instruments of service f or the rest of humanity; the NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 62  dream of a country where every man will respect the  dignity and worth of 
human personality—that is the dream." 
And so Dr King went to Memphis to help 1,300 sanita tion workers— almost all of 
them black—to win union recognition, dues check-off , higher wages and better 
working conditions. And in the midst of this new ph ase of his work he was 
assassinated. Since then, the sanitation workers ha ve won their fight. But the 
real battle is just beginning. 
The Report of the National Advisory Commission on C ivil Disorders is the latest 
in a series of documents—official, semi-official an d unofficial—that have sought 
to arouse the American people to the great dangers we face and to the price 
we are likely to pay if we do not multiply our effo rts to eradicate poverty and 
racism. 
The recent recommendations parallel those urged by civil rights and labour 
groups over the years. The legislative work of the Leadership Conference on 
Civil Rights, of the National Association for the A dvancement of Coloured 
People and of the AFL-CIO has been vital to the pro gress we have made so far. 
This work is now proceeding effectively on a broad coordinated basis. It has 
pinpointed the objectives for which the entire nati on must strive. 
We have got to provide meaningful work at decent wa ges for every employable 
citizen. We must guarantee an adequate income for t hose unable to work. We 
must build millions of low-income housing units, te ar down the slums and 
rebuild our cities. We need to build schools, hospi tals, mass transit systems. We 
need to construct new, integrated towns. As Preside nt Johnson has said, we 
need to build a 'second America' between now and th e year 2000. 
It is in the context of this national reconstructio n that the socioeconomic fate 
of the Negro will be determined. Will we build into  the second America new, 
more sophisticated forms of segregation and exploit ation or will we create a 
genuinely open, integrated and democratic society? Will we have a more 
equitable distribution of economic resources and po litical power or will we sow 
the seeds of more misery, unrest and division? NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 63  Because of men like Martin Luther King, it is unlik ely that the American Negro 
can ever again return to the old order. But it is u p to us, the living black and 
white, to realize Dr King's dream. 
This means, first of all, to serve notice on the 90 th Congress that its cruel 
indifference to the plight of our cities and of the  poor—even after the 
martyrdom of Dr King—will not be tolerated by the A merican people. In an 
economy as fabulously productive as ours, a balance d budget cannot be the 
highest virtue and, in any case, it cannot be paid for by the poor. 
Next, I believe, we must recognize the magnitude of  the threat we face in an 
election year from a resurgence of the rightwing ba cklash forces. This threat 
will reach ever greater proportions if this summer sees massive violence in the 
cities. The Negro-labour-liberal coalition, whateve r differences now exist 
within and among its constituent forces, must resol ve to unite this fall in order 
to defeat racism and reaction at the polls. Unless we so resolve, we may find 
ourselves in a decade of vindictive and mean conser vative domination. 
We owe it to Martin Luther King not to let this hap pen. We owe it to him to 
preserve and extend his victories. We owe it to him  to fulfill his dreams. We 
owe it to his memory and to our future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 64   
STEWART MEACHAM 
THOUGH VIOLENCE IS THE COMMON  denominator of U.S. policy, both foreign and 
domestic, nonviolence now challenges the United Sta tes in the person of the 
murdered Martin Luther King. His position even befo re his murder was unique 
among other black leaders of comparable influence. The leaders of the older 
civil rights organizations, though not violent men,  do not present a nonviolent 
challenge to the country, for they are black men wh o have been accepted into 
the Establishment; they are relied upon to do two t hings: (1) keep themselves 
in positions of leadership and thereby maintain the ir Establishment credentials, 
and (2) in times when crisis threatens, be a modera ting and temporizing 
influence on the black masses. They are able, safe men who preside over their 
institutions and use them (the National Association  for the Advancement of 
Coloured People, the Urban League, etc.) to accompl ish good, solid purposes 
but not comprehensive social change. They are men w ho reassure the 
discontented that patience, hard work, and persiste nt hope can eventually 
bring results. These men, while not given to violen ce (indeed they are 
passionately committed to due process and to orderl y steps) nevertheless 
accommodate to the violence of the state whether it  be in Vietnam or closer to 
home. They champion equal rights for blacks to enga ge in state-sanctioned 
violence (the military, the ghetto police), and whe n violence flares out in the 
ghettos or on college campuses they (with appropria te head shaking) line up on 
the side of repression so long as it is restrained in its methods and officially 
sanctioned. Thus instead of being nonviolent, they are unviolent in their 
support of the powers- that-be who preside over a v iolent society. They are 
unviolent in their identification and their coopera tion with an increasingly 
violent social order. 
The black radicals on the other hand are typically young leaders who have gone 
through a period of strong, consistent adherence to  nonviolence, only at last to 
chuck the whole business and declare themselves rea dy for violent social 
struggle. They have been beaten by the police, fire d upon by white mobsters, NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 65  treated with contempt, and subjected to every indig nity by people who are not 
even aware of their own racist attitudes. The black  radicals in despair have 
turned from nonviolence; they frankly advocate viol ent struggle. 
Both the more staid black leaders who have 'made it ' in the Establishment and 
the radicals who choose defiance and all-out strugg le are readily 
understandable. But Martin Luther King, who strange ly combined 
characteristics of both, is not. The Establishment he has left behind would 
gladly extol his memory and use his nonviolence as a means of social control 
over the defiant radicals who reject doctrines of n onviolence and seek a 
quicker, more explicit solution. But neither the Es tablishment nor the new 
radical can either appropriate Martin Luther King o r forget him. 
Martin Luther King stood both for U.S. military wit hdrawal from Vietnam and 
for social justice and human dignity in the United States. It is a measure of the 
spiritual and moral chaos at the very core of Ameri can life that these two 
issues, peace and civil rights, though perceived in  a theoretical way as joined, 
actually in practice often compete with each other.  Young black soldiers in the 
armed forces in Vietnam enjoy opportunities for car eer advancement in the 
military establishment which they rarely experience  in desegregated academic 
or religious institutions, where the ideal of peace , rationality and human 
brotherhood would seem to have a stronger social cl aim. The army, to them, 
offers a better chance for a job and some measure o f social acceptance than 
they can find elsewhere. 
White students resisting the military conscription system are frustrated in their 
efforts to bring blacks into their movement. Even w hen the young blacks shout, 
"Hell no, blacks won't go", what they really want i s black liberation here and 
now, not just draft evasion. Resistance to the draf t is incidental. And one of 
the things they want to be liberated from is the le adership of white radicals. 
During the last four years of his life Martin Luthe r King was criticized by many 
of his more respectable supporters because he spoke  out against the war in 
Vietnam. They thought he should stick to civil righ ts. Many American liberals, 
white and black, say that it is unrealistic to insi st, as King did, that both issues, NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 66  withdrawal from Vietnam and bringing an end to raci st policies at home, must 
go hand in hand. As a matter of strategy they prefe r the so-called Freedom 
Budget plan approach which provides for the war on poverty within the context 
of an expanding military budget. They have advocate d, and continue to 
advocate, both guns and butter. But not Martin Luth er King. He more than any 
other American leader, white or black, has at the s ame time and without 
compromise fought for black liberation at home, and  for an end to war in 
Vietnam. Shortly before he was to launch his Poor P eople's Campaign King was 
asked by a reporter whether he advocated a modest r eduction in the military 
budget so that the funds saved could be used to mee t the problems of poverty 
and at the same time maintain the military establis hment substantially intact. 
His reply was eloquent: "The guns-and-butter idea i s an absolute myth. 
Spending S85 billion a year on war and $35 billion a year on Vietnam is totally 
inconsistent with meeting the needs of people here at home. It is as if we were 
trying to write our own obituary as a nation. Vietn am is the most tragic error in 
the history of the nation. The U.S. is engaged in c riminal activity in Vietnam. 
The more we continue the war in Vietnam the more we  will refuse to meet the 
problems of the cities." 
It was in this mood of all-out commitment to the st ruggle against poverty, 
human deprivation, and war that Martin Luther King went to his death, gunned 
down by a sneak assassin under circumstances genera ting questions, suspicions, 
and rumours which call to mind the welter of unreso lved questions surrounding 
the death of President Kennedy, of Malcolm X, and o f Medgar Evers, to mention 
only three of the other victims of the similar kill ings that have felled 
Americans, great and obscure, in recent years. It i s not surprising that in King's 
case, particularly, there would be expressions afte r his death calling to mind 
the Christian teachings about redemption which are related to the death of 
Jesus. This is so not merely because of King's own deeply religious orientation, 
and that of his followers, but, one suspects, more especially because liberal 
whites in America are deeply disturbed by his death , feel their own guilt, and 
seek spiritual reassurance. On the one hand they kn ow that the assassin could 
not have emerged except for the social climate not only of Memphis and the NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 67  deep South, but also of the entire country which is  dehumanized in its attitude 
toward black people and already has denied them the ir humanity in its heart 
long before the idea of a particular bullet for Mar tin Luther King had entered 
the mind of his killer. On the other hand there is the stark fear among whites 
that the reaction of the black people will be of an ger and revenge producing 
not just a summer but a whole new era of violence i n American cities, ripping 
apart the social fabric which covers the poverty an d despair of the black 
ghettos, and exposing the white communities and the  entire social machinery 
to the wrath of a small but desperate minority. Thu s guilt and fear move the 
whites to construct a new mysticism of nonviolence which will ease their own 
sense of guilt in King's murder and paradoxically j ustify them later in using the 
police to crush black uprisings when they occur. 
Among the blacks one senses a less traumatic reacti on to King's death. They are 
not surprised that King has been killed. They have seen others killed for doing 
far less. At the same time, in a way, King's death validates their own despair 
and even their resort to violence. "Why not?" they ask. Nonviolence presupposes 
a capacity to respond non-violently. And where is t hat in white America? 
It may well be that the Poor People's Campaign, whi ch will occupy the centre of 
the stage in America's 1968 summer, will provide a last opportunity for the 
people of the United States, white and black, to di scover whether they really 
have the capacity to move toward nonviolence in fac t, or whether this high and 
compelling social demand for which Martin Luther Ki ng gave his life, will be 
again rejected by the American people who in so man y ways are now re-
examining themselves. 
 
 
 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 68   
WILLIAM STUART NELSON 
IN RESTROSPECT , IT IS CLEAR THAT  the phenomenal achievements of Dr King were 
attended by serious, sometimes baffling, problems w hich cast even clearer light 
upon his extraordinary character and abilities. He was fortunate in his many 
loyal followers. He was brave and was undaunted by the problems inherent in 
America's racial situation, in the conservative ele ments in the Federal 
Government, in his motley followers composed not on ly of the deeply loyal and 
able but also of the timid, the inept, the radical,  the bitter. Facing his 
problems in these contexts, Dr King exhibited extra ordinary insight and 
fortitude. 
One recalls the sudden and, for Dr King, unexpected  birth of the Black Power 
slogan in his movement. It took place in Greenwood,  Mississippi, in the summer 
of 1964. Stokely Carmichael, a member of King's mar ching band, mounted a 
platform and proclaimed the need for 'Black Power' to which the crowd gave a 
roaring, affirmative response. 
No persuasion by Dr King could prevent the contagio n of the Black Power fever, 
especially with its encouragement by the press. He was forced to face what he 
conceived to be a nihilistic philosophy resulting f rom the Negro's inability to 
win otherwise in the struggle for his rights. Perso nal trauma followed the 
negative shouts by members of the Black Power movem ent which later greeted 
his speeches. He was not deterred, however, in his effort to lay bare the 
weaknesses of the slogan and to preach a better way . 
Black Power he describes as a 'cry of disappointmen t' born of 'the wounds of 
despair and disappointment'. It was born in the Sta te of Mississippi where in 
three years more than forty Negroes and whites have  either been lynched or 
otherwise murdered and no man brought to justice fo r the commission of these 
crimes. 
Black Power, for Dr King, was 'a call to black peop le to amass the political and 
economic strength to achieve their legitimate goals ', a need which no one can NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 69  deny. It is 'a psychological call to manhood', the power of the black to wipe 
from his memory the insinuation that he is a nobody , biologically depraved and 
worthless. It is a cry for independence from whites , a second Emancipation. It 
is the wiping out of shame by the Negro that he is black. But all these, says Dr 
King, were the objectives of the civil rights movem ent before Black Power was 
born. 
Dr King rejects Black Power as a slogan and argues that it is a nihilistic 
philosophy born of the conviction that the Negro ca nnot win and thus a 
philosophy which cannot long sustain itself. It is a philosophy of separatism 
which is deadly, since there is no solution in isol ation, no possibility here of 
effective political power, no insurance against soc ial injustice, no gain in 
economic power. On the contrary, the ability to ent er into alliance has been a 
mark both of the Negro's strength and his weakness.  There is, writes Dr King, 
'no separate black path to power and fulfillment th at does not interest white 
paths—we are bound together in a single garment of destiny'. 
It is this conviction that should be set against th e call for retaliatory violence 
which Dr King regarded as the most destructive aspe ct of Black Power. In 
sadness Dr King admitted the use of the Black Power  slogan principally by those 
who had lost faith in the method of nonviolence. Th ey say, he writes, "Sing us 
no songs of nonviolence, sing us no songs of progre ss, for nonviolence and 
progress belong to middle-class Negroes and whites and we are not interested 
in you". 
Dr King points further to the danger of organizing a movement around self-
defence, since this often becomes an invitation to aggression. If loss of life is 
any index to the value or disvalue of riots, we mig ht recall that the loss of life 
in the Watts rioting in Los Angeles in one night wa s greater than that of ten 
years of nonviolent resistance demonstrations in th e southern part of the 
United States. 
Finally, Dr King argues strenuously against the val idity of violence as an appeal 
to conscience—in the belief that "power and mortali ty must go together, 
implementing, fulfilling and ennobling each other".  NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 70  And so this noble disciple of Gandhi, after years o f dramatic success, found 
himself confronted, even in his own ranks, with a p hilosophy many implications 
of which ran counter to his deepest convictions. He  did not, however, retreat. 
He argued his views with passion and continued to p ursue his chosen cause. 
 
The Poor People's Campaign  
Dr King, writing in this year's  Look  magazine of April 16 set forth the conviction, 
partly in alarm and partly in censure, that "The po licy of the Federal 
Government is to play Russian roulette with riots; it is prepared to gamble with 
another summer of disaster. Despite two consecutive  summers of violence, not 
a single basic cause of riots has been corrected." Recalling that discernible 
progress had been made a few years ago through nonv iolence, he concedes that 
in more recent times this movement had not been pla ying its "transforming 
role". 
This was an introduction to the announcement that t he time had arrived for a 
return to mass nonviolent protest and that a series  of demonstrations was 
planned for the following spring and summer, the fi rst to be held in 
Washington. In this Washington demonstration econom ic issues would be 
emphasized—"the right to live, to have a job and in come". 
Whence would the people come? Dr King answered that  ten cities and five rural 
districts had been selected from each of which some  200 poor people would be 
selected. The protests of these 3,000 persons would  set the pattern. Since 
November they had been in training in the disciplin e of nonviolence. 
Some of these people, it was planned, would walk to  Washington at distances 
from their starting points of several hundred miles  on the theory that the sound 
and sight of such a growing mass of poor people wal king toward Washington 
would have a dramatic effect upon Congress. Congres s, wrote Dr King, is "still a 
coalition-dominated, rural dominated, basically Sou thern Congress" with 
Southern committee chairmen who, with right-wing Mi dwestern or Northern 
Republican support, can be expected to stand in the  way of progress as long as NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 71  possible. The idea was to dramatize the whole econo mic problem of the poof 
but without the illusion of moving Congress in two or three weeks. 
Observing that no structural changes have taken pla ce, Dr King emphasized his 
intention further to dramatize the living condition s of poor people in America 
by erecting a shanty town in Washington, emphasizin g the absence of violence 
at all times. 
Dr King pointed to the fact that in cities where ma ss demonstrations have been 
held, the crime rate tended to decrease, with Montg omery, Alabama, showing a 
decrease of 65 per cent for an entire year. The peo ple had found a way to 
slough off their self-hatred, a channel through whi ch to express their longings 
and a way to fight nonviolently. 
In the discussion of these plans, Dr King reiterate d his absolute commitment to 
nonviolence. This he had found to be a philosophy o f life "that regulates not 
only my dealings in the struggle for racial justice , but also my dealings with 
people, with my own self. I will still be faithful to nonviolence." 
He warned, however, that if the nonviolent campaign  failed to bring progress 
an increase in violent activity could be expected. It was his determination that 
he and his co-workers would not fail. They would br ing the problem of the poor 
to the seat of the government of the wealthiest nat ion in the history of 
mankind. "If this society fails", he wrote, "I fear  that we will learn very shortly 
that racism is a sickness unto death". 
Dr King in this quiet, almost plaintive disclosure of his plans for Washington, 
hearkened back to the divergent views of the Studen t Nonviolent Coordinating 
Committee (SNCC) and stated that he and the Souther n Christian Leadership 
Conference had not given up on the integration of W hites and Negroes. "We 
believe", he wrote, "in black and white together. S ome of the Black Power 
groups have temporarily given up on integration. We  have not." 
Dr King expressed disbelief that there had been a m assive turn to violence. 
White persons had rarely been killed in the riots. Rather, Negro wrath had been NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 72  vented largely on property and not persons "even in  the emotional turbulence 
of riots". 
He warned, however, that if the plans for Washingto n failed Negroes would 
begin to think and act in violent terms. His hope w as for an Economic Bill of 
Rights for the Disadvantaged, requiring about ten t o twelve billion dollars for 
the support of a specific number of jobs, a program  to abolish unemployment, 
and a program to supplement the income of those who se earnings were below 
the poverty level. "These", he wrote, "would be the  measures of success in our 
campaign". 
"Black Americans", felt Dr King, "have been patient  people, and perhaps they 
could continue patient with but a modicum of hope; but everywhere 'time is 
winding up'—in the words of one of our spirituals, 'Corruption in the land, 
people take your stand; time is winding up!' " 
This was Dr King's dream for Washington and his adm onition. Under new 
leadership some three thousand of the poor at the t ime of writing have now 
come—Negroes, whites, American Indians, Mexicans, a nd others. And with them 
have come also the spring rains, deluging their Res urrection City of improvised 
shelter. Delegations from the 'City' have called up on high Government officials 
with varying results. A march on Washington planned  after the pattern of the 
celebrated March on Washington of 1963 will be held  on June 19. It will be 
remembered that on the occasion of that earlier mar ch Dr King delivered the 
now famous address, 'I have a Dream'. 
Resurrection City is also his dream. Whatever may b e its fruits they will bear 
the imprint of this young prophet, dreamer and buil der. 
 
 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 73   
JUNE J. YUNGBLUT 
MAY 4,  1968— TODAY I PASSED  by a park in Atlanta, in the Druid Hills section. 
Druid Hills has been cited in a national magazine a rticle as the most desirable 
place in America to live for middle income families  (of course, the article had 
white families in mind). Playing together there in this beautiful weather were 
Negro and white children; they were swinging, pushi ng the hand-run merry-go-
round, running after each other in games of tag, an d playing ball. Even more 
surprising, white and Negro mothers were sitting on  the same benches watching 
their children play. 
I stopped to watch too, thinking that if there had been no Montgomery Bus 
Boycott, there would have been no civil rights legi slation; if there had been no 
march in Selma there would be very little implement ation of the civil rights 
laws. Martin Luther King's place in history was wit nessed to silently today as I 
passed by that park. The moral leverage, the power of his spirit of nonviolence 
as an individual, and the organization, Southern Ch ristian Leadership 
Conference, that he built, made possible, indeed ma de inevitable, the little 
scene I passed by today. The assassination took pla ce exactly four weeks ago. 
Now the Poor People's Campaign is getting under way  from all parts of America, 
joining poor Negroes, poor whites, poor Mexican imm igrants, and poor 
American Indians in common cause. Martin Luther Kin g gave his life for the 
quiet scene which I witnessed today. It is only a b eginning. His dream is 
becoming our reality. 
Fifteen thousand telegrams have come to Coretta Kin g. They have come from 
all over the world. Almost without exception they s peak in the highest praise of 
Martin King; some of them liken him to the New Mess iah, many refer to him as 
a great prophet of the time, the contemporary Moses  who did not live to see 
the promised land, etc. The remarkable thing is tha t his spirit and person, his 
place in histosy, are all the greater when they are  seen in the light of his 
human frailties as well as greatness, his organizat ion's struggles and weaknesses NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 74  as well as its great vision, his little failures as  a father and husband as well as 
his magnificence in both roles. 
My husband and I are among those who counted it a p rivilege to live and work 
closely with Martin and Coretta King. We came to At lanta, to Quaker House, at 
the same time that Martin Luther King came here to assist his father at the 
Ebenezer Baptist Chruch and to lead the Southern Ch ristian Leadership 
Conference into the powerful organization it was so on to become. He, as well 
as we and other Americans, was deeply influenced by  Gandhi's powerful work 
and witness to the truth of nonviolence. 
While he was still a student working on his doctor' s degree at Boston University, 
Martin King came under the influence of Gandhi thro ugh the teaching of Dr 
Alien Knight Chalmers, who had long worked for civi l rights and who 
promulgated the teachings of Gandhi in his classes.  Martin's strict adherence to 
nonviolence during the Montgomery bus boycott is we ll known and documented. 
It was surprising to me to hear once again the tele vision interview of that 
period, so long ago now, when Martin spoke on behal f of Rosa Park's action 
refusing to go to the back of the bus, and outlined  the support his church 
people as fellow Christians planned to give her for  her courageous stand at a 
time when it was unheard of for a Negro to assert h is rights. I had thought 
there would be naivete, immaturity, even awkwardnes s perhaps in those early 
annunciations by Martin of the principles of nonvio lence. To my astonishment, 
his message, even at that time, was consistent and spiritually mature. Totally 
dedicated to nonviolence, his articulation of his f aith sprang full blown, the 
faith of the once-born man. 
When his house was bombed, some of his people armed  themselves. Martin 
went from house to house, asking for the weapons an d clarifying once again the 
Christian principles of nonviolence on which his wo rk and life would stand. 
Victory came at the end of the year and what began as a simple incident in one 
city of the South became a crucible for the nation.  
At Quaker House we offered in 1960 a platform to Ma rtin so that his message of 
nonviolence might be heard as a unifying message fo r black and white alike. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 75  Although even then he was answering calls from acro ss the nation to speak and 
to gather up the forces for change, he week-by-week  here at this house 
instructed the gathered people in the power and Tig htness of nonviolence. With 
the expanding organization, and the attraction it h ad for prominent figures, 
there came all the problems of maintaining the orig inal spirit within a highly 
complex organization. Staff, volunteers, constituen ts reached across the 
nation: they had to hammer out together the tension s arising from whether 
nonviolence should be an inward spirit permeating a ll actions, thought, and 
dedication, or whether it would be used as long as it was viable as a technique 
for social change. Some of us saw Martin every othe r week preaching at his 
church here in Atlanta and also in his home and at meetings. Watching him at 
close range, we can affirm and witness to the absol ute steadiness of his 
purpose. 
Although on his staff many were torn, unpersuaded o f the historical relevance 
of nonviolence, he kept them on, influencing them i n their work and lives, 
frequently bringing about a change in their hearts,  never giving up on them 
when no change occurred, but remaining in creative tension with them, and 
leading in his way which was the way he believed Ch rist had pointed out. Some 
considered it a weakness on his part as an administ rator and leader that he 
kept troubled souls on his staff; however, to those  who believe that men's 
hearts can change, it was a great testimony. Black militant leaders and 
followers considered it Martin's weakness that he c ontinued to believe in the 
common future of the white and black man in America  and throughout the 
world. To them he was the picture of naivete or wor se. He had to endure labels 
which hinted of his being an Uncle Tom to the white  man. For example, African 
leaders in exile in Zambia considered him a worse e nemy than the white 
rightists of Southern Africa or America. His attitu de toward nonviolence was 
misunderstood as passivity in the face of injustice , as effeminacy foisted upon 
the already emasculated black male, etc. With reaso nableness, patience and 
understanding he continued the slow task of preachi ng and teaching the one 
message up and down the land and over the world, in  tiny all black NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 76  communities in the Mississippi Delta, in the great gathering of the Nobel Prize 
convocation, at Hollywood first nights, during acad emic awards and honours. 
SNCC, which changed from a combined black and white  student effort to bring 
about change in the South and later across the nati on, to a black militant 
organization excluding whites and finding all white  people the object of 
mistrust, became double-minded about Martin King, s ometimes trying to work 
with him while resenting the national publicity tha t would attend SCLC's joining 
their efforts, and sometimes pulling away completel y, relegating SCLC to the 
cause of the white man. Those white people who only  see SNCC as a black 
organization over against them, bitter and determin ed to overthrow white 
oppression whether violently or otherwise, should r emember the history of 
SNCC, the way these young people went into areas of  Mississippi, Alabama, 
South Georgia and Louisiana, where beatings, lynchi ngs, and shootings were 
common, though unreported. Their courage and dedica tion cannot be assailed. 
The tragedy that they became divided from SCLC and white people of good will 
is not just the outcome of their isolated bitternes s; it is a judgment on the 
intransigence of a violent white element in the Sou th which ran unchecked 
particularly in the rural communities, and whose op pression of black people 
was overlooked, winked at, or complied with by 'whi tes of good will'. If SNCC 
lost faith in nonviolence it would be ironic to poi nt the finger at Martin King's 
failure; the failure belongs squarely on the politi cians' desks and in the hearts 
of the people of the South. 
Many of us were critical of Martin's not coming out  sooner to link the problems 
of peace (and particularly the situation in Vietnam ) with the problems of race 
and poverty. We kept up pressure on him to speak ou t while other pressures 
were overwhelming him. He did speak out at a time e arly enough to bring a 
reaction across the nation. The criticism of many l iberals, who were with him 
on race and poverty but not on a strong stand again st the war in Vietnam, 
became a wave of reaction. It was like a playback o f earlier accusations (when 
he started the bus boycott and later went to prison  in Montgomery) on the part 
of churchmen and others, "Why not wait for gradual change?" "Why rock the NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 77  boat?" "Why bring these issues into the open?" "You  are dividing the nation!" 
"You are letting down our boys!" 
Anyone at this time seeing and hearing the unhurrie d and unruffled Martin 
Luther King as microphones were thrust at him when he boarded the planes, 
and reporters firing questions at him whenever he a ppeared would not have 
guessed at the agonizing hours he spent in his own Gethsemene where decisions 
of personal spiritual import and international cons equence had to be made. 
Typical of this kind of decision making was what to ok place in the days 
immediately before the assassination. My husband an d I had brought Martin 
Father Thomas Merton's invitation to have a quiet r etreat at Gethsemni 
Monastery, bringing one or two of his leaders with him to renew the life of the 
spirit in the face of the protracted Washington Poo r People's Campaign. He both 
wanted and felt the need to do this. Memphis then o ccurred as a demand on 
him; the plight of the Negro garbage workers in tha t city was  TOO  immediate to 
be overlooked. With the momentary failure of nonvio lence during the first 
march he felt called to return. He was to have met with us on Friday, April 
fifth, to set the date for going to the monastery. He died on Thursday, April 
fourth, in the action of nonviolent confrontation o f injustice. 
Coretta King has said, and we all have heard in his  sermons of that week, that 
there was an expectation on his part that his own e nd might come soon. By that 
time his spirit had become a vessel for a will othe r than his own; this 
premonition seems quite in keeping with the whole o rientation and submission 
of his life to service. 
The great experience for many of us has been the wa y his spirit seems to have 
moved into the hearts and minds of Coretta King and  some of his staff in SCLC. 
My husband has written elsewhere that about the thi rd day after his death we 
in Atlanta felt a kind of resurrection of the spiri t in which we felt that we could 
go ahead and believed that we would be given power to do so. The continuity 
of this spirit will be crucial to the Poor People's  Campaign in particular and to 
the future of America and indeed of the world in ge neral. That Coretta King is 
permeated with it is obvious. I have been with her at her home since the time NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 78  of the assassination and, although working there to  be of help to her and the 
children, it was inevitable that I would observe he r closely in the terrible days 
that followed. She was prepared for his death, ther e is no doubt of that, but 
she was also prepared to take on both the spirit an d the problems of his work. 
When she brought his body back from Memphis, a few of us were in her living 
room, and of course we thought that she would want immediately to be alone 
with her grief when she returned to the house. Inst ead of this personal need, 
she seemed to be responding to our need for comfort  at this time. She came 
forward and greeted each person with great compassi on. She came to me and 
embraced me, holding me for a long time in her arms  as though to give me of 
her own strength and will and faith. 
May 8, 1968—When I spoke with Coretta today, she de scribed the problem of 
myriad decisions which she has to make each day abo ut her public appearances 
and statements and the role she may continue to pla y in the civil rights 
movement which is now connected with the problems o f peace and poverty. 
Then she referred to the challenge of the times mea ning both the Washington 
March and the issues being raised by the presidenti al candidates. After a long 
pause she said very simply, "I wish Martin could be  here to see it". 
It is her determination to carry forward his work i n whatever role she will be 
best suited. It seemed to me that the test of Marti n King's greatness is that his 
spirit lives on in his family and in the spiritual decisions of his wife, in his 
immediate surroundings, while at the same time serv ing a great cause and 
being an instrument to a power which mediates betwe en the present and the 
eternal. He changed radically the history of this c ountry and the history of the 
world. There is a likeness of spirit which one sees  in the Lincolns, the Pope 
Johns, the Gandhis, and the Martin Luther King’s of  this life. 
There is no doubt that in Martin's case, as in Gand hi's case, the movement 
dominated his life. In so far as his personal life with his family and with others 
is concerned, he tried to be sensitive to their nee ds but relationships were 
subjected to the rigorous and sometimes nearly deva stating forward motion of 
this wave that was rolling toward the future. Those  closest to him, his family NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 79  and his staff, although they suffered most from the  demands of the movement, 
loved him most both because and in spite of the dem ands he put on them. They 
are now bearing witness to this love in their lives  and in their continued 
dedication to his spirit. The power of his own dedi cation is also attested to in 
the change of hearts and minds in Atlanta which is symptomatic of the change 
which has taken place across the nation toward acti on and good will on the part 
of many heretofore unmoved whites and Negroes, all of whom had remained 
embedded in the status quo through self-interest or  lack of imagination. 
It is incredible to remember that a few years ago w hen he won the Nobel Peace 
Prize, there was little intention in Atlanta to do anything to recognize this 
world figure who lived with us. Some liberals, Negr o and white, came together 
for a luncheon meeting and after great effort on th eir part slowly the gathering 
impulse pervaded some levels of power within the ci ty. Some men of influence 
responded because they recognized greatness. Others  had pressures put on 
them by the businesses they were affiliated with wh ich had offices in New York 
City. Mayor Ivan Allen that night found himself sin ging 'We Shall Overcome', as 
everyone in the banquet hall held hands and swayed with the music which had 
hitherto been a rallying song for a few liberal whi tes in the city and the masses 
of Negro oppressed and socially-conscious people. O bviously the recognition 
was not that of an emotionally-swayed mass of peopl e. Rather this was a 
recognition somewhat reluctantly wrung from a group  of city leaders in joining 
finally with the liberals because the greatness of the man could not go 
unrecognized. 
When in Riverside Church in New York City a year ag o he publicly made clear 
the inescapable connection of the movement for civi l rights with the need to 
stop the war in Vietnam and attend to the problems of poverty at home, there 
was a reversal again and new attacks were launched at him. The Atlanta papers 
which had grown toward a liberal point of view on t he revolution for civil 
rights, now editorialized about 'Peaceniks', 'Culti sts', and other 'disruptive 
groups'. It took his assassination to change the ed itorial policy. Once again 
there is a feeling of good will and even a concerte d desire for social change and NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 80  peace. When Doctor Suzuki of Japan flew to Atlanta from Prague, arriving after 
the funeral and coming to Coretta with tears in his  eyes to tell her of his sorrow 
and the sorrow of the people of Japan over her loss  which they felt as their loss 
too, Coretta took his hands in hers and said, "My h usband was glad to give his 
life for what he believed in. We all heard him day in and day out, but now we 
really understand what he was saying." 
If we do at last really understand what he was sayi ng in spite of the 
weaknesses, whether they are in ourselves, in the v arious civil rights orga-
nizations, in our government, in our country, or in  the world, then we will go 
ahead to bring about changes in the social structur e by the grace of the spirit 
summed up in the lives and in the deaths of men lik e Gandhi and Martin Luther 
King. It seems to take both their lives and their d eaths to change our hearts, 
but that change cannot be emotional and momentary b ecause then it subsides 
into a sentimentality which is a worse state than t he intransigence of will which 
preceded it. No, that change must be a spiritual ch ange which imbues our 
heart, mind and will. Furthermore, it must grow int o works which by their very 
nature reflect our faith in the vision which these men had to climb the 
mountain to see. If we are unable to climb that sam e mountain we can and 
must take step after step along the way without bei ng turned back. We must 
see in our hearts what they were driven to see 'fac e to face'. 
It was Martin King's work to change laws to gain a better life for his people and 
all people, but it is this spiritual dimension whic h he achieved or was given 
which is the destiny for men. Many of us in this co untry believe that the 
Washington March is the last hope for the white man  and the black man alike in 
this nation. By the time this article is being read , part of this historical 
denouement of Martin King's life will have been pla yed out in action. His test in 
history is over; ours, we are suddenly aware, is ju st beginning. 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 81   
JANES E. BRISTOL 
IN 1959  FROM EARLY JANUARY  until the middle of March  I was privileged to 
cooperate with G. Ramachandran and Swami Viswananda  of the Gandhi 
Memorial Trust in making possible the visit of Mart in Luther King and his wife, 
Coretta, to India. They visited India at that time at the invitation of the Gandhi 
Memorial Trust and under the auspices of the Americ an Friends Service 
Committee. Together we planned for a month's stay, which began early in 
February and terminated exactly four weeks later. D uring a journey which took 
us to widely scattered portions of India Swami Visw ananda and I accompanied 
the Kings during literally their every waking and s leeping moment. 
Thus it was that both Swami Viswananda and I learne d to know Martin Luther 
and Coretta King well in a relatively short space o f time. 
Before he came to India Martin Luther King had been  my hero—a valiant 
believer in nonviolence, following courageously in the footsteps of Gandhi. 
After the experience of being so closely associated  together in India both he 
and Coretta were my friends. 
It is always easy for the great men of the world to  make moving statements 
from public platforms, and to write books full of i mpressive words which many 
of us applaud. In some cases, however, to know grea t people better is not 
unfortunately to gain confirmation of what they hav e said and written for the 
public. Exactly the opposite was true as I learned to know Martin and Coretta 
King so well. In addition to the beauty of the love  which they bore towards 
each other and the marvellous and infectious sense of humour which Martin 
displayed in those moments when he was able to rela x, I was most deeply 
impressed with two facets of his character: (1) his  unswerving dedication to 
nonviolence, never considering even for a split sec ond any deviation from his 
commitment thereto, and (2) his genuine love for hi s enemies, his ability to 
harbour no hatred in his heart and forgive genuinel y and completely even those 
who had bombed his home, and threatened his wife an d children, yes, even the 
woman who had almost killed him in a New York depar tment store. Clearly NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 82  these were no 'public pronouncements' on his part. These were the bedrock 
facts of his life and constituted the faith by whic h he lived. And, it should be 
added, the bedrock facts of Coretta's life and the faith by which she lives. 
Nine years later Martin Luther King is dead, killed  by an assassin's bullet. 
Moreover, he has been killed at a time when the tid e of commitment to 
nonviolence is ebbing in the United States and thro ughout the world. Though 
such a statement may be difficult to document, it i s fair to say that in 
American pacifist circles today there is a general acceptance of two facts:  
(1) that the civil rights movement is to a consider able extent turning in 
disillusionment and despair away from nonviolence t o the practice of violence 
in an effort to gain freedom and justice for the Bl ack community in America; 
(2) that the peace movement in the States (the 'ant i-Vietnam war movement' is 
probably more accurate) is presently becoming both much larger in size and 
more militant, embracing today even advocates and p ractitioners of violence, 
including those who openly support an NLF victory i n Vietnam. From the point 
of view of both movements it is hard to conceive of  a worse time to lose a 
leader so deeply dedicated to nonviolence and so de eply respected in many 
portions of both the black and white communities. 
Not for a moment would I try to minimize the fact t hat this is a dreadful time 
to have been deprived of such a leader (nor would t here ever by the wildest 
stretch of the imagination be a propitious time to lose the leadership of such a 
one as he), but there are also three counterbalanci ng facts to bear in mind, 
facts not the product of wishful thinking, but down -to-earth and realistic. 
1. We  have had  a nonviolent civil rights movement of large scope in America 
for more than a decade, and we have also had the gr eat example of 
Gandhi, both in South Africa and in India. Nothing can erase their impact 
from the history of human experience. In spite of t he fact that there is 
more scepticism about nonviolence now than was true  five years ago in 
America, it must also be borne in mind that the bus es were boycotted in 
Montgomery, Alabama only twelve years ago, and that  before that time 
there was no nonviolent civil rights movement in th is country at all. All the NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 83  dedication and experience that followed in the wake  of Montgomery is still 
valid, and leaves its legacy of learning and achiev ement with us. We are at 
the present moment much further ahead in America in  our experience with 
nonviolence than any of us would have thought possi ble prior to 
Montgomery twelve years ago. Before that only a tin y handful of Americans 
had any interest in or knowledge of nonviolence. 
2. We  have had  Martin Luther King speaking and preaching up and d own the 
length and breadth of America. He has been heard by  millions, including 
multitudes of white people, and read by millions mo re. His words have 
always carried with them the authority of his examp le, that genuine 
authority which comes only out of a life committed to and consistent with 
that which is being advocated. The legacy he leaves  us is immeasurable, 
and this we did not have twelve years ago. 
3. The Poor People's Campaign  is,  thank God,  under way,  launched by Dr King 
some months before his death. To carry this campaig n through to 
successful fruition gives the Southern Christian Le adership Conference a 
specific and ultra-challenging task to do. It is di fficult to over-emphasize 
the value and importance of this fact, for it means  that there is no time 
for grief and looking back. Instead there must be p lanning, hard work and 
action now, and constant looking forward to the nex t day and the next 
week. Thus it is that his closest followers have be en galvanized into action 
such as they never would have achieved had Martin L uther King still been 
alive. I have even heard the Rev. Andrew Young, sec ond in the leadership 
ranks of the Southern Christian Leadership Conferen ce today, say that so 
often in the past even highly placed leaders in SCL C allowed Dr King to 
carry the weight of everything, while (as Andy Youn g put it) "we goofed 
off". Now these people are challenged as never befo re, and instead of 
grieving hopelessly for their lost leader they are deriving inspiration from 
him to carry on the greatest struggle in which they  have ever been 
engaged. 
The Southern Christian Leadership Conference has tu rned to the Old Testament 
and found a text in the Book of Genesis to which th ey are referring repeatedly. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 84  It is a text which has been inscribed on a white ma rble tablet at the Lorraine 
Motel in South Memphis where Dr King was killed, an d it reads: "They said one 
to another, 'Behold, here cometh the dreamer. Let u s slay him and we shall see 
what becomes of his dreams'." They are staking thei r lives now on making the 
dreams of their slain dreamer come true! 
Thus it is that the Poor People's Campaign looms al l-important for believers in 
social justice and its achievement by nonviolent me ans. I believe it is wrong to 
call it the "final testing ground for nonviolence" as some are doing, but it is still 
almost impossible to over-estimate the size and sco pe of its importance. Should 
the campaign flounder in a sea of ineffectualness, or should it erupt into a 
violent effort, it would set back the cause of nonv iolence a great way, and 
make it very difficult to launch another nonviolent  undertaking or crusade for 
some time to come. 
Even as I am writing these words (May 16th) the Poo r People's Campaign, with 
the first people having arrived in Washington four days ago and a half dozen 
marches from all parts of the country converging up on Washington, is in an 
entirely fluid and flexible stage of development, a nd no one can predict with 
any certainty what may or may not happen. Less than  a week ago I spoke to a 
woman who since January has been spending virtually  her every waking 
moment on the Campaign, and who was among the group  that went initially to 
Washington with Ralph Abernathy at the end of April . Dedicated for a lifetime 
both to nonviolence and to the achievement of socia l justice, at the end of our 
conversation she said out of the past four months' experience that the Poor 
People's Campaign is 'a fragile vehicle', though in finitely and gloriously better 
than none at all. In spite of the fact then that wh at I write in this article may 
be proved inaccurate by the time it is printed, I w ant to say what I can at 
present say about the Campaign. 
To sketch in some of the background about the mood of the country as the Poor 
People's Campaign was launched may be of value. I.F . Stone, writing in  I.F. 
Stone's Weekly  for April 15, 1968, says at the beginning of his a rticle about the 
tragic death of Dr King: "The assassination of Dr M artin Luther King, Jr. was the NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 85  occasion for one of those massive outpourings of hy pocrisy characteristic of the 
human race. He stood in that line of saints which g oes back from Gandhi to 
Jesus; his violent end, like theirs, reflects the h ostility of mankind to those who 
annoy it by trying hard to pull it one more painful  step further up the ladder 
from ape to angel. 
"The President and the Washington establishment had  been working desperately 
up until the very moment of Dr King's killing to ke ep him and his Poor People's 
March out of the capital; his death, at first, prom ised to let them rest in peace. 
The masses they sang were not so much of requiem as  of thanksgiving that the 
Nation's No. 1 Agitator had been laid to rest at la st. Then a minority of his own 
people and not all of them the ignorant and the hun gry, celebrated his memory 
with an orgy of looting while black radicals and Ne w Leftists hailed the 
mindless carnival as a popular uprising... Those am ong his own people who 
sneered at his nonviolent teaching as obsolete now seized upon his death as a 
new excuse for the violence he hated. Thus all side s firmly united in paying him 
homage." 
I am inclined to agree with I.F. Stone as to the "m assive outpourings of 
hypocrisy". As soon as Dr King was killed, tributes  and adulation poured in from 
every corner of the land—from every political leade r, from every Presidential 
hopeful; in fact, all the front-runners (even those  not yet declared as 
presidential candidates) were actually present at t he funeral in Atlanta. The 
country practically came to a halt for five days, e very bit as much as at the 
time of President Kennedy's assassination. 
The very people who had opposed him bitterly hasten ed to praise him. 
Newspapers that had not been friendly eulogized him  in editorials, and carried 
special pictures of Dr King, many of them in colour . A glaring example of this 
sort of instant change was found in the city in whi ch I live. The morning paper,  
The Philadelphia Inquirer , for April 5th, had printed an editorial in its St ar 
Edition which is put on the newsstands about 7 p.m.  the night before. In that 
edition already on the stands when he was killed th ere appeared an editorial, 
"Dr King and the Law", attacking him for his advoca cy of civil disobedience, NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 86  specifically for his determination to hold a march in Memphis in support of the 
striking garbage men in defiance of a Federal Court 's restraining order. In part 
it read: "It may be that Dr King's own ego is more at stake in this confrontation 
than anything to do with Memphis garbage men. Certa inly his sense of 
proportion is questionable... When he exerts his le adership on the side of 
breaking the law—and disowns in advance the consequ ences—he is guilty of 
hypocrisy at best, and a taste for hell on earth ha rdly becoming a man of the 
cloth, at worst." As soon as word of his death reac hed the offices of the paper a 
fleet of trucks was dispatched to gather up every a vailable copy of the paper 
from the stands. A glowing editorial tribute was su bstituted and appeared in all 
later editions for that day. During the next severa l days  The Philadelphia 
Inquirer  out-did itself in praise of Dr King, even providin g a special full-page 
colour picture with all its Sunday editions. 
Even on a TV program (one of many) eulogizing Dr Ki ng the Mayor of Los 
Angeles saw fit to criticize his stand against the Vietnam war. Obviously, there 
was in this country great opposition to Martin Luth er King, to his position on 
Vietnam, and to his Poor People's Campaign, and as the shock of his death 
recedes, the opposition appears again. 
President Johnson announced the day after the assas sination that he was going 
to address a special joint session of the two House s of Congress to urge 
immediate passage of Civil Rights measures and the spending of billions of 
dollars to implement the recommendations of the Pre sident's Commission on 
Civil Disorders, which up until then (from March 1s t to April 4th) had been quite 
coolly received by President Johnson and seemed des tined simply to gather 
dust on the shelves. Within a few days he decided t o postpone the speech; now 
it seems to have been forgotten entirely. 
 
Nonviolence is Not Dead  
Let us next look at the Poor People's Campaign itse lf and at the faith and 
commitment of those who lead it. The  New York Times  for April 21st carried an 
article appraising the position of the Southern Chr istian Leadership Conference NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 87  and the Nonviolent Civil Rights Movement after Dr K ing's death. It began with 
these few sentences: "In those hours just after the  assassination of the Rev. Dr 
Martin Luther King Jr. stunned witnesses stood arou nd at the Lorraine Motel in 
Memphis, quietly debating the future of nonviolence  in the civil rights 
movement. 'This movement is finished', a young Negr o man said. 'You can say 
that nonviolence ended right here.' Others shared t he same thought. The 
movement could not survive, they felt, without the charismatic leadership of Dr 
King. 'The movement', someone else said, 'died with  him'." The article went on 
to say that events since that time have, however, i ndicated that these initial 
reactions were wrong. The Rev. Ralph Abernathy, sai d the  Times,  has shown 
real "toughness and determination" as the new leade r, and though definitely 
militant in his approach, has shown no signs at all  of backing down on nor of 
compromising with nonviolence. 
In fact, as the Poor People's Campaign moves ahead,  Ralph Abernathy becomes 
ever clearer and more specific in his emphasis upon  the need for adherence to 
nonviolence. A friend of mine who at the end of Apr il was at the large mass 
meeting in Washington on the first night of the vis itation to high government 
officials told me that as Abernathy addressed that throng he more than once 
stressed his own belief in nonviolence, and emphasi zed the moral basis for that 
conviction. Again in Washington on May 13th at the dedication of the 'City of 
Hope' (now rechristened 'Resurrection City') which the campaigners will occupy 
he was emphatic about their determination to remain  nonviolent. 
On May 14th I was present in a crowd of some 30,000  people who heard him 
speak in Philadelphia. I recorded verbatim some of the statements that were an 
integral part of the emphasis he was making through out his speech. Said he: 
"The problem is poverty, and we must remain nonviol ent so that we do not give 
people the excuse to say the problem is violence, a nd thus shift the attention 
away from poverty." Again: "We will commit no viole nce at all, but you can't 
tell what else will happen. We're going to turn thi s country upside down and 
downside up." Still again: "I'll tell you what we'r e going to do. We're going to 
love this nation to death." Once again: "I believe in love and believe in NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 88  nonviolence, and I have all along; I'm nothing new. " And finally: "Marching on 
Washington is a nonviolent army, armed not with wea pons, but armed with 
truth and love—and Ralph Abernathy is the general."  Those who heard him 
speak in Philadelphia could have doubted neither hi s militancy nor his emphasis 
upon remaining nonviolent. 
Andy Young, SCLC's second-in-command, speaking at t he First Methodist 
Church, Germantown, Pennsylvania, on the night of A pril 30th reaffirmed his 
faith and that of the Southern Christian Leadership  Conference in nonviolence, 
and in the determination of Martin Luther King to s ee justice for  all peoples of 
all colours  established in America. In the course of his addre ss he stated: 
"There is more power in poor people singing and pra ying than the Molotov 
cocktails and throwing bricks through windows." He predicted that the Poor 
People's Campaign "will be the greatest thing since  Gandhi's Salt March to the 
Sea", and avowed that in and through it "we want to  redeem the soul of 
America". 
The role of Coretta King is of vital importance in shaping the future of the 
movement and insuring its adherence to nonviolence.  She is herself deeply 
committed to nonviolence. Staunchly against the Vie tnam war, for the past two 
years she had been steadily acting on her own (I sa w her in Atlanta in January 
when she was just back from leading the Jeanette Ra nkin Brigade 
demonstration in Washington). Since the assassinati on she has been active in 
the anti-war movement, speaking at a large rally in  New York City, and has 
devoted herself unstintingly to the Poor People's C ampaign, speaking out 
repeatedly, strongly and clearly for nonviolence, f or the power it produces, for 
its ability to achieve its purposes and for the cou rage required to adhere to it 
through thick and thin. 
One can readily understand as he sees and hears the se brave and committed 
followers of Martin Luther King why Ossie Davis, th e prominent Negro actor, 
said in a recent interview with Nat Hentoff ( New York Times,  May 5, 1968): "I 
was absolutely flabbergasted when I got to Atlanta for the funeral and talked to 
some of the men who had been around Martin Luther K ing—Jesse Jackson, Andy NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 89  Young, James Bevel, Coretta King too, and Ralph Abe rnathy. There is so much 
strength there! Believe me, there's no vacuum." 
His Legacy to Us  
Martin Luther King, as all mankind knows, stood as did Gandhi both  for the 
practice of nonviolence,  and  for the achievement of a just social and economic 
order for  all men,  for others as well as for members of his own group . 
1. He aroused his own people and inspired them to a ne w sense of self-
respect, no longer to acquiesce and to accept the a ge-old slights and 
wrongs and indignities, but to fight for justice an d an equal place in the 
sun. 
2. At the same time he stressed that they must carry o n the fight non-
violently and with regard and love even for those p itted against them 
(eleven years ago I heard Ralph Abernathy, his clos est friend and now the 
leader of SCLC, say: "We may not like them, but we sure  do  love them!") 
3. And—he awakened large numbers of whites  both  to see at last the awful 
inhumanity and injustice of our racist society  and  the power of 
nonviolence to effect change and cure. 
4. In the course of the years he became a charismatic figure for both blacks 
and whites. 
5. Yet—he never produced the revolution he sought to i mplement in American 
society as a whole. He was not able in his lifetime  to redeem America. He 
did not live to see the fulfillment of the dream he  dreamed and caused 
others to dream. Like Moses he never reached the Pr omised Land. 
Long before his death he had seen militant young bl acks leave his ranks to take 
up arms and use the weapons of violence; he had hea rd them taunt him and 
deride his as 'de Lawd'. His death at the hands of a white assassin (especially 
one of whom weeks later no trace has been found) co nfirms them in their 
conviction that the only language 'Whitey* understa nds is that of violent force. 
Although we can expect them to act accordingly in a nother "long, hot summer', 
his death has  not,  as some feared might happen, robbed his followers of their 
faith in nonviolence. Nor am I surprised. I was pri vileged in mid-January to be NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 90  in Atlanca for the SCLC staff meetings, where under  Martin Luther King's leader-
ship about sixty people from many parts of the coun try engaged in planning for 
the Poor People's Campaign. Not only Dr King, but a ll the leaders there were 
clearly committed to nonviolence. 
His death moreover has aroused many of  his own  people, including middle-class 
Negroes, who never before were identified with the struggle. His assassination 
has moved a large number of white people to support  the freedom movement 
actively for the first time, and as the campaign co ntinues to develop, there is 
apparent a veritable upsurge of support from whites  who are asking, 'What can 
we do'? And the response is truly overwhelming in c ertain local communities as 
literally tons of food are contributed and thousand s of beds are provided for 
the marchers making their way to Washington. Thus t he Poor People's Campaign 
may indeed have greater support from both the black  and white community 
than would have been the case were Martin King aliv e today. 
Conclusion  
The two most powerful forces in America today that can thwart everything for 
which Martin Luther King lived and died are  white racism and  white apathy.  
Obviously, whites constitute the overwhelming major ity of American citizens, 
and with a few exceptions all members of Congress a nd of the executive and 
legislative branches of the government are white. I n spite of all the awakening 
produced by Martin Luther King's death only a small  percentage of whites even 
now are actively and passionately concerned to see justice and equality 
achieved for their black brothers. The tragic fact is that a very sizable 
percentage are racists— simple, kindly, gentle, goo d, respectable, devoutly 
religious white people who express their gentleness  and quiet Christian 
devotion in the vocabulary of hatred, physical assa ult, cruel beatings, injustice 
and even murder when they find themselves confronte d by a black man, woman 
or child, especially if these black people are stri ving to live with dignity and 
self- respect, and have the effrontery to behave as  equals. 
This  white racism  is totally opposed to all that Martin Luther King stood for, 
and even his death has in many cases only served to  harden the racists' hearts. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 91  Here we find so many of the humble rank-and-file of  America—the housewives, 
the clerks, the labourers—people never quoted in th e press nor on T.V., but a 
powerful force to be reckoned with none the less, e specially in an election year 
when the chief concern of members of Congress and p residential candidates is 
with getting votes. How to deal constructively with  white racism is 
extraordinarily difficult. How to remove prejudice and insecurity, and the 
hatred these breed, presents a problem both as old as the human race, and one 
to which we thus far have no workable answer. 
In an article published only three days prior to Dr  King's death James A. Tillman 
Jr. offered "A Dissent from the Kerner Report (Repo rt of the President's 
Commission on Civil Disorders)" in  Christianity and Crisis  (page 66, April 1, 
1928). Said he: "We repeat a grave error if we cont inue only to propose 
programs designed to improve the physical lot of bl acks. God knows, no one can 
deny that such programs are necessary. But to negle ct the need of whites to 
overcome their hang-ups and to improve their mental  health is a grave 
oversight. 
"In articles published four years ago I stated that  whites are mentally ill with 
respect to race and that white racism is a collecti ve mental illness that needs 
systematic treatment. This means, for one thing, th at such programs as are 
recommended by the commission cannot be mounted—so long as the power to 
initiate and implement such programs rests with the  white community and until 
whites have begun to come to grips with their own i nsecurities, which cause 
them to need—and to live by— racism. 
"Therefore, the commission's failure to make propos als and recommendations to 
this end is a significant loss. Confession and cont ribution •on the part of the 
white Establishment is simply not enough!" 
From his experience directing anti-poverty and urba n programs Tillman knows 
full well how deeply rooted white racism is, and th at it is at this time far from 
sufficient to wring our hands and shed crocodile te ars while acknowledging our  
past  misdeeds and shortcomings. Radical departures from  old patterns of 
thought and action, and revolutionary moves in a to tally new direction alone NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 92  can save us. Will such departures and moves be fort hcoming, and will they be 
forthcoming fast enough? 
Gandhi could lead the Indians to independence, and Martin Luther King could 
lead the Blacks some steps down the road toward fre edom, frut somehow 
someone in America must lead not those in bondage a nd those dispossessed, 
but the privileged and the 'top dogs' to serve thei r fellowmen and share with 
those less fortunate. Nor dare there be condescensi on in that service and that 
sharing. Both must spring from a realization of equ ality genuinely recognized as 
the equality of human beings everywhere. 
When Whitney Young, the National Director of the Ur ban League, himself a 
Negro and one of the leading Civil Rights leaders i n America, was asked who 
could replace Dr King as a "symbol of nonviolence a nd faith in the system" he 
replied: "I am not looking for a black leader to re place Dr King. I am looking for 
an American leader who will lead us all to justice. " America desperately needs 
such a leader, and the change of mind and attitude of millions of white 
Americans to the point where they will follow him. Perhaps the actual 
appearance of the man may serve to move many in his  direction; that has 
happened before in human history, and could again. Perhaps the Poor People's 
Campaign will be able to take giant strides toward the redemption of America's 
soul, and in so doing prepare us all for the advent  of the leader this country 
needs so much. Perhaps out of the crucible of black -and-white-together in that 
campaign such a leader is even now being born! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 93   
ADAM ROBERTS 
AFTER GANDHI , MARTIN LUTHER KING  was without question the most important 
proponent of nonviolent action in this century. As with 
Gandhi, so with King, assassination came at a time when his achievements were 
being called into question and his ideal of nonviol ence disregarded even by his 
own people. If the riots which have occurred in Ame rican cities every summer 
since 1964 have been as nothing compared to the Ind ian riots of the 1940s, at 
any rate as far as loss of life is concerned, they have nevertheless placed a 
large question mark against the methods of struggle  used by Martin Luther King, 
and the gains won by him. 
That nonviolent forms of resistance have not produc ed in the United States the 
dramatic and speedy solutions which many had hoped for is obvious. The 
reasons, however, are complex. It is much too simpl e merely to conclude that 
'non-violence' has failed, and that, as Negro advoc ates of violence have put it, 
'the only language the white man understands is vio lence'. In non-violent, as in 
violent, campaigns it may be for particular and loc al reasons that failure 
occurs, or that no more than partial success is ach ieved. The American civil 
rights struggle has had many unique characteristics ; and it is in some respects a 
uniquely difficult struggle. 
The sheer scope of the U.S. racial problem is itsel f the underlying cause of 
present frustrations. In addition to the fact that they are in a minority of only 
19 million, American Negroes have to face a deeply-  rooted system of white 
supremacy dating from the centuries of Negro slaver y, the well entrenched 
economic superiority of most whites, the inaction o f successive federal 
governments, and their own striking lack of organiz ation. 
The Negro revolt of the last twelve years has made a considerable dent in these 
problems. Buses and other public facilities through out the South have been 
largely desegregated. Many overt racists, such as S heriff Jim Clark in Selma and 
'Bull' Connor in Birmingham, have left public life.  Negroes have gone on the NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 94  voting rolls in the South, especially since the vot er registration campaign in 
Selma, Alabama in 1965 and the subsequent Voting Ri ghts Law.1 In some cities 
Negroes have vastly improved their own levels of em ployment. In Memphis, 
Tennessee, the dustmen won their struggle in early 1968 for higher wages and 
the right to organize a nnion—though only some time  after King's assassination 
on 4 April. Throughout the U.S. there is a greater degree of Negro militancy; 
and a gradual, though painfully slow, erosion of th e old federal attitude of  
laissez faire  towards racial problems. 
Such achievements, however important, are pitiful i n comparison with the 
injustices and deprivations suffered by the America n Negro, who has been 
promised freedom so frequently since the emancipati on proclamation of 1863, 
and who has so often seen 'historic' decisions of t he President and the Supreme 
Court fail to make history. King himself, at times,  may have been guilty of 
over-optimism. Of King's 'I Have a Dream' speech de livered at the 1963 March on 
Washington, his biographer wrote: "Splendid as the words were, they 
nevertheless fell short of King's own high standard s. ... He focussed primarily on 
ends and not means. . . . This approach, though of immense value from the 
standpoint of internal morale and external public r elations, left King open to 
the criticism of events."2 King's speeches and writings indicate that he came  
increasingly to recognize the immensity of the task  he had set himself. In  Chaos 
or Community ?, his last book, he wrote that "the Negro's strugg le in America is 
quite different from and more difficult than the st ruggle for independence" 
against a foreign invader.3 He criticized American Presidents from Lincoln 
onwards for their empty rhetoric and betrayal of th eir own promises to the 
Negro. His attitude to President Johnson was far mo re critical than it had been 
in his 1964 book,  Why We Can't Wait?*  
 
Origins of Nonviolent Resistance  
In the slow process of achieving equal rights for t he Negro, nonviolent 
resistance played a particularly prominent part onl y after the beginning of the 
Montgomery, Alabama, bus boycott on 5 December 1955 . Nonviolent resistance NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 95  was adopted by the civil rights movement not as the  outcome of a long 
intellectual and strategic debate, but because nonv iolent methods proved 
themselves useful in the campaign to desegregate th e buses in Montgomery. 
These local origins of the Negro nonviolent movemen t were a key to its success. 
Disciplined non- cooperation is always easier to pr opose than to conduct, and 
the yearlong Negro boycott of buses in Montgomery p roved a more effective 
advertisement for nonviolent action than all the mo re ambitious plans and 
ideas of Negro leaders in preceding years. What is true of the civil rights 
movement in general is also true of Martin Luther K ing, who was unknown 
before the Montgomery bus boycott and an internatio nal figure after it. His 
ideas about nonviolence developed only as a result of the bus boycott and 
subsequent events. Although he was familiar with Ga ndhian ideas, he did not 
start out with a complete ethical rejection of viol ence, and his belief in 
nonviolence was and always remained the product of a complex combination of 
pragmatism and Christian morality. For King and for  his movement, Montgomery 
crystallized the idea of nonviolence, not  vice versa.  
There had, of course, been earlier advocacy of nonv iolent action, and earlier 
use of this technique; and these previous developme nts may have helped to 
create the climate for Montgomery and for its after math. In the nineteenth 
century, there had been some largely nonviolent res istance in the North 
working for desegregation of public transport facil ities.5 In the twentieth 
century many attempts were made to develop a nonvio lent Negro movement 
along Gandhian lines. In his book written in 1932,  Moral Man and Immoral 
Society,  Reinhold Niebuhr had briefly discussed the idea of  using Gandhian 
methods for Negro emancipation, referring particula rly to the possibilities of 
boycotts of segregated enterprises—a remarkable pie ce of prophecy.6 In 
February 1936, in his well-known remark to Dr Howar d Thurman, Gandhi had 
said: "It may be through the Negroes that the unadu lterated message of 
nonviolence will be delivered to the world."7 But the most serious attempt to 
produce a Negro nonviolent movement was in the earl y 1940s, when A. Philip 
Randolph, still today a key figure in the Negro lea dership, announced a 
'nonviolent goodwill direct action campaign' which was to have included various NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 96  types of boycotts and marches. In 1942 he held a se ries of mass meetings, but 
the following year, on the eve of his campaign, Ame rica erupted in race riots 
and the campaign was 'postponed'. The lack of immed iate impact of all these 
attempts has been summed up by Lerone Bennett: "The  graveyard of Negro 
leadership was by 1956 replete with the bones of me n who had attempted to 
establish an American passive resistance movement b ased on Gandhian 
methodology."8 
When nonviolent resistance began, it began in a loc al way, and it was always to 
remain local and decentralized in character. The ev ents in Montgomery in 
December 1955 were an odd beginning for a mass move ment. The year-long 
boycott of Montgomery's buses arose out of an incid ent on 1 December 1955 
when Mrs Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to gi ve up her seat on the bus to 
a white man; originally intended to last only one d ay, the boycott began, not as 
a campaign against segregation, but as a campaign f or more equal treatment 
within the 'separate but equal' system; and after c oming close to defeat it 
ended in success only thanks to a Supreme Court dec ision of 13 November 1956 
that Alabama's laws on bus segregation were unconst itutional.9
 
Constitutional Framework  
These events established a pattern which was to end ure for over ten years. In 
the first place, the constitutional framework in wh ich the boycott and many 
subsequent campaigns took place was of considerable  importance. It provided a 
legal basis for many civil rights actions, and this  appeal to a 'higher law' was 
especially important where a local law, regulation,  or order had to be 
contravened. Moreover, the constitutional framework  reflected the ideology of 
the civil rights movement, which sought Negro integ ration into existing society. 
As this ultimate goal has been challenged by new le aders, so too has the con-
stitutional framework to which it was related. 
Nonviolent action and federal law reinforced each o ther in a whole series of 
ways: and it is probable that the very emergence of  the civil rights struggle 
owed as much to the decisions of the U.S. Supreme C ourt as to the rather NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 97  uncertain dissemination of Gandhian ideas. In 1946,  in the Irene Morgan case, 
the Supreme Court had first outlawed segregation in  inter-state travel; and in 
1954 it had declared that in public education 'sepa rate but equal' facilities had 
no place, following this up in May 1955 with an ord er to desegregate schools 
with 'all deliberate speed'. Such decisions, even w here they were not 
implemented, undoubtedly contributed to Negro milit ance, and to Negro confi-
dence that the goal of equality might, after all, b e attainable. 
Legal enactments and federal law continued to be im portant to the civil rights 
cause in a wide variety of ways. It was often moral ly easier for southern 
segregationists to abandon their policies in face o f a Supreme Court decision 
than as a capitulation of pressure from the Negro n onviolent movement. 
Equally, it was only because of direct action by ci vil rights campaigners that 
many legal battles were joined and many significant  Supreme Court decisions 
reached. Nonviolent action, far from being extra-co nstitutional or even illegal, 
served as a powerful means of pressure for ensuring  that legal decisions were 
first reached and then implemented. 
Even more significantly, nonviolent action served a s a spur for the enactment 
of new laws by Congress. By exposing the inadequaci es of existing legislations, 
the 1963 campaign in Birmingham, Alabama, led direc tly to the passage in the 
following year of a Civil Rights Act. In 1965, the voter registration campaign in 
Selma led to a Voting Rights Act. 
Federal law implies federal enforcement: and even t hose civil rights leaders 
like Martin Luther King, who were deeply committed to nonviolent action, did 
not oppose the use of federal forces to guarantee c ivil rights. Hence the Selma 
to Montgomery march of 1965, which was given protec tion by troops and 
federal agents. But the alliance with federal force s was seldom as clear-cut as 
it was on that march. Civil rights leaders were gen erally impatient at the 
indolence of federal agents and the caution of Pres idents. Even while 
recognizing the importance of the constitutional fr amework in which they had 
acted, they felt increasingly by 1968 that the situ ation had changed. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 98  The pattern of nonviolent action and legal action s timulating and reinforcing 
each other will continue to be important in the U.S . But there are signs that 
the nonviolent movement for Negro rights is moving towards more radical 
policies which may bring it into a direct clash wit h the authorities in 
Washington. As King said, the gains for Negro digni ty of the last twelve years 
were won at bargain basement rates. Future action f or Negro rights will 
demand vase federal expenditure—and may have to be fought for by increased 
direct pressure against the federal government, as well as by greater emphasis 
on more strictly constitutional means. It is becaus e the nature of the problem is 
changing that the old form of the civil rights move ment is widely recognized to 
be inadequate to today's challenges. 
 
Means of Struggle  
That changes are required does not necessarily mean  that nonviolent means of 
struggle are likely to be abandoned. Those means of  struggle have always been 
complex and varied, and may prove to be adaptable t o the new situation. 
There is no sign that the riots of recent years hav e killed nonviolent action in 
the way that the 1943 riots killed A. Philip Randol ph's proposed campaign; the 
riots have, however, undeniably weakened the nonvio lent movement and 
diminished its effectiveness. 
The attitude of civil rights leaders to nonviolence  has always been more 
complex than day-to-day slogans and easy generaliza tions would suggest. 
Although Martin Luther King opposed the use of viol ence in politics generally, 
and although he opposed it strongly and eloquently in the struggle for civil 
rights, his was not an absolute ethical rejection o f violence for all 
circumstances. He did slowly move towards the latte r position, but his 
rejection of violence was never complete. King did not call on Negroes to 
renounce their right to defend their homes with wea pons.10  And he recognized 
that sometimes the threat of violence in the backgr ound may have contributed 
to winning concessions from opponents. As he wrote:  "It cannot be taken for 
granted that Negroes will adhere to nonviolence und er any and all conditions. . NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 99  . . Southern segregationists in many places yielded  to it because they realized 
that the alternatives could be intolerable."11  
The use of nonviolent action could be, and often wa s, justified on pragmatic 
grounds: the Negroes would have to live tomorrow wi th the opponents they 
fought today; violence was more likely than nonviol ence to reinforce the unity, 
determination, and inhumanity of white supremacists ; while nonviolent action 
had a serious chance of undermining white unity, of  inducing sympathetic 
federal action, and of making continued segregation  costly or even impossible 
by means of weapons such as economic boycotts and p ersistent defiance of 
offensive orders and regulations. Although much emp hasis was placed on 
'nonviolence' as an ethical idea, these more mundan e considerations influenced 
the movement greatly. 
This was not always clear, however, in the public s tatements of civil rights 
leaders. Although from its inception the nonviolent  movement had conducted 
coercive campaigns of non-cooperation and nonviolen t intervention, such as 
economic boycotts and obstructions of segregated bu sinesses, King himself 
frequently referred to the civil rights actions he launched as 'protests' or 
'protest movements'—terms which implied action of a  far more limited 
character than that which was actually undertaken.12  King's emphasis on 'love' 
was similarly liable to cause misunderstanding abou t the nature of nonviolent 
action. He often suggested that it was necessary to  love one's opponents—even 
those opponents who were most rigid in their suppor t of white supremacy. For 
many, especially perhaps those less deeply committe d to Christianity than King, 
this was difficult to take. A consistent stream of brutal white racist actions, 
such as the assassination of the Mississippi NAACP leader, Medgar Evers, in 1963 
and the killing of four Negro children in a church bombing in Birmingham in the 
same year, made it hard to love. Those who could no t accept King's injunction 
to love may at the same time, by a natural enough a ssociation of ideas, have 
rejected nonviolence as well. But that nonviolent a ction did not, in fact, 
depend only on the moral force of 'protest' or 'lov e' was clearly demonstrated in 
many phases of the civil rights movement. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 100  The campaign in Birmingham in 1963 best illustrates  the complexity of the 
methods employed by the civil rights movement. This  campaign was 
dramatically etched on the public mind by mass demo nstrations which were 
unique in the civil rights struggle in that they in volved the first mass defiance 
of court orders, and the first participation of sch oolchildren on a mass scale.13  
The picture of fire hoses and police dogs being use d on nonviolent 
demonstrators were powerful propaganda for the caus e of civil rights. (Indeed, 
one may wonder whether the demonstrators could have  been so courageous, or 
maintained their nonviolent discipline, had it not been for the comforting 
presence of press photographers and television men. ) 
The demonstrations in Birmingham, simply because of  their scale, had a 
coercive element. It became clear to some whites th at even if mass arrests 
continued it would be impossible to go on indefinit ely suppressing Negro 
demands. The way in which a Negro march in Birmingh am on 7 May 1963 
produced this effect on a council of white business men during negotiations with 
civil rights leaders has been described by King in Why We Can't Wait ?14  Equally 
important was the effect of the marches on the forc es of law and order. There 
was a celebrated incident on 5 May 1963 when the Co mmissioner of Public 
Safety, 'Bull' Connor, did as he had so often done before and ordered out dogs 
and fire hoses against Negroes trying to hold a mar ch and prayer meeting. 
Connor ordered his men to turn on their fire hoses,  but he was ignored by them 
and the march was allowed to proceed.15  Thus without converting- Connor, the 
Birmingham marchers had subtly undermined the power  of segregation. 
But behind the conspicuous demonstrations was anoth er equally important 
tactic—economic boycott. In planning the Birmingham  campaign, King and his 
advisers had early decided to focus on the business  community, "for we knew 
that the Negro population had sufficient buying pow er so that its withdrawal 
could make the difference between profit and loss f or many businesses".16  The 
original Montgomery boycott of 1955-56 had a powerf ul economic impact, as 
had subsequent campaigns against discriminatory emp loyment practices in 
Montgomery and other cities.17  The effect of such boycotts was reinforced by a NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 101  sharp decline in the outside investments so badly n eeded in the South: 
prolonged racial crises in a city—as in Little Rock  in 1957—tended to discourage 
outside investors.18  As with Gandhi's campaigns in India, the un-dramat ic force 
of economic boycott complemented more conspicuous a ctivities. 
Nonviolent methods of struggle were particularly we ll suited to attacking 
blatant indignities, and to undermining the discrim inatory policies of particular 
businesses. Increasingly, however, the Negro revolt  is entering territory where 
racialism is harder to oppose. A segregated city is  harder to integrate than a 
segregated lunch counter; white economic superiorit y is harder to undermine 
than some of the overt manifestations of white supr emacy. It is not surprising 
that, as Negro aspirations have risen and the deepl y entrenched economic 
superiority of whites remains unaltered, many Negro es have turned from 
nonviolent methods to demonstrations of militant de spair in the form of riots. 
Race riots are nothing new in the U.S., as the even ts of 1919 and 1943 show. It 
is probably too simple to see the current wave of r iots merely as the 
consequence of pent-up feelings of rage and despair  at the humiliations which 
nonviolent campaigners have suffered, especially as  riots have tended to occur 
more in cities where the nonviolent civil rights mo vement never secured a very 
firm base. In the search for explanations for the r iots the organizational 
weaknesses of the civil rights movement deserve exa mination as a possible 
contributory factor. 
 
Organization and Leadership  
Like most political activities, nonviolent resistan ce requires a degree of unified 
organization and leadership if it is to be effectiv e and sustained. It is significant 
that in Montgomery and many other southern cities i t was the Baptist churches, 
with their strong following and peculiarly autonomo us and independent 
structure, which provided the necessary basis for r esistance. But in the matter 
of organization and leadership the local and accide ntal beginning of the civil 
rights movement may in the long run have been a sou rce of weakness. There 
were plenty of older national organizations, such a s NAACP (National NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 102  Association for the Advancement of Coloured People) , CORE (Congress of Racial 
Equality), and the Urban League, which could only w ith difficulty overcome the 
reserve they felt in 1956 about a young Baptist pas tor in Montgomery, Dr Martin 
Luther King, suddenly becoming a national symbol. E ach organization had its 
own history and its own political emphasis, and for  this reason the civil rights 
movement never had a unified organizational base co mparable to Congress in 
the Indian independence movement. In some actions, such as the 1963 March 
on Washington, the various bodies were able to comb ine effectively: but they 
never succeeded in submerging their individual iden tities in any permanent 
unified body. 
King himself helped to form yet another organizatio n in 1957—the Southern 
Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). Its very na me indicated its somewhat 
limited character—partly because of the emphasis of  Christianity (its original 
call to battle, issued in February 1957, called upo n Negroes to "accept Christian 
love in full knowledge of its power to defy evil") and also because of the use of 
the word 'Southern', which reflected a deliberate d ecision on King's part to be a  
Southern  Negro leader. In his last few years he changed his  emphasis, however, 
and worked more in the North, particularly in Chica go. But his remark shortly 
before his assassination, "Don't say nonviolence ha s failed in the North; it hasn't 
really been tried there", was to some extent a crit icism of himself and of his 
organization. 
King's origins weakened his claims to national lead ership not merely because 
they were Southern, but also because they were so i ntensely local. If the 
Montgomery boycott could produce a King, could not other campaigns produce 
other leaders by a similar process of national sele ction? As Louis Lomax has put 
it; "Local leaders in various (Southern) towns saw themselves as potential 
Martin Luther Kings, and they did not want his orga nization moving into their 
parishes to capture the power and the glory that ca me with a successful 
desegregation move. What these men  did  want, and still demand, was Martin 
Luther King, their symbolic leader. . . ,"19  NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 103  The disparate character of the civil rights movemen t was at times its strength. 
It was by a purely local and spontaneous action in Greensboro, North Carolina, 
as unexpected as Mrs Parks' action in Montgomery, t hat the great wave of sit-
ins in 1960 began. The 1961 Freedom Rides—a dramati c means of opposing bus 
segregation better suited than boycotts to the inte r-state routes—were initiated 
by CORE, not by King. But the divided character of the civil rights movement 
probably added to the already great problems of mai ntaining nonviolent 
discipline and overall control. It made it easier f or new leaders to emerge who 
first advocated slogans somewhat suggestive of viol ence (such as 'Black Power') 
and then advocated violence itself. 
The personal courage and powerful speeches of Marti n Luther King did much to 
hold this movement together. He and some of the oth er civil rights leaders 
often gave the impression of being overworked firef ighters, rushing from one 
crisis they had not created to another, and only oc casionally having the 
opportunity to plan their campaigns in a coordinate d way. But King, through his 
extraordinary force of character, did impress a com mon character on this 
diverse and disorganized movement, despite its stro ng centrifugal tendencies. 
It was natural that a leader so prominent as King s hould be criticized. The 
grounds on which he was most commonly criticized we re ones which arose 
indirectly from the organizational weaknesses of th e movement. He was 
frequently attacked for having come out of jail on bond in Albany, Georgia, in 
December 1961, after having previously invited othe rs to come in and spend 
Christmas with him;20  and also for not personally leading actions in Bir mingham 
in 1963, and for coming out of jail as a leader who  could coordinate action and 
hold the movement together. This was perhaps an ine vitable consequence of 
the organizational problems of the civil rights mov ement. 
 
After King  
As his  Chaos or Community?  makes clear, in his last years King recognized mor e 
and more that a national organization was needed; a nd that the movement 
would have to change its character, fighting increa singly for economic justice NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 104  as well as dignity. To King, this meant a national campaign to demand federal 
programmes on a scale hitherto undreamed of, compar able to that of the 
Vietnam war which he so strongly opposed. He stress ed particularly the 
importance of greater expenditure on Negro educatio n, and a guaranteed 
minimum wage for the poor. 
The Poor People's Campaign, advance contingents of which reached Washington 
by mid-may, is a sign of the changed direction of c ampaigning. Originally 
planned by King, and now led by the Reverend Ralph Abernathy, King's 
successor as head of SCLC, it is based on the deman d for a guaranteed 
minimum wage. It is also a desperate attempt to reg ain the initiative for 
nonviolent forms of action. Since the Poor People's  Campaign has taken the 
form of a lobby—albeit an unusual one—much will dep end on the reaction of 
President and Congress. As yet, the campaign shows few signs of being 
effective, and it is hard to be optimistic about th e reaction to it, not only 
because of the expenditure on, and preoccupation wi th, Vietnam but also 
because of the continuing inertia of Congress. 
The 1968 Civil Rights Act, passed through Congress in the week following the 
King assassination, is hardly a guarantee of a new spirit in Congress. It deals 
with a particularly important aspect of the race pr oblem: housing. But those 
sceptical Negroes who called the 1964 Civil Rights Act a 'rubber cheque' which 
could not be cashed can perhaps make the same criti cism of the latest Bill with 
greater justification. Although racial discriminati on in the sale, rental, or 
advertising of most dwelling will now be prohibited , such provisions are 
extraordinarily hard to enforce, and they may indee d prove largely meaningless 
in the absence of direct federal financial support of house-purchasers, and 
direct federal action to abolish slums. That the 19 68 Civil Rights Act contains 
new anti-riot provisions', will only confirm the wi despread view that it is the 
product of bargaining in Congress and is no sign of  a genuine, overriding 
determination to attack injustice. 
King's assassination has brought together the leade rs of the nonviolent 
movement, who have repeatedly said that if their la test efforts— particularly NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 105  the Poor People's Campaign—do not produce results, America will have lost her 
last chance for a nonviolent solution. It is signif icant that Mr Bayard Rustin, 
who broke with King over the latter's involvement o f the civil rights movement 
in the issue of opposition to the Vietnam war, has been very active in the Poor 
People's Campaign and is organizing the National Da y of Support, which will 
involve demonstrations in Washington on 19 June. He  is one of the many very 
able leaders of the nonviolent moment who have take n on so large a respon-
sibility at so difficult a time. It remains to be s een whether they can proceed 
beyond the present activities in Washington, and sh ape the movement into a 
coherent pattern—both in terms of organization and action. 
 
1. According to a 1968 report of the U.S. Civil Rights  Commission, in the eleven 
southern states, a total of 2,800,000 Negroes, over  57 per cent of the Negro 
population of voting age, are now registered to vot e,—The Times,  London, 13 May 
1968. 
2. Lerone Bennett,  What Manner of Man: A Biography of Martin Luther K ing, (London, 
Allen and Unwin, 1966), p. 73. This is more up to d ate than the biography of King by 
L.D. Reddick. 
3. Martin Luther King,  Chaos or Community?  (London, Hodder and Stoughton, 1968), p. 
62. 
4. See King,  Why We Can't Wait?  (New York, New American Library, 1964), p. 146; an d  
Chaos or Community?  pp. 34 and 88. 
5. See article by Professor Louis Litwack, quoted in J ames Peck,  Freedom Ride  (New 
York, Grove Press, 1962), p. 14. On nineteenth-cent ury Negro resistance to 
segregation, see also Alan F. Westin (ed.),  Freedom Now: The Civil Rights Struggle in 
America  (New York, Basic Books, 1964), pp. 61-78. 
6. Reinhold Niebuhr,  Moral Man and Immoral Society  (London, SCM Press, 1963), pp. 
252-4. 
7. D.G. Tendulkar,  Mahatma: Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi  (Delhi, Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting, Publications Division , 1960-63), vol. 4 p. 51. 
8. What Manner of Man.  op. cit., p. 73. 
9. Martin Luther King described the bus boycott in his  Stride Toward Freedom: The 
Montgomery Story  (New York, Ballantine Books, 1958). NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 106  10. See  Chaos or Community?  pp. 27 and 55. In 1957 King himself applied for a gun 
permit after his home had been bombed; but he event ually thought better of it. 
11. Ibid.,  p. 21. 
12. For examples of King's use of the word 'protest', s ee  Why We Can't Wait?  p. 51; and  
Chaos or Community?  pp. 55 and 58. 
13. For a sympathetic psychiatrist's discussion of the role of children in the civii rights 
movement, see Robert Coles, 'The Strength of the Ch ild', New Society , London, 23 
May 1968. 
14. Op. cit., pp. 104-5. 
15. Ibid., p. 101. 
16. Ibid., p. 54. 
17. Chaos or Community? p. 145. 
18. This also happened in Knoxville, Tennessee, in 1960 . For an account of events there, 
see Merrill Proudfoot.  Diary of a Sit-in  (Chapel Hill. North Carolina U.P., 1962), pp. 
185-6. His book contains an excellent discussion of  the methods used by the civil 
rights movement. 
19. Louis E. Lomax,  The Negro Revolt  (New York, New American Library, 1963), p. 110. 
Lomax's book contains a penetrating assessment of K ing's leadership. 
20. Ibid., p. 110. 
21. The latest news, which comes as  Gandhi Marg  goes to press, is that Mr Bayard Rustin 
has now resigned as co-ordinator of the National Da y of Support for the Poor People's 
campaign. This resignation followe on mounting evid ence that this campaign has 
been poorly organised, and that it is not based on a clear conception of how it is 
supposed to achieve results. The confusion, coming at this time, is a poor omen for 
the future of nonviolent action in the American rac ial conflict. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 107   
CHARLES C. WALKER 
MARTIN LUTHER KING  was a shaper rather than a maker of events.1 
At the beginning of the Montgomery bus boycott, he was a recent seminary 
graduate with fairly conventional ideas of social a ction. He knew of nonviolence 
and Gandhi; he had been involved in protest episode s; he had a deep sense of 
mission; nevertheless, he was settling into a churc h pastorate, and had 
declined an invitation to head the local branch of the National Association for 
the Advancement of Coloured People (NAACP) because it would take up too 
much time. 
He was thrust into the leadership of the bus protes t but, once immersed in it, 
sensed its potential greatness. It was truly a corp orate effort and powerful 
voices, worthy of the tradition of Southern Baptist  preaching, portrayed its 
meaning in vivid exploits of oratory. None surpasse d King in grasping and 
voicing the universal themes, and evoking responses  of "the better angels of our 
nature". 
At an early mass meeting in that city, I heard him say: "What is happening 
today in Montgomery is much bigger than Montgomery.  It is as big as the cause 
of freedom itself. It is a struggle of black people , but for more than black 
people. It is a struggle for human dignity everywhe re." 
The first day's boycott exceeded his expectations a nd within weeks became a 
national drama. Many leaders would panic before suc h a prospect, fearing the 
unforeseen power of a mass movement. King embraced it. In test after test—
handling organizational crises or personal harassme nt or the press or 
confrontations with the city—he came through with a mazingly few tactical 
mistakes and with impressive gains. 
The Montgomery experience seems to have defined his  characteristic leadership 
pattern. Its most significant feature was this: the  community made the 
movement. It was collective leadership at its best.  The mass media sought out 
King, but he pointed to his co-workers and to the p eople walking the hot NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 108  streets and dusty roads. This was no act of phony h umility. Montgomery was a 
participatory movement. 
A new ritual evolved: the twice-a-week mass meeting s held in various churches. 
Of these, Murray Kempton, one of the first and best  reporters to sense the 
unfolding drama, writes: "Those nights he never tal ked to us but only to them, 
working the old ritual of his affirmation and their  response; he did not speak 
for them but with them: if we wanted to listen to h im, we had to listen to them 
too; they accompanied him into history."2 
Nonviolence was an emerging feature. When King's ho use was bombed, he 
delivered his crucial 'sermon on the porch' where h e appealed for calm and non-
retaliation, and the angry crowd melted away. This event stamped the seal of 
authentic nonviolence on the movement. Even then he  tried to get a gun 
permit but was denied it. As the leaders and the pe ople discovered in new and 
unexpected ways the power of nonviolence, it caught  hold of them. King among 
others, but most effectively, evoked from Negro lor e—history, songs, daily 
experience— imagery and examples that plumbed the d epths of memory and 
aspiration. 
The motifs were far from new. He spoke not only out  of Negro life and feeling; 
he enunciated American themes and invoked American heroes; he gave new 
meaning to Biblical story, and affirmed values deep  in Judaeo-Christian and 
Western culture. Few of his allusions were Asian or  Eastern. While he echoed 
universal themes, he was a black, American Christia n. 
In spite of his fame, he was still for some time co nsidered a sectional rather 
than a national leader. The traditional organizatio ns of protest were somewhat 
apprehensive about this burgeoning movement in the South, wondering whether 
it would become ally or rival. Civil disobedience w as also a thorny issue. The 
NAACP had won notable legal victories and had consi derable stake in its legal 
strategy. When at a San Francisco NAACP conference King called upon Negroes 
to fill up the jailhouses of the South, legal exper t Thurgood Marshall (now a 
Supreme Court justice) stalked out of the meeting. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 109  From the beginning King did not wish to precipitate  a North-South battle, and 
in this he was encouraged by those strategists who saw the possibilities of 
reorienting national leadership without splintering  /Or confrontations. For 
example, King took out a 'life membership' in NAACP  and helped raise money. In 
1957 he decided to remain a Southern leader; when h e left Montgomery it was 
to move to Atlanta.3 
His appearance on the national scene came in three ways. One was mass media 
which gave him terrific exposure. This in turn made  him the most sought-after 
speaker in America. These speeches not only publici zed the movement, they 
also raised substantial sums of money. The third pa th was a series of 
demonstrations in Washington initiated by Bayard Ru stin, the first of which was 
the Prayer Pilgrimage For Freedom. The impetus for these came from the needs 
of the Southern struggle, and the recognition that it merited national support. 
King undertook some sorties into direct action and organizational campaigns, 
but they were of modest accomplishment. He was arre sted and jailed in 
Montgomery, stabbed in Harlem by a black woman, but  was feted in Ghana and 
received warmly in India. 
The next breakthrough came with the student-led sit -ins beginning in February, 
1960. What had begun in Montgomery now took on a ma ss character. Soon 
thousands were in jail and a hundred thousand in th e streets. In quick 
succession came the commando-style Freedom Rides in to the deep South; the 
difficult campaign in Albani, Georgia; and the cruc ial struggle in Birmingham, 
Alabama. The culmination of these efforts was the g iant March on Washington 
in 1963 and King's climactic speech, "I Have A Drea m". Public opinion polls 
showed repeatedly that King had a preeminent hold o n the loyalty and imagina-
tion of Negro people. His base was still Southern b ut his role truly national. 
It couldn't last. Historic changes were in the maki ng and black consciousness 
was intensifying. Nevertheless, the structure of Am erican economic and social 
life set limits. The Civil Rights Bill of 1963 had been passed, but the basic 
conditions of Negro life changed only marginally. J obs, housing, schools, ghetto 
life generally—the modest gain in these areas were no match for the rising NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 110  expectations and the more strident demands. Inevita bly the strains upon 
collective leadership grew severe. 
New directions in the Student Nonviolent Coordinati ng Committee crystallized 
in May 1966, when Stokely Carmichael replaced John Lewis as chairman.4 Floyd 
McKissick replaced James Farmer as National Directo r of the Congress of Racial 
Equality and announced: "Nonviolence is a dying phi losophy". After James 
Meredith was shot and wounded in June 1966, the Mar ch was carried on by 
King, Carmichael and McKissick. While King drew the  most fervent responses 
from the crowds at the meetings, it was the new cry  of Black Power enunciated 
by Carmichael and McKissick which came through as a  protest of the new 
period. 
In this new configuration of leadership, King was o ne among others and no 
longer the unrivalled rallying point. However, his hold on the black masses was 
still formidable. 
A major feature of his leadership in this period wa s his constant opening 
towards the militants rather than turning from them . He refused to attack them 
by name though he criticized aspects of their claim s, and repeatedly 
emphasized it is the conditions which must change. Had he sought a centrist 
position, with militancy on the increase, fragmenta tion would have engulfed 
the movement. As his death later revealed, he embod ied a peculiar significance 
even for the young militants for whom he was a hero  in their adolescence or 
early organization years. Though they criticized an d even ridiculed him, they 
honoured him for bearing the scars of the struggle,  quite literally. 
The widest gulf was between him and the young of th e ghetto growing up in 
greater alienation and desperation, for whom King w as only a 'big name' from 
that vaguely sensed region called 'the organization  scene'. 
Many white people saw King as an alternative to the  more militant and 
violence-prone black leaders. For a time, King hims elf seemed willing to play 
that role, saying that unless he could win victorie s and concessions the result 
might be ominous. While there was truth in that ass ertion, it tended to play NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 111  into the hands of those who wished to promote disse nsion in the ranks of black 
leaders and enervate the movement. 
The Southern Christian Leadership Conference, King' s organizational base, 
moved into Chicago to test its organizational appro ach in a major northern city, 
ft seemed to have achieved some victories after a s trife-ridden summer, but 
these could not be sustained in face of a crafty po litico like Mayor Daley. While 
"accepting goals in principle" he succeeded in prev enting their implementation. 
Exaggerated hopes had been raised about what could be accomplished by direct 
action. Chicago was viewed by some as a disappointm ent, by others as a 
strategic disaster. The modest gains were indirect.  The theoretical and 
strategic concepts which had grown out of a Souther n culture and a religious 
milieu of the black Southern churches could not sus tain an assault on the 
entrenched exploitative institutions of a northern city. 
In the fall of 1967 King announced a campaign of mi litant nonviolence and 
possible civil disobedience in the nation's capital , to be held in the Spring of 
1968. This he saw as a way to absorb and put to goo d use the constructive 
energies that might otherwise produce smoking ruins  in America's cities. It was 
also viewed as a natural next step in the organizat ional development of some of 
the nonviolent forces. It was called the Poor Peopl e's Campaign. 
When Stokely Carmichael returned from his much-publ icized tour abroad, he 
settled down in Washington and launched a new drive  for 'black unity'. 
Whatever the strategic intent, one effect was to mu te criticism of black 
leaders, including King. The two men had a long con versation, during which 
Carmichael agreed not to interfere with the Washing ton campaign even if he 
might not help it. 
Then came the shock of the assassination. Despite t he effusive and sometimes 
phony outpourings of feeling accompanying this" tra gedy, apparently the shock 
was deeply felt. It is indeed possible, to use anot her phrase of Murray Kempton, 
that a healing has begun. Nonviolence is once again  on the lips of many and is 
not the 'dirty word' it was only months ago. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 112  The Poor People's Campaign is under way at the time  of this writing. One 
achievement can already be seen: the reversal, even  if momentarily, of the 
polarization and fragmentation process within the b lack community, and 
between black and white groups in communities acros s the land. While its 
demands are not likely to produce much action out o f official Washington, even 
when they are made more specific, this campaign is likely to become a 
significant organizational thrust for the black lib eration movement. 
King saw his work as inextricably related to more t han the race problem. It was 
bound up with the fate of the anti-war movement, th e labour movement, and 
other efforts for social change. Underlying all the se are fundamental questions 
of how men can live worthily in a complex and inter dependent community. 
Those concerns were not new with him, though he gav e them more attention in 
later years, and the Nobel Peace Prize indicated th at fact. 
Ignazio Silone writes: "A society is renewed when i ts humblest element acquires 
a value". King helped that happen in America, and i n the course of that mission 
once more proved the mettle of nonviolence as a for ce for human betterment. 
The major contribution of nonviolence in the Southe rn struggle was to enable 
black people to act in new ways no longer immobiliz ed by their fears of the 
white man nor of themselves. A great new flowering of energies resulted, and 
made possible more wide-ranging efforts to change A merican life. 
No one leader can assume his mantle. As in Montgome ry in the early days of 
1955, the task now belongs to a collective leadersh ip who might again be thrust 
into a role beyond their imagining. 
 
1. A phrase of Lerone Bennett, Jr., in What Manner of Man, Johnson Publishing Co., 
1964. 
2. Spectator, April 19, 1958. 
3. Bennett, op. cit., pp. 82-83. 
4. Jack Newfield in The Prophetic Minority, Chapter 5,  New American Library, 1966. 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 113   
MARIE E. BYLES 
IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE ASSASSINATION  of Martin Luther King, an Australian 
newspaper published an article saying that the deat h of the great leader would 
probably be followed by the stepping up of the war on poverty and other much 
needed reforms; it ended by asking, "But will this lead to amity between Blacks 
and Whites?" The answer was a decided negative. The  Negroes might win but 
the hatred would be as bad as or worse than ever. 
In India victory left no bitterness behind. Instead  it left that amity so deeply 
needed in U.S.A. In 1954 I found that holding a Bri tish passport was a passport 
to kindness, and that especially the young men woul d come to me and call me 
'mother' and do everything they could to help. What  was there in Gandhi's 
methods that brought this to pass? What was there a bout this law of love which 
he seemed to know intuitively and apply in his deal ings, so that victory left only 
loving kindness behind it? 
The much abused term 'love' is used in respect of a ll forces which draw 
together. It includes everything from blind sexual passion to sublime 
compassion and selflessness, and has even been desc ribed as that which "holds 
the sun and other stars". The more we know of any l aw of nature the more it 
seems to expand, even as the more we know of the un iverse the larger it seems 
to become. The law of love is the same. In Old Test ament times it was found it 
could not work if there was blind retaliation; ther e must be strict justice, "an 
eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth". The Buddha  found that "not by hatreds 
are hatreds calmed but only by non-hatreds". Theref ore both he and Christ 
after him realised that this law could not work smo othly unless one had loving- 
kindness even towards those who injured or tried to  kill one. 
It was at this stage that Gandhi came on the scene and found further 
requirements necessary for the working of this law of love. 
Just before Martin Luther King's murder I read his article in  Gandhi Marg,  and 
laid it down very sadly saying to myself, "Gandhi w ould never have written in NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 114  that way". The article inculcated nonviolence, but it did not make for 
friendliness as Gandhi's articles did. Gandhi devot ed his life to bringing 
opponents together and breeding loving- kindness be tween them. He was 
always ready to take the blame on his own shoulders  or lay it upon his 
countrymen, and to exonerate his opponents even whi le he fought them or the 
system they had imposed. He said the British were h is friends and that he 
wanted to help them as much as he wanted to help th e Indians. When there 
were riots which negated his gospel of nonviolence,  he would look to see where 
his own teaching had failed, and would fast to puri fy his own mind. He insisted 
upon the confession of his countrymen's riots befor e he turned to condemn the 
far worse atrocity of Amritsar. He stirred up the m uddy waters of 
untouchability when his followers thought he was th ereby betraying the cause 
of home rule. Indeed he was often blamed for inculc ating self-reform first of 
all. 
I am English-born myself, and though I should now d islike to live in that country 
I still cherish the absurd and irrational love for the land of my fathers that 
doubtless Indians cherish for theirs. We know that all men are brothers and that 
sort of thing, but we still do not like it when peo ple say unkind things about the 
land that gave us birth. It is a strange sensitivit y, but there it is and we have to 
accept it. In all the years I read what Gandhi wrot e or is reported to have said, 
I never found the slightest dislike of or unfairnes s towards my people, nothing 
that stirred that irrational love and wish to defen d my motherland. I never read 
anything that would have caused anyone to dislike t he conquering race. Yet 
Gandhi worked incessantly to overthrow its dominati on. He worked for reform 
as strenuously as he worked for amity. This was oft en not so with regard to his 
disciples whose books I have sometimes put down wit h a feeling that the writer 
was not fair and did not like us. 
It was similarly that I put down that article by Ma rtin Luther King. I could not 
dispute his facts but I missed Gandhi's note of lov ing kindness and self-blame, 
which removed the sting from words just as factuall y dependable, and bred 
amity and never dislike of the opponent. For the sa ke of argument let us agree NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 115  to what is often contended that the Negroes have su ffered more at the hands 
of the overlords than did the Indians and that they  have no Lord and Lady 
Mountbatten to help. None the less the problem rema ins the same, the need 
for love and understanding by the oppressed people for those who oppress 
them. 
Martin Luther King ceaselessly urged his followers to love their enemies, and 
one of his books he called 'Strength to Love'. But we cannot love our enemies 
because Christ or Martin Luther King tells us to do  so, more especially when our 
leader points out all their vileness and ill-treatm ent of us. That is the problem. 
How are we to learn to love our enemies despite the ir vileness and ill-
treatment? We cannot work for reform unless we admi t the truthfulness of the 
wrongs done to us. What then are we to do to breed amity? Gandhi set the 
example by his intuitive understanding. But he did not make the means  
explicit.  
So far as T know the Japanese teacher, Tenko San, w ho died only this year, is 
the first to have made  explicit  the solution of how to make friends with our 
enemies.1 
He tells how he searched for the source of all the evils of the world, and found 
that it lay within his own heart, that it was his o wn heart that must be purified, 
and that the way to its purification was by humble selfless service to others, 
rich and poor alike. This is the truth hidden behin d the stories of the great 
saviours of the world who suffer or die to save oth ers. They take upon 
themselves the burden of others' evil. Shiva drank the poison of the evil of the 
world, and bears the dark stain of it at his throat  for ever after. Christ was 
crucified and thereby bore the sins of the world an d saved mankind from the 
result. Our trouble has been that we have left the sacrifice to the saviours 
instead of performing it ourselves by seeing that t he evil (as well as the good, 
of course) is within our own hearts. And we must st art with our personal 
relationships by seeing this evil within and being ready always to take the 
blame for it ourselves. Then and not until then are  we ready to remedy the evil 
that is done to our whole race. Tenko San told me t hat in the case of any NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 116  disagreement if only one party admits the fault as his, the discord will be 
healed. This cannot be tested by mental argument; i t must be tried in actual 
practice, and when it is tried it will be found to work. But what if the fault is 
not  ours. The answer is that it always  is  our fault. As Aldous Huxley has pointed 
out, our own opinion is always wrong because it is  ours. The egotistical belief is 
itself evil, for it is opposed to the great Oneness . But in fact one can always 
find the fault within oneself if one only looks wit hin truthfully. 
When I was staying with Tenko San's community of It toen in Japan I heard the 
story of how two of its members started a wayside s helter for people down-
and-out, due to the Depression, and often contempla ting suicide on the 
convenient nearby curved railway line. Such people were offered two meals 
and shelter for the night, and the opportunity of j oining the little community in 
collecting rags and scraps of food and thereby comm encing a new life. Among 
those who came was a former criminal. One of the le aders asked him to enlarge 
an oven he had built. He refused, got angry and tri ed to kill the leader. The 
other members of the community did not blame the cr iminal; instead they 
fasted to purify their own minds and prayed to lear n where they themselves 
had failed. In a day or so the criminal left of his  own accord, but left in 
friendliness and wrote to them several times afterw ards. 
To admit that evil lies within our own hearts does not preclude us from working 
for reform. It did not preclude Gandhi. But it make s it possible to place 
ourselves in the position of the opponent, to under stand his point of view 
because we now see the same evil tendencies in ours elves, and know that in 
similar circumstances we should have done the same ourselves. In  The 
Discovery of India  Nehru, speaking of the time Indians conquered othe r lands, 
remarks that they probably behaved just as badly as  conquerors always do. Our 
own natures are not superior, and we cannot work di spassionately and with 
love for the enemy unless we recognize this. 
It is not utterly heartless to say that this aspect  of the law of love applies to 
Negroes also, perhaps the most abused of all people  and homeless in a land 
that is their only home. But all laws of nature are  inexorable, and the law of NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 117  love is a law of nature. The collision which result ed in many deaths may have 
been caused by one motor rushing to help an injured  person and another 
rushing to put out a fire. The noblest of motives c annot prevent the deaths of 
the occupants. 
To understand is to forgive and love even though we  are simultaneously working 
for reform. But the tendency is always to blame the  opponent and the 
opponent only and to forget that "there but for the  grace of God go I". 
Why? Why do we have this blindness. Psychiatrist Ka rl Jung points out that we 
are told to love our enemies, but that our worst en emy is within ourselves, our 
shadow side, and that it is this that we must first  of all understand, forgive and 
love, and this is most difficult to do, for we like  to turn a pleasant face to the 
world. It is for this reason that we transfer the e vil from ourselves and fix it 
upon the opponent, whether personal or national. As  long as we do this then no 
matter how just our cause there cannot be amity. A retiring judge recently 
remarked that in his experience every person at one  time or another had been 
guilty of wanting to murder another. How difficult to admit this, and yet unless 
we do the law of love cannot operate unimpeded. Gan dhi knew this by intuition 
and applied it. Tenko San made it explicit, and mad e it the basis of his 
teaching. 
Both Gandhi and Martin Luther King saw that we must  be prepared to suffer 
ourselves without inflicting suffering on the oppon ent, but self-suffering alone 
without the admission of evil in ourselves may very  well only have the effect of 
increasing outwardly the latent sadism in the enemy . 
As I have said it is not intellectually that we can  prove this aspect of the law of 
love. All that the intellect can do is to predispos e us to understand. The only 
proof comes from successfully applying it in actual  practice. Perhaps I am 
fortunate that something under two years ago I rece ived a very serious injury 
and broken skull; I think this may have temporarily  numbed some upper brain 
centres which usually exercise fair control; I do n ot know; but I do know that to 
my unutterable horror I found myself hating, actual ly hating the good nurses in 
hospital, and later on frantically indignant with t hose who had been kind to NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 118  me. It was a frightful discovery that these evil fe elings were within me. 
Probably it was an intellectual appreciation of Gan dhi and Jung which soon 
made me see these feelings as the shadow side that must be loved and forgiven 
and see also the large part that is played by self- pity which undermines virtue 
sooner than anything. But it was months before that  shadow side was really 
forgiven. 
Tenko San has shown this expansion of the working o f the law of love by 
showing the necessity for taking the blame for ever ything ourselves. Whether 
our work is then to assist reforms in a practical m anner is a matter of our 
dharma, our job in life. It may or it may not be. B ut without this basic 
shouldering of the blame and by humble service to e xpiate what are our own 
evils, our dharma cannot be well performed. 
What makes the Negro struggle so terribly tragic is  that there seems no hope of 
the victory leading to amity. The expansion of the understanding of this law of 
love is not found in the writings of its great Chri stian leader. And yet, second to 
Gandhi, Martin Luther King remains the greatest lea der of nonviolence that the 
world has seen. Mankind does not leap ahead in meas ured bounds, but in ups 
and downs and much suffering. And it learns slowly.  Further, progress is less 
perceptible still when we, who write, write from co mfortable surroundings, 
only in short spasms have known blind hatred of evi l, and done nothing to fight 
nonviolence for any major reform. Gandhi's work see ms to have departed from 
India and the future of true nonviolent warfare see ms very remote. But the 
achievements of the past do not really die; their s pirit lives on. "A thousand 
years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past." And it is possible to span 
with one's hand geological strata separated by abou t two hundred millions of 
years. The future is not rosy but who are we to des pair? 
 
1. A portion of Tenko San's writings have been transla ted by Makoto Ohashi in 
collaboration with the writer of this essay under t he title  A New Road to Ancient 
Truth,  now in the hands of the publishers, Allen and Unwi n, London. 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 119   
E. MARTIN SCHOTZ 
I WRITE AS AN AMERICAN STUDENT  who shares with millions of other Americans the 
great feeling of uneasiness and fear which shrouds the United States in 1968. 
The feeling stems from a recognition, sometimes vag ue, of the many massive 
problems which confront us. 
The immediate causes of the anxiety in the United S tates include the problems 
of racism; the deterioration in the standard of liv ing; the staggering increase in 
the power and influence of local police forces and federal military agencies; 
the war in Vietnam; and the emerging pattern of Ame rican political 
assassination. Most Americans are concerned to some  degree about all these 
problems. But perhaps it is the failure to see the intimate inter-relationships of 
these problems that prevents people from moving tow ard positive solutions. In 
fact, more often than not the people are enlisted i n efforts which only 
compound their problems. 
Martin Luther King's assassination has accentuated the anxiety, because King's 
life and death have a powerfully immediate relation  to the problems. By 
standing back to take stock of King, we may see mor e clearly the true nature of 
our problems and the general direction in which we must move in order to 
achieve positive solutions. 
Racial prejudice and discrimination between the whi te people and people of 
colour is one of the chief mechanisms through which  the division and 
oppression of the masses of Americans is perpetuate d. Racism presents itself in 
two interrelated forms—personal racism and institut ional racism. The personal 
emotions and acts of fear, hate, and distrust by wh ites against blacks is 
'personal' racism. By 'institutional' racism one me ans the establishing of and 
cooperation in perpetuating societal structures whi ch function to segregate 
people on the basis of race. In the United States, almost every institution 
incorporates such racism — neighbourhood associatio ns, school systems, 
businesses, unions, local, state, and federal gover nments. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 120  King's death generated in America a great outpourin g of feelings of sadness and 
verbal expressions which decried racial prejudice. This response was honest 
and was manifested by the vast majority of American s —black and white. For 
whites this was an expression of conscious rejectio n of 'personal' racism. 
However, one who denounces race prejudice is not ne cessarily ready actively to 
join the struggle against racial segregation and op pression. In fact, such a 
person is likely to persist for some time in suppor ting institutional racism. The 
reason for this apparent hypocrisy is that most Ame ricans do not understand 
the role of racism in their society, how important its maintenance is to the 
proper structure, and what its real cost is. 
The economically depressed position in which black Americans exist provides a 
source of cheap services for the white community. T hus black workers are used 
to buffer the effect on whites of America's highly exploitative and oppressive 
society. It is the white's acquiescence in this arr angement which leads him to 
fear and hate blacks and to cooperate in erecting r epressive police forces. In 
many areas of the United States poor whites who hav e little can at least enjoy 
the luxury of having some group more oppressed than  they. 
The price which the masses of Americans have to pay  for this arrangement is 
not cheap. Racial segregation has been one of the p rimary factors preventing 
the working people of America from identifying the economic and political 
forces which oppress them. Due to this blindness, A mericans permit their 
government to send thousands of their husbands and sons to die in the jungles 
of Vietnam in an attempt to maintain the colonial s ubjugation of the 
Vietnamese. This blindness convinces people that th ey have no choice but to 
live under the constant threat of nuclear war, no c hoice but to live under an 
ever expanding military-industrial state which swal lows the productive 
capacities of the society and shrinks from murderin g no one—be he Malcolm X 
or President Kennedy. America is today a society wi th miserable educational 
systems and totally inadequate health care. Million s live in crowded and 
polluted cities which are controlled by corrupt pol itical machines. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 121  As always, the conditions of today are producing fo rces determined to and 
capable of eventually ending the oppression. In the  white communities and 
universities students are criticizing and questioni ng all the basic tenets of the 
ruling philosophy. Among the people of colour there  is a growing awareness of 
the true nature of American power. The examples of the giant strides of the 
Chinese and Cuban peoples do not go unnoticed. In t he black communities 
there is a hardening conviction that change is impe rative and possible, and that 
any means necessary to produce progressive change i s justified. 
Martin Luther King was a significant contributor to  these emerging forces. He 
was able to mobilize large numbers of people, and i n so doing he gave them 
brief glimpses of the power that resides in masses of united people. This was 
the important meaning of such projects as the Montg omery, Alabama bus 
boycott and the Civil Rights March on Washington in  1963. Because he was 
deeply involved in the real problems of the society , he was able to evolve with 
the political developments. 
In the last three years the focus of the struggle b y black Americans for freedom 
has shifted from the rural to the urban centres. Th is shift necessitated a change 
in goals from the acquisition of civil rights to th e solution of the problems of 
ghetto living conditions and police violence. This change has been accompanied 
by the belief among many young black leaders that t here is a need for 
organizations in the ghettoes made up exclusively o f black people. These 
institutions are to serve two purposes. First, they  are to give blacks a greater 
personal feeling of self- esteem and ethnic pride i n order to combat feelings of 
inferiority. Second, these groups are to encourage whites to go back into their 
own communities and begin working to organize a mov ement with which the 
blacks might unite meaningfully at some time in the  future. These 
developments of necessity provoked disillusionment among many of the whites 
previously involved in the civil rights movement. M any whites were shocked to 
find their paternalistic attitudes toward blacks me t with scorn instead of 
thankful subservience. In this context King provide d a very useful service. By 
joining the anti-war movement and by organizing an integrated poor people's NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 122  march on Washington, he helped to maintain a link b etween blacks and whites 
at a time when full unity of the freedom struggle w as impossible. 
With all these obviously significant contributions,  King's achievements were 
limited. He based his political program on the powe r of nonviolent resistance, 
and the existence of American democracy, justice an d religious brotherhood. 
He appealed constantly to the federal government to  enact and enforce 
legislation for the realization of full civil right s and the elimination of poverty 
for all Americans. In doing so he appealed to the m en who represent the 
powerful interests which need and want racism and p overty. Thus it became 
impossible for him to help the American people focu s on the real enemy. 
Perhaps it was necessary for King to do this in ord er to demonstrate finally the 
illusory nature of American democracy and freedom. Because of King's 
accomplishments within the existing American struct ure and because of the 
failure of these accomplishments to bring real chan ge, more and more people 
are coming to the conclusion that only through a ma jor overturning of the 
power structure can the solutions to our problems b e achieved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 123   
H. S. TAKULIA 
HE WAS CHOSEN IN DECEMBER 1955  to head a small civic group in an Alabama town; 
when he died in  1968  he was the acknowledged leader of the Southern 
Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), not a big o rganization in terms of 
membership or finances, but his name and his work w ere known around the 
world. Martin Luther King Jr. symbolized the Negro American's deep 
commitment to his liberation. Though thirteen years  is a very small period in 
the life of a people, yet during no such span of ye ars since the emancipation 
proclamation by Lincoln has America witnessed such phenomenal developments 
in regard to Negro civil rights. 
King experimented with the use of nonviolent techni ques. But he was not the 
first to realize the potentialities of this method in the context of the Negro's 
struggle. In 1936 Gandhi had said that 'it may be t hrough the Negroes that the 
unadulterated message of nonviolence will be delive red to the world'. The 
Congress on Racial Equality (CORE) founded in the e arly forties had also 
organized some nonviolent protest demonstrations ag ainst injustice to the 
Negroes. 
Over the years King's flock grew in numbers but thi s made him only more 
humble. He contributed more than Booker T. Washingt on or W. E.B. DuBois, 
Marcus Garvey, Elijah Mohammed or anyone else to gi ving his people a feeling 
of self-respect. Even those who did not agree with him were proud that he was 
one of them. 
Leadership and greatness were virtually thrust upon  King. He is on record as 
saying that he was 'caught unawares' when his name was proposed, seconded 
and unanimously adopted for the office of the Presi dent of the Montgomery 
Improvement Association (MIA). Thereafter almost ev ery day he continued to 
receive the threatening calls which caused him so m uch anxiety that he even 
kept a gun with him for a few days. But he soon saw  the contradiction in the 
leader of a nonviolent movement carrying a gun. Als o he came to the 
realization that 'quality, and not longevity' was t he most important NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 124  consideration for judging the worth of an individua l. Since then he stopped 
worrying about himself or his family. In fact a few  hours before his death he 
said: "Like anybody I would like to live a long lif e; longevity has its grace. But I 
am not concerned about it now. I just want to do Go d's will. ..." 
Further, since the day he prepared his first addres s as the President of the MIA, 
he was concerned with the dilemma of how to strike "a balance between the 
militancy required to keep his people aroused to po sitive action and yet be 
moderate enough to keep their fervour within Christ ian bounds". More than a 
decade later, in the context of the rising black po wer movement he wrote: "I 
have to be militant enough to satisfy the militants , yet I have to keep discipline 
in the movement to satisfy white supporters and Neg ro moderates". Indeed his 
leadership of a number of freedom marches—such as t he Washington march, 
the Selma to Montgomery march, the Meredith march t hrough Mississippi, his 
proposed Poor People's Campaign in Washington—and h is experiments with 
nonviolent protest marches outside the South, parti cularly in Chicago, were a 
part of his efforts to keep up the required militan cy of his movement. 
Dr King's technique worked well in desegregating pu blic transport, lunch 
counters, movie theatres, restaurants, sports arena s, hotels, beaches, even 
churches and public schools. The initial spectacula r results surprised many 
outsiders and even the participants in the struggle . This gave an impression as 
if what Gandhi hoped for was coming true. Bayard Ru stin called this phase of 
the Negro struggle the dignity period. This was the  Negro-American's 'finest 
hour' and to it King added his matchless grace. 
King's commitment to his methods, to his ideals and  to his people was firm as 
ever. His fight was ever against injustice; the hum ble and the lowly were 
special objects of his concern. His first fight for  justice began when a 
seamstress refused to obey a city regulation that s he thought was not right. 
King's last effort was on behalf of the garbage men . His commitment to the 
poor was life-long. 
Unlike the black power advocates, however, he alway s kept the door open to 
negotiation. He did not believe in humiliating his opponents. He desired their NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 125  friendship and understanding and in this he was a t rue Gandhian. He was no 
doubt the voice of the Negroes, but more significan tly he was, as it were, the 
disquieting conscience of the whites. 
More than a hundred years after his emancipation, t he Negro is nowhere near 
the realization of his goal of equality in American  society. Tn most places his 
children still go to poor quality all-Negro schools . He cannot register himself as 
a voter everywhere despite laws that are meant to a ssure him this right. He 
lives in old dilapidated buildings which have been discarded years ago by the 
whites who have moved to beautiful suburbs. The ess ential municipal services 
are not available in areas in which he lives. The N egro pays a higher rent for 
the poor quality house that he can get and a higher  price if he could afford to 
buy one. The bulk of the city's financial outlay is  on extending water, 
electricity and telephone lines to the suburbs and since most of the people who 
live there work in the town, roads have to be built  for them. The Negro cannot 
enjoy the benefits of such outlays because he canno t get into these beautifully 
laid out residential areas except as a domestic hel p. All the same he pays the 
direct and the indirect taxes. 
Not all jobs are open to the Negro even when he is prepared for them. The 
trade unions do not admit him to membership as an e qual of the white, thereby 
seriously limiting the opportunities for his employ ment. He is inevitably the last 
to be hired and the first to be fired. Official sta tistics on the number of 
Negroes on relief tell their own story of the unequ al struggle that he has to 
wage to find and keep a job. 
The former slaves have been promised equality of op portunity times without 
number. The Supreme Court has outlawed segregation,  among others, in 
housing, education, use of public facilities and in  the context of voting. It has 
also upheld all the civil rights laws passed since 1957. As a result some schools 
have been desegregated. Some other school districts  have been forced into 
acquiescence under pressure from the federal govern ment in its attempts to 
enforce the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Segregation i n private housing has also 
been outlawed by the latest civil rights legislatio n and it is claimed that more NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 126  than 80 percent of available private housing will a lso be desegregated by 1970. 
However, if past experience is any guide, even the Civil Rights Act of 1968 is 
not likely to bring about more than a token gain. 
On the other hand Negroes are not willing to accept  anything short of complete 
equality and some of them feel compelled to abandon  King's methods of 
nonviolence and to try to force actions through vio lent protests. Every summer 
the vicious cycle—rioting, police brutality, trigge r-happy national guards, 
troops, burning and looting, loss of human lives fo llowed by investigation as to 
the causes of these riots—is repeated. 
The basic causes of riots, even though they have be en identified more than 
once, remain untackled. And because of that the Neg ro discontent gets further 
accentuated. It is this discontent that black power  militants capitalize on. The 
challenge to King was to channel this anger and fru stration. He was expected to 
turn the Negroes' accumulated despair into construc tive efforts aimed at 
improving their lot. 
King was no doubt a noble soul, a man of God, but e ven he could not be 
everywhere though he realized that he should have b een at most if not all 
trouble spots. He picked his targets, some in the N orth, but mostly in the 
South. And no matter where he went to organize the Negroes his effort was to 
keep the problems in the limelight, hoping that it will shame the nation into 
action. This strategy worked in Birmingham and Selm a; it did not in Chicago. 
When the emphasis in the civil rights movement was shifted from issues of 
human dignity due to Negroes to the questions of am eliorating their social and 
economic conditions, King like everyone else did no t know solutions of all the 
problems confronting the nation nor could he keep e veryone including all his 
followers happy. While the gains made in the South raised Negro expectations 
in the North they also stiffened the opposition amo ng the whites. 
The whites in the North are willing to have Negroes  register as voters and 
exercise their right. They also do not object to a Negro having a job as long as 
their jobs are secure. Not all of them, however, ar e willing to have true 
integration in their school systems and the provisi on of facilities to transfer NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 127  Negro children to schools outside the ghetto. The ' neighbourhood schools' have 
suddenly become both important and sacroscant to ma ny Northern whites. 
These whites also do not want the Negroes as next-d oor neighbours. 
The Negroes in the North resent these deprivations.  They realize that King's 
methods may not help them in solving their problems  speedily. In the light of 
the above developments it is easy to imagine why Ki ng, a moderate, was losing 
his hold on the movement. Certainly there was more criticism of King and his 
methods of protest towards the end of his life. 
The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee that came into being in the 
wake of the sit-ins in Greensboro, North Carolina, under the inspiration of King 
himself snatched the initiative from him, and gave the slogan of black power. 
King's association with the peace movement and his anti-Vietnam war stand 
were regarded by some as an attempt to keep abreast  of the militants and to 
keep intact his image of being a fighter for worthw hile causes. His opposition to 
war was not, however, based on expediency. Like Gan dhi his concept of 
nonviolence inevitably led King to abhor wars. His pointed call for an end of the 
war in Vietnam annoyed the establishment, many of h is white liberal friends 
and moderate Negro supporters. The gulf between the  militant and antiwar 
Negroes and the whites was widened. Well-known libe rals, particularly from 
the South, snapped their life-long ties with the in ter-racial organisations 
engaged in the civil rights movement which they had  supported at considerable 
personal risk. King's dream of narrowing racial div isions was nearly shattered 
when he made the crucial decision not to restrict h imself exclusively to the 
winning of civil rights for the Negroes. 
Unhappily it also did not help him regain his old p opularity among the Negroes. 
Yet he stuck to his principles and continued the fi ght. When the first Memphis 
march ended in street violence he decided to go bac k to the tense city to lead 
another demonstration by the garbage workers. His c ommitment to nonviolence 
was not merely tactical, clearly it was an article of faith for Martin Luther King. 
After his death the nonviolent form of protest may not necessarily cease to be 
relevant. NONVIOLENCE AFTER GANDHI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 128  There are two distinct currents of thought on the r elevance of nonviolent 
techniques of protest in the United States. Floyd M cKissick of the Congress on 
Racial Equality described King after the latter's d eath as "the last prince of 
nonviolence". Joan Baez, the famous folk-singer and  pacifist, challenges the 
view. While conceding that nonviolence had not solv ed all problems she also 
asks pointedly whether violence has succeeded anywh ere in producing better 
and lasting results? Bell Maul- din, in a thoughtfu l cartoon, depicted Gandhi 
telling King, 'The odd thing about assassins. Dr Ki ng, is that they think they 
have killed you'.  
Martin Luther King once quoted an old slave preache r: "We ain't what we ought 
to be and we ain't what we want to be and we ain't what we are going to be. 
But thank God we ain't what we was." He was certain ly right. The Negro has 
travelled a long distance in his struggle for equal ity during the last decade; and 
undoubtedly King made a major contribution to this advance. 
 