 
Our Bapu 
 
 
 
By: Begum Qudsia Zaidi 
 
 
Foreword by : Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 5/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: +91-79-27540635/27542634 
Fax: +91-79-27541329 
E-mail: jtndrnavajivan@hotmail.com  
 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2  
FOREWORD  
By Jawaharlal Nehru 
About a year ago, Qudsia Zaidi asked me to write a f oreword to a little book 
about Gandhiji, which she had written especially for children. I pleaded lack of 
time and a reluctance to accept this suggestion. She was, however, insistent 
and did not wish to hurry me at all. It became difficult for me to continue to 
say no to her, because she had put her heart in the little book she had written. 
It was something much more than a book to her and the story of Gandhi 
obviously meant a great deal to her. 
For a year her manuscript has been with me, a constant reminder of what I was 
expected, and yet was so reluctant, to do. At last I took this manuscript with 
me to Sonamarg in the Upper Sind Valley of Kashmir, and there, in sight of the 
high mountains and the glaciers, I thought again of the story of Gandhi. 
Why was I reluctant to write anything on this subject ? I do not quite know 
myself, but whenever I think of Gandhiji, I have a feeling of inadequacy about 
myself. Whenever I think of writing about him, the conviction grows that I 
cannot do any justice to the theme. Those of us, who lived and grew up in the 
shadow of that personality, had visions of greatness and of many-sided vitality, 
which cannot easily he expressed to others. It was a personal and powerful 
experience which moulded our own lives. How can that personal experience he 
expressed adequately in writing ? And so, whatever one writes about Gandhiji, 
seems trite, rather insignificant and utterly inadequate. 
And yet this generation that had seen him and touched him and knew him 
somewhat, will pass away. Indeed it is passing already. He will be remembered 
then by records and writings and by tradition which plays such an important 
part in the history of a race. 
It is four and a half years since he died. He belongs not only to history but to 
the myth and legend of India, one of the great ones who come from time to 
time to enlighten us and ennoble us and to fill us with a new vitality. Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3 It is right that our children and our children's children should know something of 
this story which has a certain epic quality about it, and even though they may 
miss the living presence, yet they will learn something not only about Gandhiji 
but about the ancient spirit and eternal message  India, which he represented 
so magnificently. 
I welcome this little book therefore and wish it success. 
New Delhi, 
September 1, 1952 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  
INTRODUCTION  
H
ari Learns About Gandhi 
It was six in the evening when little Hari returned home. He found the house 
very quiet. His father was not at his hookah1 nor was his mother cooking in the 
kitchen. The silence and the stillness frightened him. He looked for his mother 
all over the house and at last found her sitting in a corner and sobbing. 
Hari had never seen his mother in tears before. And when he saw her crying, he 
too burst into tears. After a little while, he asked his mother in a voice that 
was choked with tears: "Whatever is the matter, mother? Why are you crying?" 
Hari's heart missed a beat, as she spoke in slow, broken words: "Gandhi ... 
Gandhi ,,. is dead." "How did it happen, mother ? Only yesterday father took me 
to his prayer meeting. And I went up to him and touched his feet. He stroked 
my check tenderly and said, 'Well, son, I hope you are not being rowdy and 
naughty anymore ?' Mother dear, only yesterday he was quite hale and hearty." 
But at these words, the mother cried even more bitterly than before. With sobs 
and tears, Hari asked again, "But how did it happen, mother ? How did Gandhi 
pass away?" 
"How shall I tell you, my child ? A mad man shot him dead yesterday. Our 
beloved Gandhi was killed." 
"But, mother dear, Gandhi could not have harmed that man in any way. He was 
good, so very good." 
"Yes, my child, this is a strange world, and those who are truthful and love God 
are not liked by many. Truth is bitter and very few can bear to be told that 
which is not pleasant," 
Hari could control himself no longer. He flew into a rage and shouted: "Just let 
me have father's gun, mother, and I shall kill the rascal who killed our Gandhi ." 
"No, no, my child," said the mother, "you mustn't do any such thing. That would 
be very wrong. Gandhi has taught us that it is a sin to kill. You saw him and met Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5 him, Hari. but you have hardly understood him, I fear. Let me tell you 
something about him. You may be surprised to know that as from you or from 
any other common child. But as he grew up, he strove to reach the heights of 
greatness. By love and service alone he became a saint as great as Gautama 
Buddha.2Our country has never had a truer servant, yet he was its uncrowned 
king as well. He reigned over the hearts of over four hundred million men and 
women. And men and women not merely bowed before him and paid him 
homage, they loved him from the bottom of their hearts. From the richest man 
in the country to the poorest beggar, everyone looked upon Gandhi as a father, 
and called him Bapu.3 For his heart grieved with others in their sorrow and 
rejoiced with them in their happiness. His love of the poor was boundless. In 
fact, he himself lived like any other poor man in the country, wearing only a 
khadi4 dhoti5 and a khadi chadar.6 He drank goat's milk and lived on boiled 
vegetables. He was, indeed, a very great saint." 
"And, mother, how fond Gandhi was of little children! How he used to joke with 
them, and talk to them, and take them out for long walks! In the company of 
children, he would himself become a child. Mother dear, do tell me the life-
story of Gandhi-the whole story." 
"Very well, my son. I shall try to tell you something of the story of Bapu's life. I 
am not working today in the kitchen, for who can think of a meal to-night ? 
Your father has gone to our neighbor's house to listen in to the radio for more 
news. In the meantime, I shall tell you the story of Bapu's life." 
And then Hari's mother began to narrate the life-story of Bapu. 
 
1. A water pipe smoked in the East. 
2. Great Indian prophet who preached love and non-violence 
3. An affectionate term meaning father. 
4. Hand-spun and hand-woven cloth. 
5. A long piece of cloth which many Indians wear instead of trousers 
6. A shawl wrapped round the shoulders. 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6  
01. THE GANDHI FAMILY  
"To the north of Bombay lies Porbandar, which is one of the states of 
Kathiawar. The capital of that state is a port and town of the same name. 
Many, many years ago, when your grandfather was very young, younger even 
than you are, there lived in Porbandar a man called Karamchand Gandhi. He 
was a bania by caste. Most banias are traders and not well-educated but all the 
members of his family were well-read and, for three generations, they had held 
the posts of Ministers7 in different states of Kathiawar. 
Karamchand was an honest, brave and large-hearted man. He was widely 
respected and his word was law unto the people. But he was rather hot-
tempered, and the people were therefore afraid of him. He always spoke the 
truth, and wielded great power. He used to settle disputes even amongst the 
various rulers of Kathiawar. 
Karamchand lived in Porbandar for a number of years. Then he took up office at 
Rajkot, one of the smaller Kathiawar states. There were no railway trains then, 
and the slow bullock-cart used to take five days to cover the distance between 
Porbandar and Rajkot. The ruler of Rajkot, popularly known as the Thakore 
Saheb, held Karamchand in high esteem, and, within a few years, he appointed 
him Dewan8 of his state. 
Karamchand was very unlucky in his family life. He had married thrice, and 
each time his wife had died, without bearing him any children. At the age of 
forty he was married for the fourth time to one Putlibai, and this union was 
blessed with one daughter and three sons. 
Both Karamchand and Putlibai were deeply religious and very truthful. They 
would visit the local temple, every day, and offer worship, according to 
custom. But Putlibai was more religious than her husband. She would go daily 
to the temple for worship, and she would keep all the fasts prescribed by Hindu 
custom. Even when she fell ill, she would not give up her fasts. Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7 Putlibai was not only deeply religious, she 
was also very clever and wise. She was 
greatly respected by the Ranis9 of the 
Rajkot Palace, and the Queen Mother 
never did anything without consulting her. 
Between Putlibai's eldest child and her 
youngest, there was a difference of only 
six years. The youngest was born in 1869, 
that is, about eighty years ago. He was 
nothing much to look at, but somehow he was the favourite of the entire 
family, and Karamchand, Putlibai and the other three children were very fond 
of him. The three elder children would rush into the room again and again to 
see their little brother and the little child would suck his tiny thumb and gaze 
at them with wide open eyes. 
The father chose an auspicious day and named the infant, Mohandas. According 
to the practice in Kathiawar, the father's name, and the family name, were also 
added to the child's own name. And so he came to be known as Mohandas 
Karamchand Gandhi. 
When Mohandas was five years old, he was sent to school. He would usually 
manage to learn his other lessons but he just could not remember the 
multiplication tables. Try as he might, he forgot them almost as soon as he 
learnt them. 
Mohandas was about seven years old, when his father had to leave Porbandar 
for Rajkot. The children were sad to leave their oldhome, but within a few days 
they had already forgotten the old place and were happily settled in their new 
place. Putlibai was a little old fashioned. She took care to avoid the touch of 
people belonging to the lower castes. She was constantly telling Mohandas that 
he should immediately have a bath and change his clothes. Okha, the sweeper's 
son used to come to the house for cleaning it up, and it' ever, by mistake, 
Mohandas touched him, his mother would at once send him down to have a 
bath. Mohandas would carry out his mother's wishes and wash himself, but he 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8 could never understand why Okha should belong to a lower caste or be looked 
upon as an untouchable. He soon began to wish that he could become an 
untouchable himself and show to the world that the meanest untouchable was 
in no way inferior to a high-caste Brahmin10. 
In most things Mohandas was like any other child, but he was different in one 
respect, he would always tell the truth, no matter how much he might have to 
suffer for doing so. Once at School he was doing a test in English. An 
Englishman had come to inspect the school, and Mohandas was not able to spell 
a particular word correctly. The teacher tried to suggest by certain signs and 
gestures that he should look into his neighbours slate and copy out that word. 
When Mohandas did not take the hint, the teacher pressed the young boy's foot 
with his shoe so violently that the poor boy, was pale with pain. It just would 
not cross Mohandas's mind that the teacher, was asking him to look into his 
neighbour's slate and copy. 
"But mother," asked Hari, "he must have been a funny teacher to encourage the 
boys to cheat. If our teacher caught us copying, he would at once turn us out of 
the class and give us a black mark." 
"You are right, my son. But what is most remarkable is the honesty shown by 
Mohandas. He just would not cheat." 
 
7. Administrative heads of state departments.  
8. Prime Minister of a Princely State.  
9. Queens.  
10. A member of the Hindu priestly class  
 
 
 
 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  
02. EARLY INFLUENCES  
"Two stories deeply influenced the life of Mohandas.  One of them was the story 
of Raja Harishchandra which he had seen on the stage several times." 
Hari- "What is the story, mother ?" 
Mother- "This is how that story runs. 
Many thousand years ago, there lived in our country a king who, was very 
truthful and very generous. A great famine once befell his land, and the kind-
hearted king sold all that he possessed in order to help his people, till he 
became very poor. As fate would have it, the gods decided to test his 
truthfulness and honesty at that time of crisis. One of the gods disguised 
himself as a holy beggar and came to the king to ask for alms. The king brought 
whatever there was in the house and laid it at the feet of the holy man. But the 
holy man asked for more and so the king sold his personal slaves and offered 
the money to him. But the beggar asked for still more. 'What you have given 
me,' he said, 'is not enough to meet my needs! It seems that I shall have to go 
to the low caste man living next door and ask him for a little charity. It is a 
great pity that I should have to turn from the house of a great king like you and 
beg of a mere untouchable. But I suppose it can't be helped.' At these words 
the king went with the holy man to the house of his neighbour, and offered 
himself as a servant to the untouchable in order to meet the demands of the 
holy man. The holy man then went his way, and the untouchable dom assigned 
to the king the task of collecting fees from those who came to burn their dead 
at the burning ghat. 
He was still working for the dom when his only son, Rohithakshan, died. His 
queen carried the little corpse to the burning ghat, and set about arranging the 
funeral pyre. Just then Harishchandra came forward and demanded the 
prescribed fees. The poor queen had no money, and with tears choking her 
voice, she said to her husband, ", she said to her husband, 'All that I possess on 
earth, my lord, is this sari that I am wearing.' The king's heart sank within him, Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10 but he would not fail to do his duty. He said. 'I am helpless, my dear queen. My 
master's orders are that I should collect the fee before I allow the pyre to be 
lighted. This is my duty and I must stick to it.' The queen offered to part with 
her sari in payment of the fee. But she had hardly set her hand on the sari 
when the heavens trembled and the gods admired the courage, the devotion to 
truth and the sense of duty of the king and the queen. Down they came to the 
earth and brought back the young Rohithakshan to life, and took the king, the 
queen and the dom with them to heaven. 
Hari, my son. this story made a very deep impression on the mind of Mohandas. 
He wished with all his might that he, too, like Harishchandra, could have the 
strength to face every danger and difficulty in the pursuit of truth. And when 
he grew up, he staked his life itself for the cause of truth, and the whole world 
wondered at the honesty and courage which enabled him to come out 
victorious from the severest of trials.'' 
The mother's heart was full of emotion now, and she paused for a moment to 
calm herself, and and then went on with the other story. 
On Service - Shrawankumar 
"The other story which taught him to serve his 
f
ellowmen was the story of Shrawankumar. Mohandas 
had read how both the parents of Shrawankumar were 
blind and how the son would look after them and carry 
them where ever he went in a sling thrown across his 
shoulder. He would labour all day to earn a living for 
them and would try in every way to make them 
comfortable. One day, while Shravan had gone to the 
stream to fetch water for his parents, King Dashrath 
was out hunting in those woods. Mistook Shravan for a deer, and let fly an 
arrow. Poor Shravan was mortally wounded and he cried in great pain. But even 
then his thoughts were with his parents. Before dying he asked King Dashrath to 
carry water to his parents, and to break the news of his death to them only 
after they had drunk the water and quenched their thirst. King Dashrath did as 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11 he had been told. But the parents were old and infirm. The news of the death 
of their beloved son was too much for them, and they cried and wailed till their 
hearts broke with sorrow, and they died. And what happened to King Dashrath, 
mother?" Hari asked. 
"As the law of divine justice would have it, King Dashrath also died sorrowing 
for his son." "But, mother, please explain to me how these stories influenced 
the life of Bapu." 
"The child Mohan read these stories, and he made up his mind to be truthful 
like Harishchandra and to serve the poor and the needy like Shravankumar. 
Harishchandra and Shrawankumar became his heroes. Shravan had only served 
his parents, but when Mohandas grew up, he gave up all his, comfort and his 
wealth in order to serve the four hundred millions of Indians- men, women and 
children, Muslims and Hindus, Brahmins as well as untouchables, princes as well 
as beggars. For him they were all one and he loved them all equally." 
Hari was listening with rapt attention and his mother was happy to see that he 
was so deeply interested. She could see that Hari was already beginning to feel 
the influence of Bapu's noble example. She then continued. 
 
11. This version of the 'Story of Harishchandra' is different  from the familiar South Indian 
version. 
12. Low caste singer.  
13. Cremation ground by the side of a river  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12  
03. G ANDHI'S MARRIAGE  
"Mohandas was not even fourteen when his parents marr ied 
him to a girl from Porbandar, named Kasturbai. For the 
time being, Mohandas was very happy, for he knew that he 
would get nice new clothes to wear and a new companion 
to play with. But when he grew up, he always condemned 
child-marriage and fought against this evil practice. 
The Dominating Husband  
Soon after his marriage Mohandas started ill-treatin g his, 
gentle, little wife. He would check her movements and even choose her friends 
for her. Kasturbai was weary of these little tyrannies, and the more Mohandas 
tried to control her, the more she resisted them. Very often they quarreled and 
would not talk to each other." 
"But why did Mohandas behave in this manner, mother?" 
"Well, perhaps he thought that these quarrels and differences were necessary 
in love. 
Meat-Eating  
Although married, Mohandas did not stop going to sch ool. In fact, he was 
considered to be one of the brightest boys in the class when he reached the 
upper standards. He always wished that everyone should think of him as an 
honest and truthful boy. And if ever, by mistake, someone thought that he was 
telling a lie, he felt hurt and cried for hours. He was also keen on bringing to 
the path of virtue those of his companions who were given to bad ways; and 
that was why he made friends with a boy who was very much older than he and 
very wicked. His wife as well as well as his parents tried their best to stop this 
friendship, but Mohandas paid no heed to their words. By the way, Hari, there 
was one thing about Mohandas which I forgot to tell you. He was a very very 
timid boy, and would not enter a dark room. His friend knew this and he also 
knew that Mohandas was anxious that he should become strong and brave. So 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13 one day, he said to him, 'Look, Mohan, there is only one way of becoming 
strong and that is by eating meat. See how strong and well-built the English 
are. Just because they eat meat they are able to rule over us Indians, who are 
so weak and sickly.' Mohandas, in his innocence, believed this and he agreed to 
start taking meat. 
You know, Hari, it is forbidden by religion to eat meat. So meat was never 
bought or cooked in Mohandas's house. How could he then eat meat ? His friend 
invited Mohandas to dinner at his place. Then, he said, he would be able to 
take meat without his parents knowing anything about it. 
On the appointed day, Mohandas reached his friend's house and sat down to 
dinner along with others. He tried very hard to swallow the meat, but he just 
couldn't do it. The poor boy got sick and left his friend's house. He returned 
home, but all night long he had a most restless and miserable time. It seemed 
to him as though a goat was bleating inside his stomach. Afterwards he tried to 
take meat several times, but he never liked it. He would return home quite late 
after he began eating meat and each time he would have to make some excuse 
or other to his people. But one day it occurred to him that if he had to cover up 
his meat-eating with lies, it was not worthwhile trying to become strong at such 
a price. And so he decided never again to touch meat, even if he had to remain 
physically weak. It was no use deceiving one's parents in order to become 
strong." 
"But then how did he come to be so brave and fearless?" asked Hari with some 
surprise. 
Ramanama  
"Well, Mohandas had given up telling lies; but he lo nged to get strong and to 
cast off all fear. There was an old servant in the house, named Rambha. She 
knew how afraid Mohan was of the dark. One day she casually said to him that 
if he should ever feel afraid in the dark, or should find 'himself in trouble, he 
should start praying and repeating the sacred name of Rama.14She assured him 
that would drive all his fear." Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14 And did he really get rid of his fear by praying to Rama, mother ?" 
"Yes, my child, there is great virtue in prayer, and God always comes to the 
rescue of those who call on Him in their hour of need." 
"Why, then, I think I should also take to reciting Ramanama15, for I too am 
afraid of going in the dark." 
 
14.God. 
15.God's name.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  
04.  GANDHI'S FIRST LESSON IN NON-VIOLENCE  
"Mohandas gave up the idea of ever eating meat again , but he was now most 
eager to get big and grown up. Every child passes through this stage, when he 
tries to imitate his elders. He tries to behave and act like them and thus thinks 
himself to be grown up. Whenever Mohandas saw his uncle smoking, he would 
feel a strong desire to smoke also. When Mohandas was about fourteen, one of 
his friends decided to start smoking cigarettes. But neither of them had any 
money and cigarettes could not be had without money. The problem, however, 
was solved by picking up the stubs of the cigarettes that his uncle had smoked. 
But after a time this failed to satisfy them, and then they began to steal money 
from the servant's pockets in order to buy cigarettes. Very soon they felt that 
they could not enjoy their cigarettes when they had to smoke them in this 
stealthy way. They thought life was hardly worth living when they could not 
smoke a cigarette freely and openly as their elders did. This thought greatly 
disappointed them, and they decided to commit suicide. They collected the 
poisoned seeds of the dhatura16and decided one evening to eat them. Just 
when they were about to eat those seeds, it struck them that the poison might 
not work. What then? How could they ever face their elders after the failure? 
And so they gave up their idea; and from that day the desire for smoking 
cigarettes was gone." 
"But, mother, surely he must have smoked when he grew up?" 
"No, my darling. He never touched a cigarette since that day." 
"One day, Mohandas was working at his lessons in his room when his brother 
came in. He was looking very worried and, coming close to Mohandas, he 
whispered something in his ear. The brother had gone into a debt of some 
twenty-five rupees, and he wanted Mohandas to help him out. After much 
careful thinking, Mohandas hit upon a plan. He quietly went to his brother when 
he was asleep, and stole a little gold from his armlet. Next morning the gold 
was sold and the debt was cleared." Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16 "But, mother, you have always told me that stealing is wrong. How then can 
you explain Mohandas's action?" 
"Hari dear, children often do wrong without knowing what they are doing. But 
good children are sorry for their mistakes when they come to know of them and 
never commit them again. 
"In order to help one brother, Mohandas had stolen a hit of gold of the other 
brother. But by doing so he had lost all peace of mind and he could not decide 
what amends he should make for the wrong that he had done. At last he 
decided to tell his father the whole truth. He wrote a letter to him, telling him 
all about the incident. At the same time he promised his father that he would 
never steal again. He asked his father to punish him as severely as he wished 
and begged him not to feel pained about it in any way. The father was ill at the 
time and had to lie in bed all day. Mohandas went up to him, handed the letter 
and sat down quietly near the bed. 
As the father read that letter, tears 
began to roll down his cheeks. And as he 
watched the tears, Mohandas's heart 
sank with shame and remorse. His 
father's tears affected him very deeply, 
and this time he took a silent vow never 
to do an unrighteous deed again. This incident marked a turning-point in his life 
and he strove ever after to be ever good and truthful." 
"But, mother, why did his father cry so bitterly? Why did he not beat Mohandas 
or punish him in some other way?" 
"Because, my son, Mohandas's courage and truthfulness moved him deeply. If he 
had given the boy a beating, that would not have been so effective as his own 
gentle suffering. And that suffering and that love left its impression on 
Mohandas far more deeply than any beating could ever have done. 
This was Mohan's first lesson in non-violence. And later on it was this very 
weapon with which he fought the British, and won freedom for his country. 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17 The incident of the stealing was soon forgotten, but the father began to love 
Mohan and trust him more and more. This was only natural, for had not Mohan 
shown how good and truthful he was?" 
"I promise, mother, I, too, will always tell the truth, and then I am sure father 
will love me more and more." 
"Yes, my son. Not your father alone, but everyone who loves and honours the 
truthful." 
"But let us proceed with the story, mother. What happened to Mohan after 
that?" 
"His father's health now began to decline. Everyone in the house did what he 
could for him. But Mohandas took special pains to nurse him and look after him. 
He would rush home from school as soon as possible, and then attend on his 
father. He would give him his medicines, change his clothes, and massage his 
aching legs and feet for hours. One night, he had just left his father and gone 
to his room for something, when a servant knocked at his door and told him 
that his father had passed away. Mohandas could never forgive himself for not 
having been near his father during his last moments and this thought hurt him 
and pained him throughout his life. He was about seventeen when he lost his 
father. 
"Alas ! Poor boy ! How bitterly he must have cried at his father's death!" 
"Yes, my son. But today he himself is dead and the whole of India, nay, the 
whole world, weeps for him and mourns his death!" 
 
16. Poisonous plant.  
 
 
 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  
05. I N ENGLAND  
"Mohandas passed his Matriculation in 1887 at the ag e of eighteen and on the 
advice of an old family friend, his elder brother sent him to England to study 
law. People in our country then used to think that there in England, one could 
not be as religious or as pious as one could in India. And it was with great 
difficulty that Mohandas's people agreed to send him abroad. But before 
allowing him finally to go to England, his mother made him promise three 
things-firstly, that he would not eat meat, secondly, that he would not drink, 
and thirdly, that he would not make friends with girls. Mohandas gave his 
solemn word that he would do as his mother wished, and then, with the 
blessings of his people, he left for England, alone. 
Before he left India, Mohandas had plenty of English clothes made for himself. 
He bought shining shoes and bright ties. At first he found it difficult to knot his 
tie, but once he had learnt how to do it, he liked ties more than anything else 
in the English dress. 
 
Western Attire  
When the ship touched the shores of England, Mohanda s 
thought that he should set foot on English soil, dressed in his 
best suit. He took out a white flannel suit and wore it and 
walked down the ship's gangway17in great style. But when he 
looked around he noticed that the others were wearing dark-
coloured suits, and were staring at his white suit in 
amazement. He felt so uneasy mat he did not know where to 
turn. With the greatest difficulty he managed to reach his 
hotel. The next day happened to be a Sunday, and his luggage 
could not be brought from the docks. So for three days poor Mohandas had to 
wear his white suit, but he kept to his room most of the time and hardly stirred 
out. 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19 He saw that fashionable people in England wore top hats, and he too wanted to 
buy one. So one day he walked into a hat shop, but being very shy, he bought 
the first top hat that caught his eye, without even trying it on. When he came 
home and tried it, he found that the hat was too big for him. Luckily, his large 
ears prevented the hat from slipping down and covering his eyes." 
"How funny he must have looked with his huge hat covering his small face! I 
wish I was there, mother. I would have taken a snap of him." 
"I am quite sure, too, he must have looked very funny. Most Indian boys, when 
they get to England spend money quite freely. Mohandas was no exception. He 
learned to dance and play on the violin; he went to the finest tailoring shops 
and had some very expensive suits made; he even bought a gold watch for 
himself. In short, he spent money as he had never done before. He had, 
however, one very good habit; he would keep an account of every penny that 
he spent. And one day it occurred to him that if he continued to waste his time 
and money in idle pleasures, he would never be able to study, and surely he 
could not expect his brother to be sending him money indefinitely. He at once 
took out his account-book and carefully examined it. He marked those items 
which appeared to him useless and unnecessary, and made up his mind not to 
spend money on them again. He gave up his two-roomed flat and moved into a 
small room. He learnt to cook cheap and wholesome meals for himself and even 
avoided traveling by bus whenever he could. 
Along with his legal studies, he read books about the world's great religions. As 
a child he had seen Jains, Muslims, Hindus, Buddhists, Parsis and Christians 
coming to his father and having long discussions about religion. He would sit 
quietly and listen to these talks with attention, and he had thus learnt to 
respect all religions. Quite early in his life he had come to the conclusion that 
being good was the basis of all religions, and that no man could be good unless 
he was truthful. 
It was in England too that he began to take a keen interest in nursing the sick. 
With the help of a doctor friend he even learnt to nurse those suffering from 
leprosy, and within a short while he acquired very great skill in this work." Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20 "But, mother, how could he pick up this work so quickly ?" 
"You see, Hari, once you put your heart into a work, it comes to you very 
easily. Mohandas found great happiness in serving the sick and needy. 
 
Visit to Paris  
He had heard several of his friends speak very highl y of the city of Paris. They 
had told him that Paris was a very beautiful and well laid-out city. Shortly 
before he was due to return to India a great exhibition was to be held in Paris. 
He thought this was a great opportunity for seeing the exhibition as well as the 
city of Paris at the same time. A very tall tower of steel had been built in the 
middle of the exhibition grounds. This tower was nearly three times as high as 
the Qutub Minar in Delhi. Every visitor to the exhibition made a point of 
climbing to the top of this tower. They would  sit down and have refreshments 
in a restaurant specially built on the top of the tower, and would survey the 
exhibition from that height. Mohandas too bought a ticket to go to the top of 
the tower and he went to the restaurant and had a meal there. 
After he had gone round the exhibition, he went out sight-seeing and visited all 
the important places in Paris. What impressed him most were the old churches 
of the city, particularly the church of Notre Dame." 
"And wasn't he quite thrilled with the tower too? " 
"Strange to say, he did not much care for that tower, but he liked very much 
the old buildings of Paris. 
 
Mother dies  
Mohandas was soon called to the bar and in June 1891  he got ready to return to 
India. June and July are usually rough months on the ocean, and so it was after 
a rather uncomfortable voyage that he at last reached Bombay. His elder 
brother came to the port to meet him. He had all along been very anxious to 
meet his mother, but when he learnt from his brother that his mother had died, Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21 his heart sank within him and tears rose to his eyes at the bought that when he 
got home, he would not find his beloved mother waiting at the doorstep to 
greet him. But he checked his tears, and not even a sigh escaped his lips." 
"How could he possibly keep back his tears, mother ? Anyone else would have 
cried his heart out at such a blow." 
"But he was not like any other ordinary person. Mohandas Gandhi was different 
from the rest." 
 
17. Passage on ship.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22  
06. IN SOUTH AFRICA 
His brother had already rented an an office for him in Bombay. He put up his 
name-plate MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI, BARRISTER-AT-LAW, and started 
practice as a lawyer. But he was not able to get much work in Bombay, and so 
after six months he shifted to Rajkot, He had better lucks there, and within a 
short time, he was doing very good work. But he felt unhappy and out of place 
there. The people of Rajkot were dishonest and untruthful, and he wanted to 
leave the place. 
 
Racism in South Africa  
Fortunately for him, the proprietors of the firm of Messrs. Dada Abdullah & Co. 
were great friends of his family and were at the time fighting an important law-
suit in South Africa. They engaged him for their case and sent him to Durban. 
In South Africa, Gandhiji found himself in an entirely new and different world. 
The white people there treated the coloured races with contempt. Every 
Indian, whether he was a lawyer or an office worker, was called a coolie.18 And 
those who actually worked as coolies, were treated even worse than animals. 
No dark man was allowed even to enter a hotel, much less stay there. He could 
not walk on a pavement when a white man was walking along that pavement. It 
was quite common for Europeans to push the Indians off the pavement. Nor 
could an Indian go before an European with his turban on. He was not allowed 
to travel in the same coach or railway compartment in which a white man was 
traveling." 
"It must have been terrible for Gandhiji to stay there," said Hari. 
 
Pushed out of the train  
"I shall tell you a story about his life there, and from that you will understand 
the difficulties he had to face when he was in South Africa. One day Gandhiji Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23 wanted to travel by coach from Durban to Pretoria. The conductor would not 
allow him to sit inside the coach with the European passengers. As his business 
was urgent, he decided to sit outside with the driver. The conductor himself 
was inside, and the coach started on its journey. But he soon found out where 
Gandhiji was. He would not allow Gandhiji to sit next to the driver who was a 
white man. He ordered him to leave his seat and sit at the feet of the driver. 
Gandhiji refused to obey this order. The 
conductor began to shout and swear at 
Gandhiji and he hit him and tried to push him 
off the coach. Firmly and courageously 
Gandhiji held on to the handle and refused to 
be thrown out. For a while the other 
passengers looked on and seemed to enjoy the 
fun, but they soon began to feel that the conductor was going too far and they 
scolded him. So when the conductor saw that even the white men were siding 
with Gandhiji, he let him go and allowed him to sit with the driver." 
Hari was greatly upset when he heard of this incident, and he began to cry. The 
mother tried to console him and said, "Why! My child, you are crying! Surely 
you are not so timid. This was a very small incident in Gandhiji's life. Later in 
his life he suffered much more for the sake of others. And he never uttered a 
word of complaint. When people acted unjustly towards him, he never got 
angry with them. He would feel hurt and sad, but he never cried like you." Hari 
quickly wiped away his tears with his hand, and the mother continued her 
story. 
 
Call for unity among Indians  
"When Gandhiji saw that the Indians in Africa had to  put up with insults and 
suffer at the hands of the whites, he decided that all the Indians there-Hindus, 
Muslims, Sikhs, Christians and Parsis should unite together and appeal to the 
government. He brought all his countrymen together, and in 1894 the Indian 
National Congress of South Africa was founded. Every Indian, rich or poor, gave 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24 his whole-hearted support to the Congress. In course of time the authorities 
began to give a sympathetic hearing to the complaints of the Indian 
community." 
"But surely, mother, there were Indians in South Africa before Gandhiji went 
there ? And, as you said, the white people had always treated them badly. Why, 
then, didn't someone think of improving their lot?" 
"That was because no one felt for the sufferings of others as Gandhiji did. 
Gandhiji's heart melted with pity for the poor and for those in pain. And 
whenever he found the strong treating the weak cruelly he would risk his very 
life to fight such injustice. It was, therefore, natural for him to take up the 
cause of the suffering Indians in South Africa. 
For two years he served the people selflessly, his name became well known 
with the young and the old alike. They called him Gandhi Bhai19 or Gandhiji, 
out of their great respect and affection for him. And his legal practice also rose 
and he became one of the leading Indian lawyers in South Africa. 
The Indians in South Africa soon found that they could not do without Gandhiji. 
They wanted his help to put an end to their hard-ships. So they asked him to 
settle down in that country, to practise there as a lawyer and at the same time 
serve the cause of his countrymen. Gandhiji agreed to their request and 
decided to settle there, but he asked their permission to go home to India and 
bring his wife and children. 
In those days, it used to take nearly twenty-five days to reach India from South 
Africa, and during the voyage, Gandhiji felt bored and found time hanging 
heavily on his hands. He was looking round for something to occupy him, when 
he discovered a rnunshi20among his fellow passengers, and he started taking 
lessons in the Urdu language. 
On reaching India, Gandhiji told his countrymen the real condition of the 
Indians in South Africa. He spoke to many people and wrote to the newspapers. 
to the newspapers. He thus succeeded in winning the support of important 
public men like Sir Phiroze Shah Mehta and Gokhale, and they promised to do Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25 their best to help him in his work. Meanwhile he was asked to return to South 
Africa at once. At once he left with his wife and children. The sea was very 
rough and Gandhiji was busy, looking after those who were sea-sick. Soon he 
was back in Durban in the midst of his old friends and associates". 
Hari's mother now remembered that he had not eaten and that he might be 
hungry. She stopped in the middle of her story, and said to her son, "There is 
some food left over from the morning. I shall warm it up for you. You had 
better eat something before we go on with the story." 
"No, mother," said Hari, "if no one else in the house is eating, I shall not either. 
Please, mother dear, go on with your story,." 
In vain did the mother try to persuade her little son to eat something. Hari was 
most eager to hear all about Gandhiji's life. And so she continued the story. 
 
18. Porter.  
19. Brother  
20. A scholar or man of letters  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26  
07. BRAVING INJUSTICE IN SOUTH AFRICA 
A
ssault on Gandhi  
"During his stay in India, Gandhiji had been trying to tell people of the 
hardships which the Indians in South Africa suffer at the hands of the white 
people. The white men therefore strongly disliked Gandhiji's activities. And the 
South African newspapers gave a very wrong and misleading account of what he 
was trying to do. So the whites became indignant with him. If they could have 
had their way, they would have done away with him. But the hand of God was 
with Gandhiji, and he was not afraid. He had hardly come down from the ship, 
when he was surrounded by a group of European boys and ruffians. They threw 
stones and rotten eggs at him and kicked him and handled him roughly. Poor 
Gandhiji could hardly do anything to defend himself. Luckily the wife of one of 
his European friends was passing that way. She ran through the crowd and came 
and stood in front of him. Seeing a white woman protect him, the crowd of 
hooligans gradually melted away, and she took him to the house of his friend 
Rustomji. In the evening, however, Rustomji's house was surrounded by a white 
mob, who shouted and yelled and threatened to hang Gandhiji on the sour 
apple tree. The crowd looked mad and murderous and Gandhiji's life was in real 
danger. It was with the greatest difficulty that his friends managed to rescue 
him and take him to a place of safety. 
Gandhiji could have easily got those 
hooligans punished. But he had not 
forgotten the lesson of love and 
forgiveness which his father had taught 
him. He showed no desire to avenge 
himself on the white people. This had a 
great effect on the whites. Their 
hatred for the Indians became less 
fierce. 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27 When the Boer War broke out in South Africa, Gandhiji helped the English 
against the Boers. Anyone else would have used this excellent opportunity to 
have his revenge upon the English people. But Gandhiji always believed in 
returning good for evil, and in winning over the enemy with love and kindness. 
He stuck to his noble ideal. He made Englishmen believe in his own goodness 
and sincerity as well as in the goodness and sincerity of the other Indians living 
in South Africa. 
God had blessed Gandhiji with everything that man could desire-wife and 
children and money. But he was not happy and his mind was not at peace. As 
with Gautama the Buddha, comfort and luxury made him uneasy, and he felt 
that the way to find peace lay in giving up worldly comfort and luxury, and 
living a life of simplicity. And so he decided to do everything himself: he 
washed his own clothes, swept his rooms himself, cooked his food and even 
cleaned his lavatory himself. 
 
Barber denies service  
One day Gandhiji needed a hair-cut, and he 
w
ent to a white barber's shop. I have told you 
already how the white people hated the Indians. 
The white barber refused to serve Gandhiji. And 
what do you think Gandhiji did? He quietly 
returned home and sat down to cut his own 
hair. He had never practiced hair-cutting before 
and you can imagine, the hair was cropped very 
unevenly and clumsily, as though a mouse had been nibbling at it while he was 
asleep. His friends laughed at him when he went to the court the next day. But 
when he told them how he had been driven to do the job himself, they were all 
stunned. And since that day, he never kept the hair-style of the west and 
always cut his hair himself." 
"I am sure, mother, that day when Gandhiji saw himself in the mirror, he must 
have had a good laugh at himself." 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28 "Yes, of course. He always enjoyed a joke, even at his own expense. But, to go 
on with our story, when the Boer war ended in 1902, Gandhiji longed to return 
home and serve his people there. At last he decided to pack up and sail for 
India. The Indians in South Africa showed their gratitude by giving him a 
number of valuable presents. To his wife Kasturbai they presented a lovely 
diamond necklace. But Gandhiji handed over everything to the local Congress 
office, so that these could be used in the service of the people. He believed 
that a servant of the people had no right to accept presents and keep them for 
his personal use. 
 
Returns to India  
Gandhiji returned to India in 1906. Preparations for  the Calcutta session of the 
Indian National Congress were then in full swing. Every Indian's heart was set on 
winning freedom. But they lacked unity and organization. They had little 
discipline or sense of duty. They had not learnt that the smaller things of life 
were as important as the bigger ones, and they did not understand that there 
was dignity in all labour. At this time, Gandhiji offered his services to the 
Congress. He took upon himself the job of cleaning up the visitors' rooms every 
day. It was at this session of the Congress that he told the Indian leaders all 
about the conditions of the Indians in South Africa, and made them keenly 
interested in their cause. 
After the Congress session he returned to his home in Rajkot, visiting Banaras, 
Agra, Jaipur and Palanpur on the way. He travelled third class all along, and his 
total expenses throughout the journey came to only thirty-one rupees! And he 
travelled very light. His entire luggage consisted of a small tin box for carrying 
food, and a bag in which he kept a warm coat, a dhoti, a shirt and a towel. And 
these simple habits remained with him ever after. Till the last day of his life, 
he travelled third class." 
 "But, mother, didn't Gandhiji carry a soap and a tooth-brush in his bag ?" 
"No, my child. He used a natural tooth-brush, what we call a dantan in 
Hindustani." Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29  
21.A thin green branch of tree used for scrubbing teeth  
 
08. THE BIRTH OF SATYAGRAHA 
"I mentioned the name of Gokhale a little while ago.  He was one of the most 
important Indian leaders of those times. He had a great affection for Gandhiji 
and looked upon him as a younger brother. On his advice Gandhiji decided to 
set up practice again in Bombay. He had hardly settled down to work, when 
cable after cable came asking him to return to South Africa. The Indians there 
wanted him to come and place their grievances before Mr. Joseph Chamberlain, 
the British Minister for Colonies, then visiting Africa, and try to have them 
redressed. Gandhiji saw how important this task was and felt that he must go. 
 
Struggle for Justice in South Africa  
He immediately left for South Africa. On reaching th ere, he gave up practicing 
as a lawyer, though it meant giving up a good income, and started a newspaper 
in which he could make known the needs and difficulties of the Indian 
community. There was an outbreak of plague in the country, and Gandhiji set 
out nursing the sick and the helpless. And with renewed vigour he worked to 
win for Indians equal rights with Britishers. He also went on fasts and penances 
in order to purify his inner self; he carefully studied the Gita22and 
even learnt by heart thirteen chapters of this great book. He now 
fully believed that one could realize God only by giving up pomp 
and luxury. 
Gandhiji had come to believe that all men were equal, and that 
there could be no distinction between the rich and the poor. He 
decided to spend his time with the poor and the common people. 
So he settled in a small village, from where he brought out his 
paper, and lived humbly and simply with the villagers. His way of 
life impressed his English friends very deeply and three of them 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30 even came to live with him in this small colony. 
Those were days in Africa when a number of laws were being passed against the 
Asians. Under Gandhiji's advice and leadership, the Indians decided to resist 
those laws by offering satyagraha.23 This was his main weapon in the non-
violent struggle against injustice and foreign rule. With rare courage and 
capacity for suffering, peacefully and non-violently, the Indians in South Africa 
faced the batons and the bullets of their white rulers. They went to jail 
willingly and cheerfully: Gandhiji was himself arrested for disobeying the law 
and sent to jail in 1908. This was his first imprisonment, for as you know, Hari, 
later on in his life he was arrested and sentenced to imprisonment many times. 
He had hardly served his sentence for twenty days, when the Prime Minister, 
General Smuts, called him to Pretoria, to discuss terms for an agreement. But 
Gandhiji replied that he would discuss the terms of settlement only after the 
Government had released all those who had been sent to jail along with him. 
All his companions were at once set free; a huge meeting of the Indians was 
held at the mosque in Johannesburg and it was unanimously decided to open 
negotiations for a settlement with the Government. A few fiery Pathans, 24 
however, did not like the idea of coming to terms with the Government. One of 
them even assaulted Gandhiji and injured him seriously on the head." 
"But, mother, didn't Gandhiji get that Pathan arrested and punished ?" 
"Not at all, my child. Gandhiji refused to take any action against him. He 
believed that his suffering would ultimately move even his enemies. And he was 
not wrong. For, when the Pathan came to know of Gandhiji's large-heartedness, 
he was filled with sorrow. He came to ask for his forgiveness and became one 
of his most loyal friends and supporters ever after. 
Then came 1914. On the 4th of August, England declared war against Germany. 
It dragged in almost all the countries of the world. It became a world war. 
Gandhiji felt that at such a time his country would need his services. He first 
went to London, and after staying there for a short while, he returned to India. 
He arrived in Bombay on the 9th of January, 1915, dressed in a Kathiawari coat, 
a puggaree (headgear) and a dhoti of Indian mill-made cloth." Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31 "I am sure he must have looked very smart in those clothes. I wonder why and 
when he gave up that dress." 
"Quite so, my child. He did look very smart in those clothes. But in 1919 he 
realized that millions of his countrymen could not afford even a shirt, much 
less a coat. And so he himself took to wearing only what the poorest of his 
countrymen used to wear-namely, a short dhoti, and a chadar. And that is why 
you could never see him dressed in a shirt or a jacket." 
 
22.One of the most important Hindu holy books 
23.Non-violent protest 
24.Persons from the north western frontier (now in Pakistan) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32  
09. THE BEGINNING OF INDIA'S FREEDOM STRUGGLE  
T
he Kochrab Ashram  
"In 1915, under Gokhale's advice, Gandhiji started a  small Ashram in a Gujarat 
village named Kochrab. This was meant to be a school for training national 
workers; everyone in the Ashram had to take a vow never to tell a lie, to give 
up violence, to eat the plainest of food, and never to steal or to get money for 
his personal use. He had also to practice fearlessness, to use articles that were 
made in India, to wear only hand-spun and hand-woven clothes, to help to 
educate the people through the medium of the national language and to try to 
remove untouchability to the best of his ability. 
In the Kochrab Ashram, members of the untouchable caste lived and moved 
freely with the rest. All were considered equal: no one was looked upon as 
being higher or lower than the rest. In the beginning the inmates of the Ashram 
thought this rather strange, but they soon became used to it. Some even 
resented it, for such thing had never been known in India before; and the richer 
patrons withheld the money which they had offered to give to the Ashram. One 
evening Gandhiji found that there was not even pie with which to run the 
Ashram and he felt greatly worried. He was sitting helpless and anxious not 
knowing what to do, when, lo! a stranger walked up to him and handed him a 
purse containing thirteen thousand rupees. God never forsakes those who serve 
Him truly! 
 
Given the title 'Mahatma'  
Gandhiji's earnestness, goodness and self-sacrifice quickly became well known 
in the country. The poet Rabindranath Tagore called him a Mahatma (i.e., the 
great soul). Very soon he came to be known by that title all over India, and 
wherever he went people would come flocking in thousands, to get a glimpse of 
him, and to touch his feet or kiss his hands. Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33 There was then in India, a wave of discontent, even hatred against the British. 
The patience of the Indians had been tried to the breaking point. They were 
restless and desperate. Gandhiji was anxious to keep alive the passion for 
freedom, but he also wanted to drive out hatred from the hearts of his 
countrymen. He knew full well that it would be no joke to fight a against the 
British Government. It was necessary to train the men and collect the resources 
of the entire country. And so he devoted himself to the service of the common 
people and worked hard to improve their condition and to spread the message 
of freedom far and wide. 
The war between England and Germany was then at its height, and England 
needed all the help that India could give her. The English asked Gandhiji to give 
them his support. Knowing how the British Government had been treating the 
Indians, no one would treating the Indians, no one would have agreed to give 
them any help. But Gandhiji believed that one should never try to take 
advantage of the enemy's difficulties. He wanted to help the British in their 
hour of need and, by placing them under a deep debt of gratitude , compel 
them to do the right thing by India by giving her freedom. Moreover, Mahatmaji 
felt that the English as a nation were not bad: the unjust treatment of the 
Indians was the result of the foolish and wrong policy of a few ignorant English 
officials who came out to India. He believed that the English people could be 
won over with love, and so he put forth all his effort to get his country's 
support for the war. He travelled from village to village, persuading people to 
join the army. He spared himself no pains and worked so hard that he fell ill. 
Hardly had he recovered, when news came that the war had ended and that no 
further recruitment was necessary. During this illness he took to drinking goat's 
milk and since then right until the day of his death, he lived only on boiled 
vegetables and goat's milk." 
"How happy Gandhiji and all his countrymen must have been when the war 
ended !" 
"Of course, yes. Everyone rejoiced when the fighting ceased. But our country's 
problems had yet to be solved. Everyone was expecting that when the war had Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34 ended, and peace and prosperity was once again established, India would get 
some measure of freedom in return for her services and sacrifices in the war. 
But freedom and peace seemed still a long way off; in fact, the British 
tightened their hold over India still further. They passed new laws by which 
they could put our greatest leaders in jail on the slightest grounds. A wave of 
resentment swept over the whole country. From Calcutta to Karachi, and from 
Kashmir to Cape Comorin, men and women burned with rage and indignation at 
these new laws with which the British Government sought to crush the liberties 
of the Indian people. Mass meetings were held all over the country to protest 
against the high-handedness of the Government. Young and old, men and 
women, Hindus and Muslims, all were ready to defy the laws, and lay down 
their very lives for the country. 
Mahatmaji rose to the occasion with his message of love and non-violence and a 
new hope emerged from the gloom that had fallen over the country. With one 
voice, all classes of Indians demanded freedom for their country. Mahatmaji 
became the natural leader of India. The very first condition that he laid was 
that the fight against British Imperialism must be carried on peacefully and 
non-violently. He gave the call for a one-day strike throughout the country. All 
business was stopped. Men and women fasted, and prayers for the 
independence of India were offered in temples and mosques. 
 
The massacre at Jalianwala  
The response of the country to Mahatmaji's call was amazing, and the 
Government was now rather afraid. They tried to terrorize the people with 
stricter and newer measures. Have you heard of the Jallianwala Bagh massacre 
in Amritsar? That happened on the 13th of April, 1919. A large number of 
people had gathered in that Bagh to conduct a peaceful meeting. General Dyer 
opened fire on that crowd and mercilessly killed innocent men, women and 
children. Elsewhere in the Punjab, too, thousands were put into prison. Even 
the barest civil liberties were taken away from the people. Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35 The Government declared martial law or military rule in the Punjab. Hundreds 
were killed and thousands arrested. Communication with the outside world was 
entirely cut off, and we were quite in the dark about what was happening in 
the Punjab. But news about the happenings in the Punjab could not be 
suppressed for long, and after a few days the story of Punjab's woes reached 
Mahatmaji's ears. His heart melted with pity for the suffering men and women 
of the Punjab. He could not find any peace of mind and he decided to visit the 
Punjab. But before he could reach Amritsar, he was arrested and sent back to 
Bombay. 
The British Government now turned all its might against Mahatma Gandhi, and 
strove hard to crush him. But Mahatmaji faced the Government with greater 
courage and fearlessness. He worked restlessly to bring together all classes and 
sections of people, and within a short time, he succeeded in his task. Hindus as 
well as Muslims rallied under the same banner and fought the battle of 
independence, standing shoulder to shoulder. But this unity alone was not 
enough: there were many more things that had to be done before freedom 
could be won. The most important task perhaps was that of removing fear and 
suspicion as between the rich and the poor, the tenant and the landlord, the 
untouchable and the Brahmin, the British and the Indian. And he was never 
tired of telling the people that the only way to drive out fear and win freedom 
was by pursuing truth and non-violence. 
 
The message of Non-violence  
This message of non-violence and love of Mahatma Gan dhi 
was first given to the people of India by Gautama Buddha. 
But through the lapse of centuries we had forgotten that 
lesson. 
Mahatmaji reminded us anew that taking life was the 
greatest of sins. He asked the people to fight for the 
freedom of the country not with weapons of war but 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36 peacefully and non-violently. He sent his disciples all over the country. They 
went from village to village, bringing to the people the message of freedom and 
preparing them for the battle of independence. 
He also told people that they should learn to read and write, and spin and 
weave, and give up drinking and abolish untouchability. It was Gandhiji's rule 
that he should first practise himself what he wished to ask others to do. And so 
he began to learn to spin and within a short time, he could spin like an expert 
with both his hands. 
While Mahatmaji was trying to rouse the people and prepare them for the fight 
for freedom, the visit of the Prince of Wales to India was announced. The 
people of India were in no mood to welcome him. They believed that the 
British Government was sending out the Prince of Wales to India only to remind 
her people of the glory and the might of the British Empire. The people under 
Gandhiji's lead, therefore, decided to boycott all processions and celebrations 
in honour of the Prince's visit. And so it came about that while, on the one 
hand, the Royal procession was passing through the decorated but deserted 
streets of Bombay, on the other hand, people were collecting foreign cloth and 
making a bonfire of it. For the cry had gone round that swadeshi25 or the 
building up of Indian industries was essential for winning political freedom. 
All this, however, was happening in a most peaceful and orderly manner. But a 
few rash men lost their balance and scenes of violence were witnessed in 
Ahmedabad and Bombay. Stones were thrown at a few Englishmen, people who 
had organized the reception for the Prince of Wales were beaten, tramcars 
were burnt down and liquor shops were looted. As soon as Mahatmaji heard of 
these happenings, he visited the scenes of these outbursts in person. At one 
place he saw two injured constables lying unconscious. 
He was surrounded by the crowd, and the air rang with shouts of "Glory to 
Mahatmaji ! Victory to Mahatmaji !" Great was his grief when he looked round 
at the damage and devastation that had been done in his name. He scolded the 
people severely and told the crowd, that to fight the Government in that 
manner was his defeat as well as the defeat of non-violence. He would have Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37 nothing to do with a freedom which was won through violence. The crowd 
grieved very much when they heard him speak thus. Gandhiji was still trying to 
pacify the people and arranging to remove the wounded police constables to 
the hospital, when news came that the police had opened fire on a crowd in 
another part of the city. This was more than the people could bear. They were 
wild with rage and once again there was looting of shops and burning of 
tramcars. Disorder and violence reigned again. 
Gandhiji saw that the people were getting out of control. He decided to 
undertake a fast. He said, 'I want to make penance for the wrongs done by the 
people, and I shall break my fast only when those Hindus and Muslims who have 
resorted to violence fully repent and ask for forgiveness of the Parsis and the 
Christians whom they have wronged.' 
Gandhiji's wishes were immediately carried out. The leaders of all the groups 
came to him and assured him that those who had acted violently had already 
apologized individually to those whom they had assaulted, and that the latter 
had freely forgiven them. Only after this assurance was given, did Gandhiji 
break his fast. And since that day he took a vow that he would observe 
complete silence every Monday until India was free." 
 
25. Indian made articles  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  
10. THE FREEDOM STRUGGLE REACHES ITS HEIGHT  
"After the Bombay incidents, Gandhiji was filled wit h doubts about his 
methods, and he was not quite sure if he should continue his non-violent civil 
disobedience movement. He was afraid lest there should be fresh outbursts of 
violence. But he received news that, in the other parts of the country, strikes 
and satyagraha had been perfectly peaceful and non-violent. This gave him 
hope: and he decided to continue the struggle. 
As a result of the strikes and the boycott campaign, many people in the country 
had given up the use of foreign goods, and this was a great blow to the 
manufacturing firms in England. The Government tried hard to kill this 
movement for the boycott of foreign goods. They arrested and imprisoned 
hundreds of our national workers, great leaders like Pandit Motilal Nehru, 
Deshbandhu Chittaranjan Das, Lala Lajpat Rai and Maulana Azad. 
Another person in Gandhiji's place would have lost heart and given up the 
struggle in the face of such opposition. But Gandhiji bravely continued to fight 
the government. He again and again asked the Viceroy to release our national 
leaders but the Viceroy paid no heed to his requests. 
The fight for freedom was at its height, and it seemed as if victory was within 
our reach, when suddenly news came that Mahatmaji did not know how to 
explain Gandhiji's action. Some thought that he had become frightened of the 
British Government. Others thought that he had made some sort of compromise 
with them. Each one had his own story to tell, but there were a few sensible 
persons who could guess what the truth was." 
"And what was that truth, mother? Why did Mahatmaji call off the movement?" 
"You see, Hari, when Mahatmaji started the country's fight for independence, 
he wanted the people to master the details of non-violence to perfection. He 
knew that it was not easy to resist the organized might of such a great Empire. 
He also knew that as soon as the people started opposing the government, the 
government was bound to punish them. The, police would make lathi26 charges 
or even open fire on them. To remain calm under such provocation would be Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39 the supreme test of non-violence. And it turned out that people did defy the 
laws all over the country and calmly faced the lathi charges. At one place in 
the Uttar Pradesh, however, in the village of Chauri Chaura in the Gorakhpur 
district, the mob forgot the lesson of non-violence and returned blow for blow 
and set fire to a police outpost. Twenty-one policemen died as a result of the 
fire. This incident completely upset Gandhiji, and he immediately called off 
the movement. A freedom won through bloodshed or pain,' he said, 'was not 
worth having at all. It was better to remain a slave than take to such violent 
means. And yet I know that the mistake is mine. The country has not yet learnt 
the lesson of non-violence properly. Unless people learn the true meaning of 
the creed of nonviolence, they will not be ready to offer satyagraha. Truth, 
patience, meekness, understanding and love for the enemy are most necessary 
for satyagraha.' 
 
Gandhiji is arrested  
To admit his mistake and the mistake of his countrym en was not enough for 
Gandhiji. He sought to do further penance by observing a five-day fast. He 
returned to the Sabarmati Ashram from where he meant to preach his gospel of 
non-violence throughout India. But he had hardly been in Sabarmati four days 
when the Government arrested him. He was sentenced to imprisonment for six 
years. In his absence, Kasturbai sent his message to the country, asking 
everyone to give up foreign clothes and wear Swadeshi instead, to spin, to 
abolish untouchability and to work for the uplift of the country. 
Life in jail had many hardships, but Gandhiji bore them all cheerfully. He would 
read the Gita in the morning and the Koran27 in the afternoon, and in the 
evening he would read the Bible with a Chinese Christian. He also spun 
regularly, and in his spare time he would learn to read and write Urdu and 
Tamil. 
Though Gandhiji was in prison, he continued to live in our hearts and to lead 
us. He had not been in jail quite two years when he fell seriously ill. The news 
of his illness caused great anxiety, all over the country. For six months he 
remained ill inside the jail, and when the Government saw that there was no Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40 improvement in his condition, they transferred him to the Government hospital 
in Poona. There he was operated upon for appendicitis by a well-known 
surgeon. And when after a few days, he was known to be out of danger, there 
was great rejoicing all over the country. 
In the beginning of February that year, Gandhiji was released from jail before 
he had completed his term of imprisonment. The first thing he did on his 
release was to write a letter to Maulana Mohammed Ali, the then President of 
the Congress, saying that he was not at all happy at the way in which he had 
been released. Even though outside the jail, he considered himself a prisoner 
for the remaining period of his six years' term of imprisonment. He would not 
take part in the fight for freedom or oppose the Government during that 
period. 
From the Poona hospital, Gandhiji went to Juhu near Bombay, and here he 
gradually improved in health. Pandit Motilal Nehru, Deshbandhu Chittaranjan 
Das and the young Jawaharlal Nehru visited him there frequently. With them he 
would discuss the problem of our independence ceaselessly. Every day he was 
becoming more and more certain that our country could neither make progress 
nor win freedom unless poverty, ignorance, untouchability were removed. As 
soon as he was well enough, Gandhiji started again on his campaign for the 
uplift of India. Spinning and weaving classes were opened all over the country, 
so that foreign cloth could be easily replaced. He also worked for removing the 
evils of drink and untouchability and differences of caste and creed. He wanted 
the people of India to become strong and united. 
Gandhiji kept his word and for almost four years he did not take any part in the 
fight against the Government. Still the Government felt that if the people of all 
sects and creeds of India became one and fought unitedly for independence, 
the strongest of Government would not find it possible to resist them. And so 
the officers and agents of the British Government tried to create a split among 
the Hindus and Muslims." 
"But, mother, why did the Hindus and Muslims listen to them?" 
 
26. Wooden stick. 27. The Muslim holy book  Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41  
11. DANDI MARCH  
C
ommunal Violence Erupts  
"You know, Hari, hatred and ill-will come easier to men than love and good 
fellowship. And so the foolish, unthinking Hindus and Muslims fell into the trap 
set by our rulers and forgot Gandhiji's message of love and brotherhood. They 
started fighting each other, and for the time being, our dream of freedom 
vanished. 
Gandhiji's sorrow knew no, bounds when he saw the Hindus and Muslims fighting 
and shedding each other's blood. A riot had broken out in Delhi. Mahatmaji 
went there and decided to go on a fast for twenty-one days. He hoped, with 
prayer and fasting, to drive away hatred and purify people's hearts. 
The first eleven days of the fast passed off well, but on the twelfth day the 
doctors declared that Gandhiji's life would be in danger unless he broke his fast 
at once. This news cast a gloom over the entire country. Friends and doctors 
tried their best to persuade him to give up the fast. That day happened to be 
his day of silence, and so he just wrote on a piece of paper, 'Trust in God: there 
is great virtue in prayer.' It was a night of terrible suspense and anxiety. People 
kept awake and prayed fervently for Gandhiji's life. And Hari, my child, God 
heard the prayers of the People, and the next morning Gandhiji's condition 
improved. After twenty-one days he broke his fast, and he looked very cheerful 
and happy. 
It was a memorable day. His friends and companions woke up at four o'clock in 
the morning for special prayers. The fast was due to be broken at noon. 
Passages from the Holy Koran were first recited, and then a Christian friend 
sang a hymn. This was followed by readings from the Gita, and finally, Gandhiji 
broke his fast with a glass of orange juice. All the important leaders, Hindu as 
well as Muslim, Motilal Nehru, Chittaranjan Das, Maulana Azad, Maulana 
Shaukat Ali, Doctor Ansari, Maulana Mohammed Ali, Hakim Ajmal Khan, and 
Swami Shraddhanand, were present on the occasion and they took a pledge Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42 that they would work wholeheartedly for Hindu-Muslim unity. And for a long 
time, the effect of Gandhiji's fast continued to be felt and differences between 
the Hindus and the Muslims disappeared. 
Gandhiji now found time to turn to the problem of untouchability. The situation 
in Travancore was very serious. The Brahmins there had denied even the use of 
certain roads to the untouchables. Gandhiji went there and decided once again 
to make use of the old weapon of satyagraha. Success was immediate and all 
the roads were thrown open to the untouchables. 
In 1922 there was tension between the peasants of Kheda in Gujarat and the 
Government. Gandhiji saw that the Government were trying to oppress the 
peasants, and he sent Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel to help them. The Sardar 
worked with tact and firmness. The Government found themselves in a difficult 
situation and the peasants won the day. 
Unrest was growing apace in India, and the country rang with cries of 'Gandhiji 
ki jai'.28 People waited eagerly to court imprisonment or lay down their very 
lives for the sake of their country's freedom. 
 
Tricolour Flag - The Official Flag of Congress  
As early as 1921, Gandhiji had adopted the tricolour  as the national flag of 
India; in 1930 the Congress accepted it officially. The saffron on the top stood 
for bravery, the white in the middle for purity, and the green at the bottom for 
peace, prosperity and happiness. The spinning wheel in the middle stood for 
the dignity of labour. Thus the tricolour became a sacred symbol for all classes 
of Indians, without distinction of caste or creed. And it has since been the duty 
of every Indian to honour and respect that flag. 
I told you, Hari, that the country was restless with the desire to win freedom, 
but the British were again and again treating our demands with contempt. 
Gandhiji wanted once more to defy the law and start non-violent civil 
disobedience. But he was anxious that the law which he should decide to break Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43 should be one which meant particular hardship to the common people. And so, 
after long and careful thinking he chose the Salt Law. 
 
Salt Law Is Broken  
For you know, Hari, salt is something which the rich  and the poor both need; 
and anyone can make salt from the seawater or from certain kinds of earth. But 
the Government had framed laws by which they alone could manufacture salt, 
and they had also fixed a fairly high rate of tax on its sale. Gandhiji felt that 
this tax was most unfair, and as it tended to raise the price of salt, it hit the 
poor people very hard. And so he decided to break the Salt Law. He announced 
his plan of marching to Dandi, and of breaking the unjust Salt Law there by 
manufacturing salt himself. Before starting on his famous march, he fasted and 
prayed, and then, accompanied by seventy-nine chosen companions, he set out 
on foot from the Sabarmati Ashram. Gandhiji led the procession, and his 
companions followed him in rows of three. Each one of these satyagrahis29 
carried a small bundle thrown across the shoulder by a stick. All along the 
route, men and women flocked to get a darshan30 of Mahatmaji. The streets 
were sprinkled with water, and flowers and coconuts were laid before him as a 
mark of the people's faith and esteem. And Gandhiji would stop on the way and 
make speeches or preach sermons to the people. And thus the march from 
Ahmedabad to the port of Dandi in Gujarat a distance of two hundred miles, 
which was begun on March 12, ended on April 5. 
On the 6th of April at Dandi, Mahatmaji prepared the first illegal salt. This was 
a signal to the whole country, which seemed suddenly to be stirred up into new 
life. At very many places all over India, the Salt Law was peacefully and quietly 
broken, and salt was manufactured in defiance of the Government. The 
Government arrested the law-breakers and punished them at once and 
severely. 
 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44 Arrested At Midnight  
On the fourth of May, at dead of 
n
ight, armed police surrounded 
Gandhiji's hut. Gandhiji and his 
satyagrahis were all fast asleep, 
when a British Police Officer 
flashed his torch on Gandhiji's 
face and asked, *Are you 
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi?' Gandhiji, calm and undisturbed, simply said, 
'Have you come to take me away? Will you be so good as to wait for a little 
while? I shall just have a wash and then go with you.' Gandhiji rinsed his mouth 
and washed, while the Police Officer stood by holding Gandhiji's small bundle in 
his hands. When Gandhiji had finished washing, he asked for a little more time 
so that he could say his prayers. And then Gandhiji and all his companions sang 
hymns and recited prayers. Each one came with folded hands and bowed before 
Gandhiji. One of the policemen picked up the two small khaddar bags in which 
Gandhiji's things were packed, and then Gandhiji walked to the police truck, 
followed by the constables and the police officers. Thus, the police came 
stealthily and quietly, like guilty criminals, in the dark, and took away our 
beloved Gandhiji." 
"But, mother, why didn't he raise an alarm, so that people could have rushed in 
and rescued him from the police." 
"My son, haven't I told you that Gandhiji never believed in resisting the police 
or the government by the violent means? That is why he could never think of 
raising an alarm or calling for help." 
 
28. Victory to Gandhiji.  
29. Nonviolent fighters  
30. Glimpse of a great personage  
 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45  
12. GANDHIJI ATTENDS THE ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE  
"For eight months Gandhiji was in jail, and when he came out, the entire face 
of the country had changed. Gandhiji had such a hold over the people that the 
proud and arrogant British were compelled to come to terms with him. 
The terms of the agreement required that a Round Table Conference should be 
held in England in order to discuss the future of India. The Congress nominated 
Gandhiji as their representative at the Conference. Gandhiji was conscious of 
the trust which his countrymen had placed in him, and his last words to them 
before he set sail for England were, 'I give you my solemn word that I shall not 
betray the trust which you have reposed in me.' 
Gandhiji arrived in London on the twelfth of September 1932. The newspapers 
were full of news about him. Scores of pictures showing various sides of his life 
appeared in them. One of the papers, however, published a false picture 
showing him touching the feet of the Prince of Wales. Gandhiji smiled when he 
saw that picture, and said, "I would most gladly bow my head before the 
lowliest of my countrymen. I, would even pick up the dust from under the feet 
of the untouchables whom we have despised and oppressed for centuries past. 
But I will never touch the feet of the King of England, much less the Prince of 
Wales.' 
The Conference lasted for some time and Gandhiji presented our case with 
great ability. In one of his speeches he told the Conference, 'I do not in any way 
wish to belittle the British in India. But I certainly want that England should 
look upon India as an equal and treat the people of India accordingly.' 
 
Gandhiji Meets King  
When the Conference ended, Their Majesties held a re ception in honour of the 
delegates to the Conference. Everyone that went to the reception was dressed 
in his best suit of clothes, but Gandhiji appeared before the King of England, 
wearing a Khaddar dhoti, a pair of the plainest sandals, and an ordinary Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46 blanket. The simplicity and humility of his dress presented a striking contrast to 
the glory and pomp of the royal palace." 
"Isn't it strange, mother, that even when he went to the royal palace, he should 
not have put on a proper suit of clothes?" 
"You see, Hari, Gandhiji went to England as the spokesman of the poorest men 
and women of India, and it was right that he should appear like one of them. 
But the respect that he got did not depend upon his clothes, for the King was 
very attentive to him and talked to him for a long time. 
In England he was the guest of an old friend of his, Miss Muriel Lister, and he 
continued to follow his daily routine exactly as he used to do in India. He would 
hold his prayer meetings, morning and evening, and would take long walks 
everyday. His simplicity and sincerity and warmth left a deep impression on the 
poorer people of England. In fact, that impression still remains in a very large 
measure. 
 
Churchill Refuses To Meet Gandhiji  
It is customary that when a person visits a new coun try or town, he calls on the 
important people of that place. And in accordance with this practice, Gandhiji 
wanted to call on Mr. Churchill. But Mr. Churchill refused to see him, saying, 'I 
am not prepared to meet that half-naked fakir of India as long as he does not 
learn how to dress properly.' Bapu was not upset by Mr. Churchill's rudeness but 
every Indian felt deeply grieved and angry at this insult to their beloved leader. 
 
Calls Off the Civil Disobedience Movement  
Gandhiji returned to India without having been able to bring about any 
understanding between England and India. On his way back, he stopped in Italy 
and saw the Italian dictator, Mussolini. He also visited the Pope's palace, the 
Vatican, and towards the end of December he reached Bombay. The 
Government had meanwhile resumed its repressive policy. Our leaders - Pandit Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47 Jawaharlal Nehru, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, and Sardar Patel - had been sent 
to prison, and no less than ninety thousand men and women were in jail. The 
British Government were trying every means of crushing the Congress. But their 
repressive policy had the very opposite effect on the people. They became all 
the more determined to win freedom for their country. Finally, Gandhiji was 
arrested and put in jail again. The Government had hoped that with Bapu in 
jail, the people would lose courage and become disunited. They did not know 
that the flame of patriotism Gandhiji had lighted burned steadily in every 
Indian heart, and that it was not possible to put it out by violence. No doubt, 
people had to face more severe hardships everyday, and Bapu could only show 
his anger and distress over the sufferings of his countrymen. When he saw no 
other way of stopping the highhandedness of the Government, he decided to 
fast unto death. The Government thereupon released him. As soon as Gandhiji 
came out of the jail, he called off the civil disobedience movement and 
devoted all his energies to the uplift of the Harijans." 
"Why are the untouchables called Harijans, mother?" 
"This name was given to them by Bapu. The word, 'Harijan' means the servant 
of God, and since the so-called untouchables work very hard and are therefore 
the best servants of God, Bapu preferred to call them Harijans rather than 
untouchables. Hari, my dear, you can see by this what a kind heart Bapu had!" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48  
13. AT SEVAGRAM ASHRAM  
"I told you how, right from the days of his childhoo d, Bapu looked upon 
untouchability as a shameful evil. It hurt him and filled his heart with sorrow. 
He believed that all men were equal, and that no one had the right to think he 
was superior to others. A man was high or low in the eyes of God by his actions 
and not by his birth. Distinctions of class and caste were set up by interested 
people. 
Gandhiji had always believed in practicing himself whatever he preached to 
others. He started another Ashram at Wardha in the year 1936. This came to be 
known as the Sevagram Ashram, and was open to people of all castes and 
creeds. There were, of course, certain conditions which everyone in the Ashram 
had to fulfill. Each one had to do everything for himself-like grinding the flour, 
cooking the food, sweeping the rooms, and cleaning the lavatories. Even 
Gandhiji and Kasturbai would do everything with their own hands: they were no 
exception to the discipline of the Ashram. The food would be cooked in a 
common kitchen and all would sit down to their meals together. They would 
first pray for God's blessings and for peace and then eat the food. 
Bapu was in the habit of inspecting every nook and comer of the Ashram every 
day, and if he saw any dirt or rubbish anywhere, he would sweep it away 
himself. If any of the inmates fell ill, he would sit with him up and cheer him 
with his inimitable humour and wit. He was himself quite an expert in nursing 
and treating the sick. 
 
The lad's wish is fulfilled  
A Madrasi lad once had an attack of dysentery in the  Ashram. He had just 
recovered when he longed to drink South Indian coffee. He had become used to 
the plain and boiled food which everyone in the Ashram ate, but he had always 
missed his coffee. The rules of the Ashram, however, forbade coffee, tea, 
cigarettes, and even pan31 How, then, could the Madrasi boy get any coffee? He Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49 was lying in his bed, dreaming about his coffee, when he heard Bapu's 
footsteps. Bapu came and stood near his bed and looked at him in his usual kind 
and smiling manner. ' You are looking much better today', he said, ' I hope you 
have got back your appetite. What would you like to ear? How about a few 
dhoshas?" Gandhiji knew how very fond the South Indians were of dhoshas." 
"What are dhoshas, mother?" asked Hari. 
"They are a kind of savoury pancakes," 
continued the mother, "which are made 
only in the South of India. The eyes of 
the young boy began to sparkle, as he 
heard Bapu talk of food. He faltered for 
a while, and then took courage to ask, 
'Could I have a cup of coffee, Bapu ?' 
'You old sinner !' said Bapu, and laughed 
affectionately. 'Since you are so keen, 
you will certainly have coffee. In fact, a light cup of coffee may be good for 
you. But you must have something to eat with your coffee. It may not be 
possible to get dhoshas made here, but perhaps a hot toast will go very well 
with your coffee. I shall go and see to it at once.' 
And then Bapu went away. The young boy knew that tea and coffee were 
forbidden inside the Ashram, and he was wondering whether Gandhiji had 
promised him the coffee in a moment of absent-mindedness. He could hardly 
believe that he could be so lucky as to get coffee inside the Ashram, and that 
too from Gandhiji's own hands. A little later, Bapu's footsteps were heard again 
coming nearer and nearer his room. He now feared that Bapu was coming to 
tell him that he had made a mistake in promising him coffee, and that coffee 
was really impossible inside the Ashram. But to his great surprise he saw 
Gandhiji walking in with a tray covered with a khadi napkin. He could hardly 
believe his ears, when Gandhiji placed the tray near his bed and said, 'Here is 
your coffee and toast. I have made it myself, and even a South Indian like you 
will agree that it is well made. ' 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50 'Bapu, Bapu,' faltered the boy, 'why didn't you tell someone else to make the 
coffee ? I am so sorry that you had to take all this trouble for my sake.' 'Let it 
be,' replied Gandhiji, most affectionately. Don't let the coffee get cold. Ba was 
asleep and I did not like to wake her up. You had better drink it now. I should 
be going now. I'll send someone to take away the tray.' And with these words, 
Gandhiji walked away. The coffee was really very good, and the boy enjoyed it 
thoroughly. Coming from Bapu's hands, that coffee was like divine nectar 
itself." 
"But, mother, when no one was allowed to drink coffee or tea inside the 
Ashram, how did the coffee get there so quickly? '" 
"You see, son, Rajaji and Mr. Andrews often used to come to see Gandhiji, and 
Kasturbai always kept some coffee and tea for them, though for no one else. 
That was how Gandhiji was able to prepare the coffee for the boy. 
All kinds of people would come to the Sevagram Ashram to meet Bapu. 
Someone would bring a sick child to be healed, another would come to have a 
dispute about property settled. Sometimes a husband and wife would come and 
tell Bapu of their quarrels and seek his help in settling them. One day there 
walked in a man who seemed to be slightly mad. It was later found that he was 
a very well-read man and had been a professor in some college. He had also 
been to jail a number of times, and had now become a sadhu.32 He had roamed 
the jungles for many years without any clothes at all. He had fasted foe weeks 
at a time; he had at one time taken a vow of silence and had gone so far as to 
stitch his lips with a copper wire. For a long time he lived only on neem33leaves 
and unbaked flour. In the course of his wanderings, he came to the Sevagram 
Ashram and he wanted to meet Bapu. Bapu looked after him with great 
affection and care and succeeded in bringing him back to the world of normal 
human beings. 
In the beginning he disliked work, but, in course of time, he began to work for 
seventeen hours at a stretch. He would spin for eight to ten hours, and teach 
the inmates of the Ashram for another seven or eight hours. He became a fully 
normal and active human being, and, whereas he had formerly gone about with Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51 sealed lips and avoided human society, he would now make the whole Ashram 
ring with his hearty laughter. He even agreed to wear a short dhoti, but more 
than this he would not keep anything else with him. He would walk fearlessly to 
a place full of snakes and scorpions. Sometimes, however, he would get into 
one of his old moods, and then he would go to Mahatmaji, troubled and upset, 
and ask for permission to hang himself upside down in a well. Of course he was 
never allowed to do anything so foolish; for Bapu's word was law to him and he 
would obey it unquestioningly like a child. 
In those days Bapu was working from his Ashram to remove untouchability, 
ignorance and superstition from the country. He started the Charkha34 Institute, 
the Education Institute, and the Institute for the Protection of Cows. It was his 
wish to provide occupation for the villagers, when they were idle and had no 
work to do in the fields and thus add to their income. Such occupation, he 
thought, could be found in spinning, weaving newar35 or some other similar 
handicraft. At the same time he also wanted the villagers to learn to read and 
write, and thus prepare themselves for the final battle for freedom. He wanted 
to get them freedom not only from the British, but also from poverty, diseases 
and ignorance.'' 
Hari had begun to yawn and so, the mother asked, "You seem to be tired and 
sleepy. I have come nearly to the end of my story, but I shall continue it 
tomorrow." 
"No," said Hari, "I am not at all sleepy. In fact, I am all attention and I don't 
think I can go to sleep before I have heard the entire story. Do please go on, 
mother dear." 
 
31. Betel leaf  
32. A holy man or a hermit  
33. A tree common in India.  
34. Spinning wheel.  
35. A broad rough tape.  
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52  
14. THE QUIT INDIA MOVEMENT 
"By now the prestige of the British Government had f allen very low and 
Gandhiji ruled over the hearts of the millions of the millions of Indian men and 
women. In fact, he was the uncrowned king of the country. In some provinces, 
the Congress had even formed the government. The British did not approve of 
such things, but they were helpless before the growing enthusiasm of the 
masses. 
The Congress Ministers had been in power only for a short time, when the 
Second World War broke out. The British began to use our men and materials in 
the war against Germany without even consulting our leaders. The people of 
India felt deeply hurt and resented this fresh insult to our national dignity. On 
Gandhiji's advice, the Congress governments in the provinces resigned, for 
Gandhiji felt that there was not much sense in the Congress party continuing to 
hold office when they were not consulted in a matter of the greatest 
importance. 
 
Bapu's letter to Hitler  
Bapu remained at Sevagram, but he was in touch with all the events that were 
happening in the world outside. He was aware of the misery and destruction 
that wars caused, and so he wrote a letter to the German Dictator, Hitler, 
saying, 'I do not generally regard anyone as my enemy; but today you and I 
happen to be fighting a common foe, namely, the British. How wonderful it 
would be if, like me, you too fought the enemy with the weapon of non-
violence. Violence could only bring immense ruin and misery to the whole 
world. Should you like to know more about the principles of non-violence, there 
is a soldier in your army who was with me in my Ashram for some time. He will 
be able to tell you everything about the methods of non-violence. You alone 
are now in a position to stop this ruinous and bloody war.' Gandhiji wanted to 
send this letter to Hitler through the Viceroy of India, but the latter did not Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53 allow it. Had the Viceroy consented, and had Hitler listened to Mahatmaji's 
advice, the world would have been saved all the havoc and destruction that 
followed. But England and Germany were both drunk with power and they could 
only go headlong towards disaster. 
 
Appeal for freedom  
At the same time, Gandhiji made repeated attempts to  persuade the British to 
transfer power to Indians in a peaceful way. But all his efforts were in vain. 
Had he wished, he could have asked the whole nation to fight the Government. 
But the apostle of nonviolence could never do so; he was not prepared to win 
freedom by bloodshed and violence. And yet the fight against the British had to 
be kept up somehow. He felt that satyagraha on a mass scale was not proper. 
And so he thought of a new method, that of Individual Satyagraha. He decided 
to select a few well-tried companions, who had thoroughly understood and 
practiced the principles of non-violence, and these were to offer satyagraha, 
one by one. The first person chosen for the offer was Shri Vinoba Bhave. He was 
immediately arrested, and after him hundreds of patriots, who were only 
waiting patiently for their turn. Overnight all the leaders were arrested. 
Jawaharlal Nehru was sentenced to imprisonment. But the country was seething 
with unrest and the government found it impossible to crush the rising urge for 
freedom. Very soon they had to release all those whom they had put in jail. 
The fighting in Europe was at its height, when news came that Japan had 
joined the war against the Allies and led an attack against America. Japan had 
also advanced towards India and occupied Rangoon. The enemy was at our 
door. There was widespread anxiety all over the country, and people were 
wondering what would come next. 
Some thought that India would be attacked in the war between Japan and 
America. Some even wished that the Japanese would cross over to India and 
drive away British. People were impatient break their chains of bondage. 
Seeing such widespread unrest in India, the British government in England 
decided to send out Sir Stafford Cripps to India, so that could bring about some Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54 kind of settlement between the two countries. A ray of hope seemed to come 
out of the darkness, and people in India began to think that freedom was at 
hand. But once again our hopes were dashed to the ground. The proposals 
which Cripps brought with him were not acceptable to our leaders :the British 
were not prepared to give what we really wanted. And so Cripps went back to 
England, having achieved nothing, and Gandhiji and the other leaders decided 
that India could not give the British help in the war, unless she is first given 
freedom. 
Bapu saw that the European war as well as the war with Japan was ruining our 
country. The youth and the wealth of the country were being sacrificed, against 
our wishes, for the sake of a foreign nation. His heart was sick and he wanted 
to do something. He called all the leaders together and explained to them that, 
as long as the British remained in India, they would continue to suck her blood 
and to exploit her. It was necessary to make a desperate and united effort to 
drive them out of India. 
But the fight must remain peaceful and non-violent. If freedom was achieved 
through violence and bloodshed, it was not worth having at all. Let us ask the 
British with one voice, 'Quit India! Quit India!' The moment Gandhiji gave the 
call, the four hundred millions of India took up the slogan 'Britishers, quit India! 
Britishers, quit India !' This slogan stared the British in the face wherever they 
went. It was written on the walls, the door-posts, the streets, and even on the 
office tables where they worked. For the first time they began to realize that 
the time had come when they must really quit India. 
At the same time Gandhiji wrote a letter to the Viceroy saying that if India was 
given freedom, she would willingly help in the war-effort. But if the British 
even now refused to give India her freedom, she would be driven to fight for 
that freedom to the very last man. It would be a desperate and a bitter 
struggle, but it would be fought on the principles of non-violence." 
"What reply did the Viceroy give to Gandhiji's letter?" asked Hari. 
"Instead of replying to that letter,'' continued the mother, "he only arrested our 
leaders and shut them up in jails. Bapu and Kasturbai were taken to the Aga Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55 Khan's Palace in Poona and confined there. Some of his close associates such as 
Sarojini Naidu, Dr. Sushila Nayyar and Mahadev Desai were also kept in 
confinement there along with him." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56  
15. Death of Kasturba and Mahadevbhai  
D
ays at Agakhan Palace  
"Bapu must have been very comfortable in that palace ?" asked Hari. 
"No, my son, how could Bapu, the friend of the poor , the father of Our Nation, 
how could he be comfortable, living away from his suffering and sorrowing 
children? He could find no peace inside that large and luxurious palace. Bapu 
could never find happiness, if he could live and spend all his time with the poor 
and the lowly. 
Even in that palace he lived like a poor man. He would get up early in the 
morning, say his prayers, take a little fruit juice and then get busy with his 
work. All his associates would have their meals with him, and the poetess 
Sarojini Naidu, the Nightingale of India, would entertain him with his jokes and 
anecdotes. There would be prayers again in the evening, and then they would 
all settle down to some more work. And then they would retire early, after 
having worked the whole day. 
 
Loses his dear colleague  
Mahatmaji had been in detention only for a few days,  when his old and trusted 
colleague, Mahadev Desai, died suddenly of heart failure. Gandhiji and 
Mahadev Bhai had been very closely associated with each other for over thirty 
years, and Bapu loved him as his own son. Mahadev Bhai too had dedicated his 
life to Bapu and to the country. They had shared each other's joys and sorrows: 
Bapu would open out his heart to him, and he would always give Bapu his frank 
and well-considered opinion on all matters. 
Bapu bathed Mahadev's body with his own hands and then decked the bier and 
performed all the funeral rites himself, even as a father would have done. The 
funeral pyre was lighted in a comer of the palace garden, and a memorial was Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57 erected on that spot, and as long as Bapu stayed in that palace, he went to 
that samadhi36 and laid flowers there everyday. 
After Gandhi's arrest, there was no one to guide the people in their non-violent 
struggle against the British Government. People were burning with the desire to 
win independence, and they carded on the fight in various ways according to 
their lights. Some, in their enthusiasm, even forgot the teachings of Gandhiji, 
and secretly incited people to violence. And the government answered back 
with all the violence that it was capable of. Bullets were rained on innocent 
gatherings, and whole villages were burnt down. A reign of terror prevailed in 
the country. Men, women, and children were killed by the thousand, and the 
jails were full. The leader of the nation was in prison, and without his guidance 
the people had gone astray and run mad. Bapu had never thought that if he was 
removed from the scene, the fight for freedom would take such a bloody and 
violent turn. He did not know that people would so misunderstand his slogan of 
'Quit India', that they would throw all restraint to the winds. 
While in jail, Gandhiji was in touch with the day-to-day happenings in the 
country. He was cut off from us physically, but all his thoughts were with us. 
The Father of the Nation could not rest in peace while the people, misguided 
by their enthusiasm, risked every hardship and suffering. 
The government threw the entire blame for the prevailing confusion and chaos 
on Bapu. Gandhiji made earnest efforts to secure the release of some of the 
leaders, so that they could lead the people back to nonviolence and discipline. 
But the government turned a deaf ear to all his requests. In utter helplessness, 
on the 10th of February 1943, Bapu decided to go on fast for twenty-one days 
as the only way of convincing the world of his sincerity. 
The government offered to release him for the duration of the fast, but Bapu 
would not agree to such a proposal. Gandhiji grew weaker and weaker every 
day. Kasturbai was all the time by his side and looked after him. The whole of 
India was in great suspense and anxiety. Men and women prayed for his life, 
and all eyes and ears were turned anxiously to the Aga Khan's Palace. There 
were protests and strikes all over the country, and in Delhi three Indian Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58 members of the Viceroy's Council tendered their resignations. But the 
government did not yield an inch. 
At long last the ordeal was over; Gandhiji, on the 3rd of March, broke his fast 
with a glass of orange-juice given to him by Kasturbai. Miraben sang some 
Christian hymns, friends recited the Holy Koran, and Parsees, Hindus and 
Buddhists all read to him passages from their Holy Scriptures. 
The country heaved a sigh of relief when the fast ended. 
 
Kasturba Passes away  
But Bapu's trials were not yet over. He had hardly r ecovered from the blow of 
his dear friend Mahadev Desai's death, when Kasturbai fell ill. Efforts were 
made to persuade her to return home, but she would not leave Gandhiji. It 
seemed as though she knew she would die, and so did not want to leave her 
husband. Her health continued to decline, and at last she died." 
"How bitterly Bapu must have cried over Kasturbai's death !' said Hari. 
"My child," answered the mother, "anyone else would have completely broken 
down in the face of such a calamity. But even in such a crisis, Gandhiji did not 
lose faith in God, nor did he forget to pray for his suffering countrymen. 
A memorial was raised for Kasturbai alongside that of Mahadev Desai, and as 
long as Bapu was detained in the Aga Khan's Palace, he would lay flowers on 
both the samadhis and offer prayers everyday. And even today hundreds of 
people visit the palace on Sundays and pay their homage to the memory of the 
departed souls. 
There was sorrow and calamity on all sides, and Bapu was trying to brave all 
this alone. But there are limits even to the endurance of a man like Gandhiji. 
His strength began to decline and he fell ill. When his condition became 
serious, the government felt that it would be both safe and wise to set him 
free. They knew that his death in jail would throw the whole country into 
chaos. And, so, on the 6th of May, Gandhiji and his companions were Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59 unconditionally released. Before leaving the palace, Gandhiji paid his last 
homage at the two samadhis, and as he laid the flowers, everyone's heart was 
touched, and all eyes were moist with tears." 
"Yes, mother, I remember very well how happy we were when we heard of 
Bapu's release, and how we celebrated it in our house." 
"My son, we were not the only ones who were happy at his release. There was 
rejoicing and happiness all over the country." 
 
36. Memorial.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60  
16. FREEDOM IS WON BUT.....  
"With Bapu out of the jail, a new hope came into all  hearts, and people found 
fresh courage, for once again they had someone who could feel for them and 
share their sorrow. 
 
India Is Divided  
For some time, Gandhiji lived in Juhu and Poona and tried to regain his health. 
As soon as he was better, he threw himself into the National Movement and 
once again assumed its leadership. He opened the people's eyes to their 
mistakes, and also pointed to the government where they had been in the 
wrong. Once again, he threw in all his weight to persuade the British to transfer 
power to the Indians, but the British were in no mood to do so. They said that 
they would be willing to quit India only if the Hindus and the Muslims could 
settle their differences and ask for independence with one voice. Mahatmaji 
argued that Hindus and Muslims were both children of the same country, and 
that their differences were a mere domestic quarrel which they could settle as 
they liked. The British should not interfere in this domestic quarrel, or make 
this the excuse for refusing to give India her freedom. But there was bitterness 
and division in our ranks, and we were like the two cats who quarrelled over a 
loaf of bread and called in a monkey to divide it equally between them. The 
monkey would put the two pieces in the scales and eat up a larger slice now 
from one piece, now from the other, pretending to equalize them, until he had 
eaten away the entire loaf and the two cats looked helplessly at each other, 
growing wiser only after the event. In the same way the Hindus and Muslims 
quarrelled with each e other and the agents of the British offered to divide the 
country into two parts --India and Pakistan. 
Our leaders at length agreed to this proposal, for they felt that it brought them 
freedom even though it meant dividing the country. Little did they realize that 
this division would sow the seeds of hatred and ill-will all over. Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61  
Riots Break Out  
From all parts of the country there came news that w as heartrending and 
alarming. There were already disturbances going, on in the Punjab, when 
fighting between the Hindus and the Muslims broke out in Calcutta. There was 
bitter hatred between the two communities, and men and women who had so 
far lived as peaceful neighbours now became sworn enemies. Gandhiji was 
greatly worried over the turn of events and he proceeded to Calcutta to see 
things with his own eyes. He found that the reports that had reached his ears 
were only too true. Hindus and Muslims who had lived together in friendship for 
generations past, were now after each other's blood. The first thing that Bapu 
did was to call a mass meeting in the Calcutta Maidan. The response was 
amazing. Hindus and Muslims, who had hitherto hated the very sight of each 
other, poured in by the thousands to listen to Bapu's words. Gandhiji talked to 
them about the power of love and the value of goodwill, and in the twinkling of 
an eye, all hatred and ill-will seemed to have vanished into thin air. He then 
called upon both Hindus and Muslims to bring their weapons and lay them 
before him. People were not yet ready for this. Gandhiji at once saw that his 
message had not gone home, doubt and suspicion still remained in the hearts of 
people. And so he decided to go on a fast, so that the hearts of people might 
be cleansed. 
As soon as the news of his fast went round, 
the people of Bengal were struck with fear 
and sorrow. They came in hundreds and 
surrendered their weapons to him and 
pledged themselves to live in friendship and 
peace. And they kept their word and never 
fought with each other again. 
Bapu was working hard to bring back goodwill among the Hindus and Muslims. If 
Gandhiji brought about peace and friendliness at one place, quarrels would 
break out at another. Just then news came that Muslims of Noakhali were 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62 killing and plundering the Hindus there. The frail old man immediately started 
for that place. 
He scorned all danger, and went about preaching his gospel of love from village 
to village. Often he had to journey on foot and sometimes he even walked 
barefoot. He lived and moved with the villagers of Noakhali. He ate with them 
and slept with them. He talked to people, and asked them to stop fighting each 
other and to return the plundered goods to their rightful owners. He called 
back those who had become homeless and put them again in their homes. He 
restored the displaced and the desolate to their friends, and strove in every 
way to bring order out of confusion. 
 
In Bihar-Preaching Love  
After Noakhali, trouble broke out in Bihar. The Hind us there burnt down entire 
villages in which Muslims lived; passions ran high and hatred was let loose once 
again. When Bapu heard all these he was full of grief and set out for Bihar at 
once. Again he preached his gospel of love and told the people that it was a sin 
to take anyone's life. Hindus and Muslims alike were the natives of the same 
country. They had lived together for generations and centuries, and , they had 
to live together. Why hate and kill each other, then? This was how he talked to 
them. In the beginning they did not pay heed to his words, but slowly and 
gradually, the small feeble voice of Truth touched their hearts; they began to 
realize that they were human beings and not beasts of prey. They vowed to 
keep the peace and cherish love and goodwill. 
In those unhappy days, Bapu worked continuously and feverishly. He forgot his 
food and his sleep; he was unmindful alike of freezing cold and scorching heat. 
He would wander barefoot in the villages of Noakhali or go from place to place 
in Bihar, bringing help to the distressed and peace to broken hearts. Not for a 
moment did he lose hope; not for a moment was his faith shaken. Trials and 
difficulties gave him more courage; suffering and hardship made him more 
gentle. Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63  
India Wins Freedom  
At last in 1947 came the day when India 
w
as free; there was joy and enthusiasm 
in every heart. But the dawn of 
freedom was marred by clouds of 
hatred and ill-will. Murder and 
bloodshed were going on unchecked in 
the country. Communal passion had 
blinded us and we had strayed into 
darkness. The bonds of love had snapped; people were after each other's blood. 
Men had become murderous like wild beasts, and Hindus and Muslims thirsted 
for each other's blood. A gloom had settled upon the country, but even in that 
terrible time, one or two beacon lights shone faintly and fought to drive away 
the darkness." 
"What were those beacon lights, mother?" 
"These lights, my child, were none other than Bapu and his colleagues. But 
somehow we had turned our eyes from them. Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs were 
killing each other. The goondas37 thought it a golden opportunity: They pillaged 
and plundered and robbed and murdered. Innocent men and women had to 
suffer and the world was shocked at the savagery which had seized our 
country."  
Hari was deeply affected by this 
narration; he was sad and lost in 
thought for some time. At last he spoke 
out, "Alas! mother, how it must have 
grieved Bapu to see Hindus and Muslims 
and Sikhs doing such acts. It must have 
broken his heart." 
"Yes, my child. His heart was sore and 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64 he would often say, 'Oh God, I cannot bear this killing and looting any more. 
Take me from world'. 
When peace had been restored in Noakhali and Bihar, Bapu started for the 
Punjab. But just then rioting broke out in Delhi. What happened then is such a 
recent matter and I suppose you remember it all very vividly. They were 
terrible days. Bapu stopped in Delhi; he could not go Punjab when people were 
fighting against each other in the very capital of India. He found that displaced 
Punjab had poured into Delhi by the thousand. They were bitter and angry, and 
they seemed to have been the cause of the outburst in Delhi. Bapu was in full 
sympathy with them, but he also realised that, if once things went out of 
control in Delhi, confusion and disorder would spread to the whole country and 
destroy it." 
"What did he do, then, mother?" 
He thought over the matter calmly and carefully. He called the important 
officials of Delhi and urged upon them to treat the Hindus and the Muslims alike 
with complete impartiality. He asked them to be watchful and careful. He then 
went to the refugees. He assured them of sympathy and help, and explained to 
them that whatever the Muslims of the Punjab might have done to them, the 
Muslims of Delhi had not harmed them in any way. It would be madness to try 
to avenge their wrongs upon people who were innocent. He also appealed to 
the Muslims of Delhi to help the refugees as best they could. 
But people had lost their heads. Frenzy 
and passion had clouded their vision. 
Gandhiji then decided to undertake 
another fast: he might succeed in 
bringing the Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs 
together by laying down his own life. 
There was a Commotion in Delhi: no 
one knew what should be done. At 
length the leaders of various communities went to Bapu and assured him that 
they would risk their own lives in order to restore peace and goodwill in Delhi. 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65 As soon as Gandhiji was convinced of the sincerity of these leaders, he broke 
his fast, and from that moment conditions in Delhi began to improve steadily." 
"I remember the day when Bapu broke his fast, mother. There was rejoicing all 
over the country." 
"You are right, my son, Gandhi's fast had a great effect on all good people, but 
there were some who did not approve of his efforts in the case of Hindu-Muslim 
unity. They thought that such attempts would weaken India, and that the only 
way of becoming strong was to return bullet for bullet. To try to overcome evil, 
with good was, according to them, a sign of weakness and cowardice. They also 
knew that as long as Bapu was alive, he would continue to strive for harmony 
between all communities, and that he would not heed to their evil counsel. And 
so there was only one way for them, and that was to kill Bapu. 
 
The Light Goes Out  
Bapu was in the habit of 
h
aving his evening meals 
early, and exactly at 5 
o'clock he used to hold his 
prayer meetings. Men and 
women would gather for 
these meetings long 
before appointed hour, 
and as Bapu passed 
through the crowd, people 
would bow and greet and touch his feet, Bapu would sit on a low dais 
surrounded by his associates and read the Koran and Gita or sing hymns. The 
prayer would begin with some recitations from the Koran and then there would 
be readings from the Gita and the singing of hymns. And then Bapu would 
preach a short sermon, and talk to the people about the situation in the 
country and in the world. A favourite hymn of Bapu's which would be sung 
everyday in the prayer meetings began thus: 
Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66 'Ishwar Allah tere nam  
Sabko sanmati de Bhagwan.38 
There were also other similar hymns which were sung at those meetings. 
People flocked to his prayer meetings from far and near, and Hindus and 
Muslims, all sat together and prayed." 
"I know, mother, I have been to these prayer meetings many times. But I could 
not understand why Bapu would have readings from the Koran and the Holy 
Bible alongside those from the Gita." 
"Because, my dear son, Gandhiji believed that all religions were based on truth. 
In fact, he used to say that he was a Hindu as well as a Muslim, a Sikh and as 
well as a Christian. He took all religions as his own, for is not every religion 
based on the principles of truth and righteousness ? But let me tell you of what 
happened today. Bapu was walking fast to the prayer meeting, as he was a 
little late. He was passing through the crowd when a man came towards him as 
if to touch his feet, and shot at him. He must have been a very cruel and and a 
heartless man, for none other could have lifted his hand at Bapu." 
The mother saw that Hari was I crying. She took him in her arms and tried to 
console him. "Do not cry, my child. Gandhiji gave his life in the service of God. 
Such people never die, they live forever. And in the end victory shall come to 
them. Victory for Bapu will mean victory for Truth, and victory for Truth will be 
victory for India. But men and women, young and old, will have to work 
unceasingly for this. We should not only follow the teachings of Gandhiji 
ourselves, but help others to do the same. For thirty years. Gandhiji has been 
teaching us the gospel of Truth, Love and Nonviolence. Whenever we see our 
brethren going astray and yielding to hate, unrighteousness or violence, we 
should stretch our loving hands to them and bring them back to the right path. 
We should never think in terms of Hindus or Muslims, Sikhs or Christians; we 
should remember that we are Indians first and Indians last. We should all work 
for Hindu-Muslim unity. India as well as Pakistan should both learn that all Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67 communities are alike. God has created the Hindus, the Muslims as well as the 
Christians, and all must live together in love and harmony.'' 
Hari suddenly sat up and asked, "Mother, what must I do in order to become a 
true Indian ?" 
"There is only one way," answered the mother, "and that is to follow the path 
that Bapu showed us. We must try and make India a country where there shall 
be no poverty or suffering, where the strong shall not oppress the weak, where 
there shall be no distinction of rich and poor, Hindu and Muslim, but all shall be 
equal, happy and prosperous. We can achieve this end only through Truth, 
Sacrifice and Perseverance. And Bapu' soul will rest in peace if we can all work 
sincerely towards this end. It is not necessary that our efforts should bear 
immediate fruit. There will be many failures and disappointments, but we 
should not waver or despair. That would be unworthy of Bapu's followers. We 
should work earnestly and righteously, without worrying about the results. That 
would be true service of humanity, and thus alone could we become worthy 
disciples of Bapu." 
The mother was narrating the story of Gandhiji's life, when Hari's father 
returned. He had listened to the statements of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and 
Sardar Patel on the radio. He told them that Panditji overwhelmed by the 
tragedy, and in a voice trembling with emotion, had said, 'Friends and 
comrades, the Light has gone out of our lives and there is darkness everywhere. 
I do not know what to tell you and how to say it. Our beloved leader Bapu, as 
we called him. the Father of the Nation is no more. Perhaps I am wrong to say 
that. Nevertheless. we will not see him again as we have seen him for these 
many years, The Light has gone out, I said, and yet I was wrong. For the light 
that shone in this country was no ordinary light. The light that has illumined 
this country for these many years will illumine this country for many more 
years, and a thousand years later, that light will still be seen in this country 
and the world will see it and it will give solace to innumerable hearts. 
'A mad man has put an end to his life, for I can only call him mad who did it and 
yet there has been enough of poison in this country during the past years and Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68 months and this poison has had its effect on people's minds. We must face this 
poison. We must root out this poison in the way that our beloved teacher 
taught us.' Thus spoke Panditji and then followed Sardar Patel. He too was 
deeply affected by Gandhiji's death. He said. 'My heart is full of grief and 
agony, I do not know what to say to you. What has happened is a matter of 
sorrow and shame. Of late, Gandhiji had been dissatisfied with the state of 
affairs in our country. His recent fast was the result of that. The occasion today 
is for grief and not anger. Anger will make us forget the great things which 
Gandhiji had been teaching us all his life. We did not take his advice during his 
life-time and let it not be said that we did not follow him even after his death. 
That will be a great blot on our names. 
'Whatever we may feel, we must not forget that now is the time for us. We 
must stand firmly and solidly without any division in our ranks. Gandhiji will 
still be with us always, because his teachings and noble ideals will always be 
before us. Tomorrow at 4 p.m. his body will turn into ashes but, his soul will be 
with us for all times to come, because it is eternal.' 
Hari's mother could restraint herself no longer and broke into tears. The father 
tried to console  her by saying, "Do not cry, my dear, for tears will not help us. 
This is no time for crying and lamentation. This is the time for every Indian to 
take up the challenge and declare to Bapu's enemies, 'We are the soldiers of 
Bapu; we are the inheritors of his mission.' We shall march into the field 
carrying the banner of Truth, the shield of Nonviolence and the sword of 
Spiritual Force. Thus shall we fight evil and conquer without killing, and victory 
shall be ours! Let the sons and daughters of India wipe their tears and march 
onward with fresh hope and vigour. Let us work with the strength and the light 
that he has handed down to us. Let us win for him the battle of Truth and show 
to the world what he and his mission were." 
 
37. Gangsters.  
38. Ishwar, Allah are thy names; Give good sense to all, O Lord. 
 Our Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69  
 
