 
Panchayat Raj 
[Type the document subtitle] 
 
Written by : M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Compiled by : R. K. Prabhu 
 
 
Rs. 5/-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Mudranalaya 
Ahmedabad 380 014  (INDIA) 
  Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
PUBLISHER'S NOTE 
This is a timely publication, for compiling which w e heartily thank Shri R. K. 
Prabhu. The readers of Gandliiji's writings will ha ve known him well enough 
through his earlier compilations like  India of My Dreams, Mohan-Mala, Truth 
is God, Evil Wrought by the English Medium , etc. We propose to issue in the 
near future a further set of books compiled by him,  containing, in brief, the 
essential teachings of Garidhiji on subjects of vit al national concern, such as  
Birth-Control: The Right Way and The Wrong Way, Non -violent Way to 
World Peace, The Message of the Gita, The Moral Bas is of Vegetarianism, 
and so on. We hope that students of Gandhian litera ture will welcome these 
publications. 
Ever since Gandhiji returned to India in 1915 he ha d been laying the 
greatest emphasis on the need to revitalize the vil lage Panchayats and establish 
Village Swaraj in this country, for he firmly belie ved that the real India lives in 
its seven hundred thousand and odd villages and tha t India has no future worth 
the name unless these villages play their proper pa rt in the life of the country. 
His scheme of such a village Swaraj comprehended ve ry department of rural 
activity which went to make each village self-gover ning and self-contained as 
regards the essential needs of its inhabitants, so that on the solid foundation of 
a vast network of such little "republics" peacefull y co-operating with one 
another for mutual benefit, the life of the nation as a whole could be broad-
based, enabling it to progress smoothly towards its  destined goal. Village 
sanitation and hygiene, village diet and health, me dical relief, non-violent rural 
economy based on Khadi and other village industries , arts and crafts, co-
operative cattle-farming and other co-operatives, b asic education, and Shanti 
Sena, are some of the primary means by which, in Ga ndhiji's opinion, the goal 
of all-round village development can be attained. A  village worker trained and 
disciplined for initiating and helping forward such  a broad-based movement 
would be its pivot. Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3  It is a matter for satisfaction that in several par ts of the country rural 
reconstruction and development is progressing along  the lines chalked out by 
Gandhiji, but more strenuous and sustained efforts are necessary on the part of 
both individual Sarvodaya workers and official and semi-official agencies, if the 
pace is to be accelerated. Under alien rule, such a  movement obviously could 
not make any appreciable progress or gather any mom entum. Things have 
basically changed now and our Planners are coming t o realize more and more 
that if our national economy is to be stabilized, t he primary pre-requisite is the 
rehabilitation of our rural economy on the non-viol ent lines which had 
obtained, as pointed out by Gandhiji, till the adve nt of British rule, and which 
lies at present in a shattered and desperate condit ion. The Prime Minister has 
rightly told us that three things are our basic req uirements today, viz., 1. a 
village school imparting basic education; 2. a vill age Panchayat; and 3. a village 
co-operative. One may well add a fourth one, namely  a village  Parishramalaya  
or industrial home, where any villager should be ab le to find work for adequate 
wages and to get training in rural industries or cr afts. These four may well 
constitute the new four-fold programme for realizin g true Swaraj. 
The present publication will, we hope, help the rea der to know and profit 
by what Gandhiji had to say about this aspect of th e vital problem of national 
reconstruction. Above all, let us note what he has stated in the first chapter of 
this work (pp. 4-5) : 
"I have not pictured a poverty-stricken India conta ining ignorant millions. I 
have pictured to myself an India continually progre ssing along the lines best 
suited to her genius. I do not, however, picture it  as a third class or even a first 
class copy of the dying civilization of the West." The book has been priced as 
cheap as possibly we can, and we propose to issue i t in Hindi, Gujarati, etc., 
also. 
31-1-1959 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4   
CHAPTER 1  
WHY THE VILLAGE MOVEMENT? 
Villagers have suffered long from neglect by those who have had the benefit of 
education. They have chosen the city life. The vill age movement is an attempt 
to establish healthy contact with the villages by i nducing those who are fired 
with the spirit of service to settle in them and fi nd self-expression in the 
service of villagers. ...Those who have settled in villages in the spirit of service 
are not dismayed by the difficulties facing them. T hey knew before they went 
that they would have to contend against many diffic ulties including even 
sullenness on the part of villagers. Only those, th erefore, who have faith in 
themselves and in their mission will serve the vill agers and influence their lives. 
A true life lived amongst the people is in itself a n object-lesson that must 
produce its own effect upon immediate surroundings.  The difficulty with the 
young man is, perhaps, that he has gone to the vill age merely to earn a living 
without the spirit of service behind it. I admit th at village life does not offer 
attractions to those who go there in search of mone y. Without the incentive of 
service village life would jar after the novelty ha s worn out. No young man 
having gone to a village may abandon the pursuit on  the slightest contact with 
difficulty. Patient effort will show that villagers  are not very different from 
city-dwellers and that they will respond to kindlin ess and attention. It is no 
doubt true that one does not have in the villages t he opportunity of contact 
with the great ones of the land. With the growth of  village mentality the 
leaders will find it necessary to tour in the villa ges and establish a living touch 
with them. Moreover the companionship of the great and the good is available 
to all through the works of saints like Chaitanya, Ramakrishna, Tulsidas, Kabir, 
Nanak, Dadu, Tukaram, Tiruvalluvar, and others too numerous to mention 
though equally known and pious. The difficulty is t o get the mind tuned to the 
reception of permanent values. If it is modern thou ght—political, social, 
economical, scientific—that is meant, it is possibl e to procure literature that 
will satisfy curiosity. I admit, however, that one does not find such as easily as Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  one finds religious literature. Saints wrote and sp oke for the masses. The vogue 
for translating modern thought to the masses in an acceptable manner has not 
yet quite set in. But it must come in time. I would , therefore, advise young 
men . . . not to give in but persist in their effor t and by their presence make 
the villages more livable and lovable. That they wi ll do by serving the villages 
in a manner acceptable to the villagers. Everyone c an make a beginning by 
making the villages cleaner by their own labour and  removing illiteracy to the 
extent of their ability. And if their lives are cle an, methodical and industrious, 
there is no doubt that the infection will spread in  the village in which they may 
be working. 
Harijan,  20-2-1937 
My Dream  
I have not pictured a poverty-stricken India contai ning ignorant millions. I have 
pictured to myself an India continually progressing  along the lines best suited to 
her genius. I do not, however, picture it as a thir d class or even a first class 
copy of the dying civilization of the West. 
If my dream is fulfilled, and every one of the seve n lakhs of villages 
becomes a well-living republic in which there are n o illiterates, in wnich no one 
is idle for want of work, in which everyone is usef ully occupied and has 
nourishing food, well-ventilated dwellings, and suf ficient Khadi for covering the 
body, and in which all the villagers know and obser ve the laws of hygiene and 
sanitation, such a State must have varied and incre asing needs, which it must 
supply unless it would stagnate.. .. 
What, however, according to my view, the State will  not have is an army of 
B.A.'s and M.A.'s with their brains sapped with too  much cramming and minds 
almost paralysed by the impossible attempt to speak  and write English like 
Englishmen. The majority of these have no work, no employment. And when 
they have the latter, it is usually clerkships at w hich most of the knowledge 
gained during their twelve years of High Schools an d Colleges is of no use 
whatsoever to them. 
Harijan,  30-7-1938 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6   
CHAPTER 2 
PANCHAYATS IN PRE-INDEPENDENCE DAYS 
Panchayat has an ancient flavour; it is a good word . It literally means an 
assembly of five elected by villagers. It represent s the system, by which the 
innumerable village republics of India were governe d. But the British 
Government, by its ruthlessly thorough method of re venue collection, almost 
destroyed these ancient republics, which could not stand the shock of this 
revenue collection. Congressmen are now making a cr ude attempt to revive the 
system by giving village elders civil and criminal jurisdiction. The attempt was 
first made in 1921. It failed. It is being made aga in, and it will fail if it is not 
systematically and decently, I will not say, scient ifically, tried. 
It was reported to me in Nainital, that in certain places in the U.P., even 
criminal cases like rape were tried by the so-calle d Panchayats. I heard of some 
fantastic judgments pronounced by ignorant or inter ested Panchayats. This is 
all bad if it is true. Irregular Panchayats are bou nd to fall to pieces under their 
own unsupportable weight. I suggest, therefore, the  following rules for the 
guidance of village workers: 
1.  No Panchayat should be set up without the written s anction of a Provincial 
Congress Committee; 
2.  A Panchayat should in the first instance be elected  by a public meeting 
called for the purpose by beat of drums; 
3.  It should be recommended by the Tahsil Committee; 
4.  Such Panchayat should have no criminal jurisdiction ; 
5.  It may try civil suits if the parties to them refer  their disputes to the 
Panchayat; 
6.  No one should be compelled to refer any matter to t he Panchayat; Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  7.  No Panchayat should have any authority to impose fi nes, the only sanction 
behind its civil decrees being its moral authoiity,  strict impartiality and 
the willing obedience of the parties concerned; 
8.  There should be no social or other boycott for the time being; 
9.  Every Panchayat will be expected to attend to: 
a.  The education of boys and girls in its village; 
b.  Its sanitation; 
c.  Its medical needs; 
d.  The upkeep and cleanliness of village wells or pond s; 
e.  The uplift of and daily wants of the so-called unto uchables. 
10.  A Panchayat that fails without just cause to attend  to the requirements 
mentioned in clause 9 within six months of its elec tion, or fails otherwise 
to retain the goodwill of the villagers, or stands self- condemned for any 
other cause, appearing sufficient to the Provincial  Congress Committee, 
may be disbanded and another elected in its place. 
The disability to impose fines or social boycott is  a necessity of the case in the 
initial stages; social boycott in villages has been  found to be a dangerous 
weapon in the hands of ignorant or unscrupulous men . Imposition of fines too 
may lead to mischief and defeat the very end in vie w. Where a Panchayat is 
really popular and increases its popularity by the constructive work of the kind 
suggested in clause 9, it will find its judgments a nd authority respected by 
reason of its moral prestige. And that surely is th e greatest sanction anyone can 
possess and of which one cannot be deprived. 
Young India,  28-5-1931 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8   
CHAPTER 3 
PANGHAYATS IN INDEPENDENT INDIA 
Independence must mean that of the people of India,  not of those who are 
today ruling over them. The rulers should depend on  the will of those who are 
under their heels. Thus, they have to be servants o f the people, ready to do 
their will. 
Independence must begin at the bottom. Thus, every village will be a 
republic or Panchayat having full powers. It follow s, therefore, that every 
village has to be self-sustained and capable of man aging its affairs even to the 
extent of defending itself against the whole world.  It will be trained and 
prepared to perish in the attempt to defend itself against any onslaught from 
without. Thus, ultimately, it is the individual who  is the unit. This does not 
exclude dependence on and willing help from neighbo urs or from the world. It 
will be free and voluntary play of mutual forces. S uch a society is necessarily 
highly cultured in which every man and woman knows what he or she wants 
and, what is more, knows that no one should want an ything that others cannot 
have with equal labour. 
This society must naturally be based on truth and n on-violence which, in my 
opinion, are not possible without a living belief i n God meaning a Self-existent, 
All-knowing Living Force which inheres every other force known to the world 
and which depends on none and which will live when all other forces may con-
ceivably perish or cease to act. I am unable to acc ount for my life without 
belief in this All-embracing Living Force. 
In this structure composed of innumerable villages there will be ever-
widening, never ascending circles. Life will not be  a pyramid with the apex 
sustained by the bottom. But it will be an oceanic circle whose centre will be 
the individual always ready to perish for the villa ge, the latter ready to perish 
for the circle of villages, till at last the whole becomes one life composed of Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9  individuals, never aggressive in their arrogance bu t ever humble, sharing the 
majesty of the oceanic circle of which they are int egral units. 
Therefore, the outermost circumference will not wie ld power to crush the 
inner circle but give strength to all within and de rive its own from the centre. I 
may be taunted with the retort that this is all  Utopian  and therefore not worth 
a single thought. If Euclid's point, though incapab le of being drawn by human 
agency, has an imperishable value, my picture has i ts own for mankind to live. 
Let India live for this true picture, though never realizable in its completeness. 
We must have  a proper picture of what we want before we can have something 
approaching it. If there ever is to be a republic o f every village in India, then I 
claim verity for my picture in which the last is eq ual to the first, or in other 
words, none  is  to be the first and none the last. 
In this picture every religion has its full and equ al place. We are all leaves 
of a majestic tree whose trunk cannot be shaken off  its roots which are deep 
down in the bowels of the earth. The mightiest of w inds cannot move it. 
In this there is no room for machines that would di splace human labour and 
that would concentrate power in a few hands. Labour  .has its unique place in a 
cultural human family. Every machine that helps eve ry individual has a place. 
But I must confess that I have never sat down to th ink out what that machine 
can be. I have thought of Singer's sewing machine. But even that is perfunctory. 
I do not need it to fill in my picture. 
Harijan , 28-7-1946 
When Panchayat Raj is established, public opinion w ill do what violence can 
never do. The present power of the zamindars, the c apitalists and the rajas can 
hold sway so long as the common people do not reali ze their own strength. If 
the people non-co-operate with the evil of zamindar i or capitalism, it must die 
of inanition. In Panchyat Raj only the Panchayat wi ll be obeyed and the 
Panchayat can only work through the law of their ma king. 
Harijan , 1-6-1947 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10   
CHAPTER 4 
MY IDEA OF VILLAGE SWARAJ 
My idea of Village Swaraj is that it is a complete republic, independent of 
its neighbours for its own vital wants, and yet int erdependent for many others 
in which dependence is a necessity. Thus every vill age's first concern will be to 
grow its own food crops and cotton for its cloth. I t should have a reserve for its 
cattle, recreation and playground for adults and ch ildren. Then if there is more 
land available, it will grow  useful  money crops, thus excluding  ganja,  tobacco, 
opium and the like. The village will maintain a vil lage theatre, school and 
public hall. It will have its own waterworks ensuri ng water supply. This can be 
done through controlled wells and tanks. Education will be compulsory up to 
the final basic course. As far as possible every ac tivity will be conducted on the 
co-operative basis. There will be no castes such as  we have today with their 
graded untouchability. Non-violence with its techni que of Satyagraha and non-
co-operation will be the sanction of the village co mmunity. There will be a 
compulsory service of village guards who will be se lected by rotation from the 
register maintained by the village. The government of the village will be con-
ducted by the Panchayat of five persons, annually e lected by the adult 
villagers, male and female, possessing minimum pres cribed qualifications. 
These will have all the authority and jurisdiction required. Since there will be 
no system of punishments in the accepted sense, thi s Panchayat will be the 
legislature, judiciary and executive combined to op erate for its year of office. 
Any village can become such a republic today withou t much interference, even 
from the present Government whose sole effective co nnection with the villages 
is the exaction of the village revenue. I have not examined here the question of 
relations with the neighbouring villages and the ce ntre if any. My purpose is to 
present an outline of village government. Here ther e is perfect democracy 
based upon individual freedom. The individual is th e architect of his own 
government. The law of non-violence rules him and h is government. He and his 
village are able to defy the might of a world. For the law governing every Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  villager is that he will suffer death in the defenc e of his and his village's 
honour. 
There is nothing inherently impossible in the pictu re drawn here. To model 
such a village may be the work of a lifetime. Any l over of true democracy and 
village life can take up a village, treat it as his  world and sole work, and he will 
find good results. He begins by being the village s cavenger, spinner, watchman, 
medicine man and school-master all at once. If nobo dy comes near him, he will 
be satisfied with scavenging and spinning. 
Harijan , 26-7-1942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12   
CHAPTER 5 
AN IDEAL VILLAGE 
An ideal Indian village will be so constructed as t o lend itself to perfect 
sanitation. It will have cottages with sufficient l ight and ventilation built of a 
material obtainable within a radius of five miles o f it. The cottages will have 
courtyards enabling householders to plant vegetable s for domestic use and to 
house their cattle. The village lanes and streets w ill be free of all avoidable 
dust. It will have wells according to its needs and  accessible to all. It will have 
houses of worship for all, also a common meeting pl ace, a village common for 
grazing its cattle, a co-operative dairy, primary a nd secondary schools in which 
industrial education will be the central fact, and it will have Panchayats for 
settling disputes. It will produce its own grains, vegetables and fruit, and its 
own Khadi. This is roughly my idea of a model villa ge. In the present circum-
stances its cottages will remain what they are with  slight improvements. Given 
a good zamindar, where there is one, or co-operatio n among the people, 
almost the whole of the programme other than model cottages can be worked 
out at expenditure within means of the villagers in cluding the zamindar or 
zamindars, without Government assistance. With that  assistance there is no 
limit to the possibility of village reconstruction.  But my task just now is to 
discover what the villagers can do to help themselv es if they have mutual co-
operation and contribute voluntary labour for the c ommon good. I am 
convinced that they can, under intelligent guidance , double the village income 
as distinguished from individual income. There are in our villages inexhaustible 
resources not for commercial purposes in every case  but certainly for local 
purposes in almost every case. The greatest tragedy  is the hopeless 
unwillingness of the villagers to better their lot.  
The very first problem the village worker will solv e is its sanitation. It is the 
most neglected of all the problems that baffle work ers and that undermine 
physical well-being and breed disease. If the worke r became a voluntary 
Bhangi, he would begin by collecting night- soil an d turning it into manure and Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  sweeping village streets. He will tell people how a nd where they should 
perform daily functions and speak to them on the va lue of sanitation and the 
great injury caused by its neglect. The worker will  continue to do the work 
whether the villagers listen to him or no. 
Harijan , 9-1-1937 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14   
CHAPTER 6 
NON-VIOLENT RURAL ECONOMY 
You cannot build non-violence on a factory civiliza tion, but it can be built 
on self-contained villages. Rural economy as I have  conceived it, eschews 
exploitation altogether, and exploitation is the es sence of violence. You have, 
therefore, to be rural-minded before you can be non -violent, and to be rural-
minded you have to have faith in the spinning wheel . 
Harijan,  4-11-1939 
Strictly speaking, no activity and no industry is p ossible without a certain 
amount of violence, no matter how little. Even the very process of living is 
impossible without a certain amount of violence. Wh at we have to do is to 
minimize it to the greatest extent possible. Indeed  the very word non-violence, 
a negative word, means that it is an effort to aban don the violence that is 
inevitable in life. Therefore whoever believes in A himsa will engage himself in 
occupations that involve the least possible violenc e… This is not possible 
without a heart-belief in non-violence. Suppose the re is a man who does no 
actual violence, who labours for his bread, but who  is always consumed with 
envy at other people's wealth or prosperity. He is not nonviolent. A non-violent 
occupation is thus that occupation which is fundame ntally free from violence 
and which involves no exploitation or envy of other s. 
Now I have no historical proof, but I believe that there was a time in India 
when village economics were organized on the basis of such non-violent 
occupations, not on the basis of the rights of man but on the duties of man. 
Those who engaged themselves in such occupations di d earn their living, but 
their labour contributed to the good of the communi ty. A carpenter, for 
instance, ministered to the needs of the village fa rmer. He got no cash 
payment but was paid in kind by the villagers. Ther e could be injustice even in 
this system, but it would be reduced to a minimum. I speak from personal 
knowledge of life in Kathiawad of over sixty years ago. There was more lustre Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15  in people's eyes, and more life in their limbs, tha n you find today. It was a life 
founded on unconscious Ahimsa. 
Body labour was at the core of these occupations an d industries, and there was 
no large-scale machinery. For when a man is content  to own only so much land 
as he can till with his own labour, he cannot explo it others. Handicrafts exclude 
exploitation and slavery. Large-scale machinery con centrates wealth in the 
hands of one man who lords it over the rest who sla ve for him. For he may be 
trying to create ideal conditions for his workmen, but it is none the less ex-
ploitation which is a form of violence. 
When I say that there was a time when society was b ased not on 
exploitation but on justice, I mean to suggest that  truth and Ahimsa were not 
virtues confined to individuals but were practised by communities. To me virtue 
ceases to have any value if it is cloistered or pos sible only for individuals. 
Harijan,  1-9-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16   
CHAPTER 7 
ALL-ROUND VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT 
A village unit as conceived by me is as strong as t he strongest. My imaginary 
village consists of 1,000 souls. Such a unit can gi ve a good account of itself, if it 
is well organized on a basis of self-sufficiency. 
Harijan,  4-8-1946 
The villagers should develop such a high degree of skill that articles 
prepared by them should command a ready market outs ide. When our villages 
are fully developed there will be no dearth in them  of men with a high degree 
of skill and artistic talent. There will be village  poets, village artists, village 
architects, linguists and research workers. In shor t, there will be nothing in life 
worth having which will not be had in the villages.  Today the villages are dung 
heaps. Tomorrow they will be like tiny gardens of E den where dwell highly 
intelligent folk whom no one can deceive or exploit . 
The reconstruction of the villages along these line s should begin right now. The 
reconstruction of the villages should not be organi zed on a temporary but 
permanent basis. 
Graft, art, health and education should all be inte grated into one scheme. 
Nai Talim is a beautiful blend of all the four and covers the whole education of 
the individual from the time of conception to the m oment of death. Therefore, 
I would not divide village uplift work into water-t ight compartments from the 
very beginning but undertake an activity which will  combine all four. Instead of 
regarding craft and industry as different from educ ation I will regard the 
former as the medium for the latter. Nai Talim ther efore ought to be 
integrated into the scheme. 
Harijan , 10-11-1946 
If rural reconstruction were not to include rural s anitation, our villages 
would remain the muck-heaps that they are today. Vi llage sanitation is a vital Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17  part of village life and is as difficult as it is i mportant. It needs a heroic effort 
to eradicate age-long insanitation. The village wor ker who is ignorant of the 
science of village sanitation, who is not a success ful scavenger, cannot fit 
himself for village service. 
It seems to be generally admitted that without the new or basic education 
the education of millions of children in India is w ell-nigh impossible. The village 
worker has, therefore, to master it and become a ba sic education teacher 
himself. 
Adult education will follow in the wake of basic ed ucation as a matter of 
course. Where this new education has taken root, th e children themselves 
become their parents' teachers. Be that as it may, the village worker has to 
undertake adult education also. 
Woman is described as man's better half. As long as  she has not the same 
rights in law as man, as long as the birth of a gir l does not receive the same 
welcome as that of a boy, so long we should know th at India is suffering from 
partial paralysis. Suppression of woman is a denial  of Ahimsa. Every village 
worker will, therefore, regard every woman as his m other, sister or daughter as 
the case may be, and look upon her with respect. On ly such a worker will 
command the confidence of the village people. 
It is impossible for an unhealthy people to win Swa raj. Therefore we should 
no longer be guilty of the neglect of the health of  our people. Every village 
worker must have a knowledge of the general princip les of health. 
Without a common language no nation can come into b eing. Instead of 
worrying himself with the controversy about Hindi-H industani and Urdu, the 
village worker will acquire a knowledge of the Rash trabhasha which should be 
such as can be understood by both Hindus and Muslim s. 
Our infatuation for English has made us unfaithful to provincial languages. 
If only as penance for this unfaithfulness (he vill age worker sould cultivate in 
the villagers a love of their own speech. He will h ave equal regard for all the 
other languages of India, and will learn the langua ge of the part where he may Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18  be workings and thus be able to inspire the village rs there with a regard for 
their own speech. 
The whole of this programme will, however, be a str ucture on sand if it is not 
built on the solid foundation of economic equality.  Economic equality must 
never be supposed to mean possession of an equal am ount of worldly goods by 
everyone. It does mean, however, that everyone will  have a proper house to 
live in, sufficient and balanced food to eat, and s ufficient Khadi with which to 
cover himself. It also means that the cruel inequal ity that obtains today will be 
removed by purely non-violent means. 
Harijan,  18-8-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19   
CHAPTER 8 
VILLAGE SANITATION 
The things to attend to in the villages are cleanin g- tanks and wells and 
keeping them clean, getting rid of dung-heaps. If t he workers will begin the 
work themselves, working like paid Bhangis from day  to day and always letting 
the villagers know that they are expected to join t hem so as ultimately to do 
the whole work themselves, they may be sure that th ey will find that the 
villagers will soonea or later co-operate. 
Lanes and streets have to be cleansed of all the ru bbish, which should be 
classified. There are portions which can be turned into manure, portions which 
have simply to be buried and portions which can be directly turned into wealth. 
Every bone picked up is valuable raw material from which useful articles can be 
made or which can be crushed into rich manure. Rags  and waste-paper can be 
turned into paper, and excreta picked up are golden  manure for the village 
fields. The way to treat the excreta is to mix them , liquid as well as solid, with 
superficial earth in soil dug no deeper than one fo ot at the most. In his book on 
rural hygiene, Dr. Poore says that excreta should b e buried in earth no deeper 
than nine to twelve inches (I am quoting from memor y). The author contends 
that superficial earth is charged with minute life,  which, together with light 
and air which easily penetrate it, turn the excreta  into good soft sweet-
smelling soil within a week. Any villager can test this for himself. The way to do 
it is either to have fixed latrines, with earthen o r iron buckets, and empty the 
contents in properly prepared places from day to da y, or to perform the 
function directly on to the ground dug up in square s, The excreta can either be 
buried in a village common or in individual fields.  This can only be done by the 
cooperation of the villagers. At the worst, an ente rprising villager can collect 
the excreta and turn them into wealth for himself. At present, this rich 
manure, valued at lakhs of rupees, runs to waste ev ery day, fouls the air and 
brings disease into the bargain. Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20  Village tanks are promiscuously used for bathing, w ashing clothes, and 
drinking and cooking purposes. Many village tanks a re also used by cattle. 
Buffaloes are often to be seen wallowing in them. T he wonder is that, in spite 
of this sinful misuse of village tanks, villages ha ve not been destroyed by 
epidemics. It is the universal medical evidence tha t this neglect to ensure 
purity of the water supply of villages is responsib le for many of the diseases 
suffered by the villagers. 
This, it will be admitted, is a gloriously interest ing and instructive service, 
fraught with incalculable benefit to the suffering humanity of India. I hope it is 
clear from my description of the way in which the p roblem should be tackled, 
that, given willing workers who will wield the broo m and the shovel with the 
same ease and pride as the pen and the pencil, the question of expense is 
almost wholly eliminated. All the outlay that will be required is confined to a 
broom, a basket, a shovel and pick-axe, and possibl y some disinfectant. Dry 
ashes are, perhaps, as effective a disinfectant as any that a chemist can supply. 
But here let philanthropic chemists tell us what is  the most effective and cheap 
village disinfectant that villagers can improvise i n their villages. 
Harijan,  8-2-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21   
CHAPTER 9 
RURAL MEDICAL RELIEF 
Medical relief as part of village work or social se rvice plays an important 
part in many reports I receive from numerous organi zations. This relief consists 
of medicines supplied to patients who from far and near flock to any person 
who advertises himself as distributor of such relie f. It means no trouble on the 
part of the medicine man. He need not have much or any knowledge of diseases 
and the symptoms. Medicines he often receives free from obliging chemists. 
Donations are always to be had from indiscriminate donors whose conscience is 
satisfied if they can distribute their charity in a id of suffering humanity. 
This social service has appeared to me to be the la ziest form of service and 
often even mischievous. It works mischief when the patient is expected to do 
nothing save to swallow the drug given to him. He i s none the wiser for having 
received the medicine. If anything he is worse off than before. The knowledge 
that he can get for nothing or for a trifle a pill or a potion that will correct 
certain irregularities will tempt him to repeat the m. The fact that he gets such 
aid free of charge will undermine his self-respect which should disdain to 
receive anything for nothing. 
There is another type of medical relief which is a boon. It is given by those who 
know the nature of diseases, who will tell the pati ents why they have their 
particular complaints and will also tell them how t o avoid them. Such servants 
will rush to assist at all odd hours of the day or night. Such discriminating relief 
is an education in hygiene, teaching the people how  to observe cleanliness and 
to gain health. But such service is rare. In the ma jority of cases mention of 
medical relief in reports is a piece of advertiseme nt leading to donations for 
other activities requiring perhaps as little exerti on or knowledge as medical 
relief. I would therefore urge all workers in the s ocial field, whether urban or 
rural, to treat their medical activity as the least  important item of service. It 
would be better to avoid all mention of such relief . Workers would do well to 
adopt measures that would prevent disease in their localities. Their stock of Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  medicines should be as small as possible. They shou ld study the bazar 
medicines available in their villages, know their r eputed properties, and use 
them as far as possible. 
Harijan,  9-11-1935 
I hold that where the rules of personal, domestic a nd public sanitation are 
strictly observed and due care is taken in the matt er of diet and exercise, there 
should be no occasion for illness or disease. Where  there is absolute purity, 
inner and outer, illness becomes impossible. If the  village people could but 
understand this, they would not need doctors,  hakims  or vaidyas.  
Harijan,  26-5-1946 
Nature Cure  
Nature cure implies that the treatment should be th e cheapest and the simplest 
possible. The ideal is that such treatment should b e carried out in the villages. 
The villagers should be able to provide the necessa ry means and equipment. 
What cannot be had in the villages should be procur ed. Nature cure does mean 
a change for the better in one's outlook on life it self. It means regulation of 
one's life in accordance with the laws of health. I t is not a matter of taking the 
free medicine from the hospital or for fees. A man who takes free treatment 
from the hospital accepts charity. The man who acce pts nature cure never 
begs. Self-help enhances self-respect. He takes ste ps to cure himself by 
eliminating poisons from the system and takes preca utions against falling ill in 
the future. 
Right diet and balanced diet are necessary. Today o ur villages are as 
bankrupt as we are ourselves. To produce enough veg etables, fruits and milk in 
the villages is an essential part of the nature cur e scheme. Time spent on this 
should not be considered a waste. It is bound to be nefit all the villagers and 
ultimately the whole of India. 
Harijan,  2-6-1946 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23   
CHAPTER 10 
REVIVAL OF VILLAGE INDUSTRIES 
We are guilty of a grievous wrong against the villa gers, and the only way in 
which we can expiate it is by encouraging them to r evive their lost industries 
and arts by assuring them, of a ready market. There  is no one more patient and 
forbearing than God, but there comes a limit even t o His patience and for-
bearance. If we neglect our duty to our villages, w e shall be courting our own 
ruin. This duty is no onerous one. It is incredibly  simple. We have to be rural- 
minded and think of our necessities and the necessi ties of our household in the 
terms of rural-mindedness. The task does not involv e much expenditure either. 
Volunteers are needed to go to the nearest villages  to assure them that all that 
they produce would find a ready market in the towns  and cities. This is a task 
which can be undertaken by men and women of all cas tes and creeds, of all 
parties and all faiths. It is in consonance with th e true economics of our 
country. 
Harijan , 1-3-1935 
There is hardly anything of daily use in the home w hich the villagers have 
not made before and cannot make even now. If we per form the mental trick 
and fix our gaze upon them, we immediately put mill ions of rupees into the 
pockets of the villagers, whereas at the present mo ment we are exploiting the 
villagers without making any return worth the name.  It is time we arrested the 
progress of the tragedy. To me, the campaign agains t untouchability has begun 
to imply ever so much more than the eradication of the ceremonial 
untouchability of those who are labelled untouchabl es. For the city dweller, 
the villages have become untouchable. He does not k now them, he will not live 
in them, and if he finds himself in a village, he w ill want to reproduce the city 
life there. This would be tolerable, if we could br ing into being cities which 
would accommodate 30 crores of human beings. This i s much more impossible 
than the one of reviving the village industries and  stopping the progressive Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  poverty, which is due as much to enforced unemploym ent as to any other 
cause. 
Harijan , 30-11-1934 
The revival of the village is possible only when it  is no more exploited. 
Industrialization on a mass scale will necessarily lead to passive or active 
exploitation of the villagers as the problems of co mpetition and marketing 
come in. Therefore we have to concentrate on the vi llage being self-contained, 
manufacturing mainly for use. Provided this charact er of the village industry is 
maintained, there would be no objection to villager s using even the modern 
machines and tools that they can make and can affor d to use. Only they should 
not be used as a means of exploitation of others. 
Harijan , 29-8-1936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25   
CHAPTER 11 
CHARKHA IN THE VILLAGES 
The spinning wheel represents to me the hope of the  masses. The masses 
lost their freedom, such as it was, with the loss o f the Charkha. The Charkha 
supplemented the agriculture of the villagers and g ave it dignity. It was the 
friend and solace of the widow. It kept the village rs from idleness. For the 
Charkha included all the anterior and posterior ind ustries — ginning, carding, 
warping, sizing, dyeing and weaving. These in their  turn kept the village 
carpenter and the blacksmith busy. The Charkha enab led the seven hundred 
thousand villages to become self-contained. With th e exit of the Charkha went 
the other village industries, such as the oil press . Nothing took the place of 
these industries. Therefore the villages were drain ed of their varied 
occupations and their creative talent and what litt le wealth these brought 
them. 
Hence, if the villagers are to come into their own,  the most natural thing 
that suggests itself is the revival of the Charkha and all it means. 
This revival cannot take place without an army of s elfless Indians of 
intelligence and patriotism working with a single m ind in the villages to spread 
the message of the Charkha and bring a ray of hope and light into their 
lustreless eyes. This is a mighty effort at co-oper ation and adult education of 
the correct type. It brings about a silent and sure  revolution like the silent but 
sure and life-giving revolution of the Charkha. 
Twenty years' experience of Charkha work has convin ced me of the 
correctness of the argument here advanced by me. Th e Charkha has served the 
poor Muslims and Hindus in almost an equal measure.  Nearly five crores of 
rupees have been put into the pockets of these lakh s of village artisans without 
fuss and tomtoming. Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  Hence I say without hesitation that the Charkha mus t lead us to Swaraj in 
terms of the masses belonging to all faiths. The Ch arkha restores the villages to 
their rightful place and abolishes distinctions bet ween high and low. 
Harijan , 13-4-1940 
The ideal no doubt is for every village to spin and  weave for itself just as 
today most villages grow corn for themselves. It is  easier for every village to 
spin and weave for itself than to grow all its corn . Every village can stock 
enough cotton and spin and weave without any diffic ulty. 
Young India,  11-8-1921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27   
CHAPTER 12 
OTHER VILLAGE INDUSTRIES 
These (village industries other than Khadi) stand o n a different footing from 
Khadi. There is not much scope for voluntary labour  in them. Each industry will 
take the labour of only a certain number of hands. These industries come in as 
a handmaid to Khadi. They cannot exist without Khad i, and Khadi will be 
robbed of its dignity without them. Village economy  cannot be complete 
without the essential village industries such as ha nd-grinding, hand-pounding, 
soap-making, paper- making, match-making, tanning, oil-pressing, etc. Con-
gressmen can interest themselves in these and, if t hey are villagers or will 
settle down in villages, they will give these indus tries a new life and a new 
dress. All should make it a point of honour to use only village articles whenever 
and wherever available. Given the demand there is n o doubt that most of our 
wants can be supplied from our villages. When we ha ve become village-minded, 
we will not want imitations of the West or machine- made products, but we will 
develop a true national taste in keeping with the v ision of a new India in which 
pauperism, starvation and idleness will be unknown.  
Constructive Programme,  pp. 15-16, Edn. 1948 
Village Tanning  
Village tanning is as ancient as India itself. No o ne can say when tanning 
became a degraded calling. It could not have been s o in ancient times. But we 
know today that one of the most useful and indispen sable industries has 
consigned probably a million people to hereditary u ntouchability. An evil day 
dawned upon this unhappy country when labour began to be despised and 
therefore neglected. Millions of those who were the  salt of the earth, on whose 
industry this country depended for its very existen ce, came to be regarded as 
low classes, and the microscopic leisured few becam e the privileged classes, 
with the tragic result that India suffered morally and materially. Which was the 
greater of the two losses it is difficult, if not i mpossible, to estimate. But the Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28  criminal neglect of the peasants and artisans has r educed us to pauperism, 
dullness and habitual idleness. With her magnificen t climate, lofty mountains, 
mighty rivers and an extensive seaboard, India has limitless resources, whose 
full exploitation in her villages should have preve nted poverty and disease. But 
divorce of the intellect from body-labour has made of us perhaps the shortest-
lived, most resourceless and most exploited nation on earth. The state of 
village tanning is, perhaps, the best proof of my i ndictment. 
It is estimated that rupees nine crores worth of ra w hide is annually 
exported from India and that much of it is returned  to her in the shape of 
manufactured articles. This means not only a materi al, but also an intellectual, 
drain. We miss the training we should receive in ta nning and preparing the 
innumerable articles of leather we need for daily u se. 
Here is work for the cent per cent Swadeshi lover a nd scope for the harnessing 
of technical skill of the solution of a great probl em. It serves the Harijans, it 
serves the villagers, and it means honourable emplo yment for the middle class 
intelligentsia who are in search of employment. Add  to this the fact that the 
intelligentsia have a proper opportunity of coming in direct touch with the 
villagers. 
Harijan,  7-9-1934 
Compost Manure  
The excreta of animals and human beings mixed with refuse can be turned 
into golden manure, itself a valuable commodity. It  increased the productivity 
of the soil which received it. Preparation of this manure was itself a village 
industry. But this, like all village industries, co uld not give tangible results 
unless the crores of India co-operated in reviving them and thus making India 
prosperous. 
Delhi Diary,  pp. 270-71 
Given the willing co-operation of the masses of Ind ia, this country cannot 
only drive out shortage of food, but can provide In dia with more than enough. 
This organic manure ever enriches, never impoverish es the soil. The daily Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  waste, judiciously composted, returns to the soil i n the form of golden manure 
causing a saving of millions of rupees and increasi ng manifold, the total yield of 
grains and pulses. In addition, the judicious use o f waste keeps the 
surroundings clean. And cleanliness is not only nex t to godliness, it promotes 
health. 
Harijan,  28-12-1947. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30   
CHAPTER 13 
DUTY OF CONGRESS MINISTRIES 
It is legitimate to ask what Congress Ministers wil l do for Khaddar and other 
village industries now that they are in office. Whe ther a Minister is separately 
appointed or not, a department for the work is sure ly necessary. In these times 
of scarcity of food and clothing, this department c an render the greatest help. 
The Ministers have experts at their disposal throug h the A-I.S.A. and the A-
I.V.I.A. It is possible to clothe today the whole o f India in Khadi on the smallest 
outlay and in the shortest time possible. Each Prov incial Government has to tell 
the villagers that they must manufacture their own Khaddar for their own use. 
This brings in automatic local production and distr ibution. And there will 
undoubtedly be a surplus for the cities at least to  a certain extent which, in its 
turn, will reduce the pressure on the local mills. The latter will then be able to 
take part in supplying the want of cloth in other p arts of the world. 
How can this result be brought about? 
The Government should notify the villagers that the y will be expected to 
manufacture Khaddar for the needs of their villages  within a fixed date after 
which no cloth will be supplied to them. The Govern ment in their turn will 
supply the villagers with cotton seed or cotton whe never required, at cost price 
and the tools of manufacture also at cost, to be re covered in easy installments 
payable in, say, five years or more. They will supp ly them with instructors 
wherever necessary and undertake to buy surplus sto ck of Khaddar, provided 
that the villagers in question have their cloth req uirements supplied from their 
own manufacture. This should do away with cloth sho rtage without fuss and 
with very little overhead charges. 
The villages will be surveyed and a list prepared o f things that can be 
manufactured locally with little or no help and whi ch may be required for 
village use or for sale outside, such, for instance , as ghani-pressed  oil and 
cakes, burning oil prepared through  ghanis , hand- pounded rice,  tadgud,  Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  honey, toys, mats, hand-made paper, village soap, e tc. If enough care is thus 
taken the villages, most of them as good as dead or  dying, will hum with life 
and exhibit the immense possibilities they have of supplying most of their 
wants themselves and of the cities and towns of Ind ia. 
Then there is the limitless cattle wealth of India-  suffering from criminal 
neglect. Goseva Sangh, as yet not properly experien ced, can still supply 
valuable aid. 
Without the basic training the villagers are being starved for education. 
This desideratum can be supplied by the Hindustani Talimi Sangh. 
Harijan , 28-4-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32   
CHAPTER 14 
CO-OPERATIVE CATTLE FARMING 
It is quite impossible for an individual farmer to look after the welfare of 
his cattle in his own home in a proper and scientif ic manner. Amongst other 
causes lack of collective effort has been a princip al cause of the deterioration 
of the cow and hence of cattle in general. 
The world today is moving towards the ideal of coll ective or co-operative 
effort in every department of life. Much in this li ne has been and is being 
accomplished. It has come into our country also, bu t in such a distorted from 
that our poor have not been able to reap its benefi ts.  Pari passu  with the 
increase in our population land holdings of the ave rage farmer are daily 
decreasing. Moreover, what the individual possesses  is often fragmentary. For 
such farmers to keep cattle in their home is a suic idal policy; and yet this is 
their condition today. Those who give the first pla ce to economics and pay 
scant attention to religious, ethical or humanitari an considerations proclaim 
from the house-tops that the farmer is being devour ed by his cattle due to the 
cost of their feed which is out of all proportion t o what they yield. They say it 
is folly not to slaughter wholesale all useless ani mals. 
What then should be done by humanitarians is the qu estion. The answer 
obviously is to find a way whereby we may not only save the lives of our cattle 
but also see that they do not become a burden. I am  sure that co-operative 
effort can help us in a large measure. The followin g comparison may be 
helpful: 
1.  Under the collective system no farmer can keep catt le in his house as he 
does today. They foul the air, and dirty the surrou ndings. There is neither 
intelligence nor humanitarianism in living with ani mal. Man was not meant 
to do so. The space taken up by the cattle today wo uld be spared to the 
farmer and his family, if the collective system wer e adopted. Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33  2.  As the number of cattle increases, life becomes imp ossible to the farmer 
in his home. Hence he is obliged to sell the calves  and kill the male 
buffaloes or else turn them out to starve and die. This inhumanity would 
be averted if the care of the cattle were undertake n on a co-operative 
basis. 
3.  Collective cattle farming would ensure the supply o f veterinary treatment 
to animals when they are ill. No ordinary farmer ca n afford this on his 
own. 
4.  Similarly one selected bull can be easily kept for the need of several cows 
under the collective system. This is impossible oth erwise except for 
charity. 
5.  Common grazing ground or land for exercising the an imals will be easily 
available under the co-operative system, whereas to day generally there is 
nothing of the kind for individual farmers. 
6.  The expense on fodder will be comparatively far les s under the collective 
system. 
7.  The sale of milk at good prices will be greatly fac ilitated and there will be 
no need or temptation for the farmer to adulterate it as he does as an 
individual. 
8.  It is impossible to carry out tests of the fitness of every head of cattle 
individually, but this could easily be done for the  cattle of a whole village 
and would thus make it easier to improve the breed.  
9.  The foregoing advantages should be sufficient argum ent in favour of co-
operative cattle farmings. The strongest argument i n its favour is that the 
individualistic system has been the means of making  our own condition as 
well as that of our cattle pitiable. We can only sa ve ourselves and them by 
making this essential change. 
I firmly believe too that we shall not derive the f ull benefits of agriculture until 
we take to co operative farming. Does it not stand to reason that it is far better 
for a hundred families in village to cultivate thei r lands collectively and divide 
the income therefrom than to divide the land anyhow  into a hundred portions? 
And what applies to land applies equally to cattle.  Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34   
It is quite another matter that it may be difficult  to convert people to adopt 
this way of life straight away. The straight and na rrow road is always hard to 
traverse. Every step in the programme of cow servic e is strewn with thorny 
problems. But only by surmounting difficulties can we hope to make the path 
easier. My purpose for the time being is to show th e great superiority of 
collective cattle farming over the individual effor t. I hold further that the 
latter is wrong and the former only is right. In re ality even the individual can 
only safeguard his independence through co operatio n. In cattle farming the 
individual effort has led to selfishness and inhuma nity, whereas the collective 
effort can abate both the evils, if it does not rem ove them altogether. 
Harijan,  15-2-1942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35   
CHAPTER 15 
VILLAGE EXHIBITIONS 
If we want and believe that the village should not only survive but also 
become strong and flourishing, then the village per spective is the only correct 
viewpoint. If this is true then in our exhibitions there can be no place for the 
glamour and pomp of the cities. There should be no necessity for games and 
oilier entertainments that belong to the cities. An  exhibition should not become 
a Tamasha, nor a source of income; it should never become the advertising 
medium for traders. No sales should be allowed ther e. Even Khadi and village 
industry products should not be sold. An exhibition  should be a medium of 
education, should be attractive and it should be su ch as to infuse in the villager 
the impulse to take to some industry or the other. It should bring out the 
glaring defects and drawbacks in the present day vi llage life, and show methods 
to be adopted to set them right. It should also be able to indicate the extent of 
achievement in that direction ever since the idea o f village uplift was 
sponsored. It should also teach how to make village  life artistic. 
Now let us see what an exhibition will be like if i t is to conform to the 
above conditions. 
1.  There should be two models of villages—one as is ex isting today and the 
other an improved one. The improved village will be  clean all throughout. 
Its houses, its roads, its surroundings and its fie lds will be all clean. The 
condition of the cattle should also improve. Books,  charts and pictures 
should be used to show what industries give increas ed income and how. 
2.  It must show how to conduct the various village ind ustries, wherefrom to 
obtain the needed instruments, how to make them. Th e actual working of 
each industry should be demonstrated. Along with th ese the following 
should also find place: 
a)  Ideal village diet. 
b)  Comparison between village industry and machine ind ustry. Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  c)  Model lessons for rearing animals. 
d)  Art section. 
e)  Model of village latrine. 
f)  Farm-yard manure  v.  chemical manure. 
g)  Utilization of hides, bones, etc. of animals. 
h)  Village music, musical instruments, village dramas.  
i)  Village games, village  akhadas  and forms of exercise. 
j)   Nai Talim. 
k)  Village medicine. 
l)  Village maternity home. 
Subject to the policy indicated in the beginning, t his list may be further 
expanded. What I have indicated is by way of exampl e only; it should not be 
taken to be exhaustive. I have not made any mention  of the Charkha and other 
village industries as they are taken for granted. W ithout them the exhibition 
will be absolutely useless. 
Gram Udyog Patrika, July  1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37   
CHAPTER 16 
LOK SEVAK SANGH 
[On 29th January, 1948, a day before he passed away , Gandhiji had drafted a 
constitution for the Lok Sevak Sangh, or associatio n of servants of the people, into which 
he wanted the Indian National Congress to dissolve itself, and he drew up the following 
among qualifications for those who would be its mem bers:] 
1.  Every worker shall be a habitual wearer of Khadi ma de from self-spun yarn 
or certified by the A-I.S.A. and must be a teetotal ler. If a Hindu, he must 
have abjured untouchability in any shape or form in  his own person or in 
his family, and must be a believer in the ideal of inter-communal unity, 
equal respect and regard for all religions, and equ ality of opportunity and 
status for all irrespective of race, creed or sex. 
2.  He shall come in personal contact with every villag er within his 
jurisdiction. 
3.  He shall enrol and train workers from amongst the v illagers and keep a 
register of all these. 
4.  He shall keep a record of his work from day to day.  
5.  He shall organize the villages so as to make them s elf-contained and self-
supporting through their agriculture and handicraft s. 
6.  He shall educate the village folk in sanitation and  hygiene and take all 
measures for prevention of ill health and disease a mong them. 
7.  He shall organize the education of the village folk  from birth to death 
along the lines of Nai Talim, in accordance with th e policy laid down by 
the Hindustani Talimi Sangh. 
Harijan,  15-2-1948 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38   
CHAPTER 17 
SAMAGRA GRAMASEVA 
A Samagra Gramasevak must know everybody living in the village and render 
them such service as he can. That does not mean tha t the worker will be able 
to do everything single-handed. He will show them t he way of helping 
themselves and procure for them such help and mater ials as they require. He 
will train up his own helpers. He will so win over the villagers that they will 
seek and follow his advice. Supposing I go and sett le down in a village with a  
ghani,  I won't be an ordinary  ghanchi*  earning 15-20 rupees a month. I will be 
a Mahatma  ghanchi.  I have used the word 'Maliatma' in fun, but what I  mean to 
say is that as a  ghanchi  I will become a model for the villagers to follow.  I will 
be a  ghanchi  who knows the Gita and the Quran. I will be learne d enough to 
teach their children. I may not be able to do so fo r lack of time. The villagers 
will come to me and ask me: "Please make arrangemen ts for our children's 
education." I will tell them: "I can find you a tea cher, but you will have to bear 
the expenses." And they will be prepared to do so m ost willingly. I will teach 
them spinning and when they come and ask me for the  services of a weaver, I 
will find them a weaver on the same terms as I foun d them a teacher. And the 
weaver will teach them how to weave their own cloth . I will inculcate in them 
the importance of hygiene and sanitation and when t hey come and ask for a 
sweeper I will tell them: "I will be your sweeper a nd I will train you all in the 
job." This is my conception of Samagra Gramaseva. 
Harijan,  17-3-1946 
Village Factions  
Alas for India that parties and factions are to be found in the villages as 
they are to be found in our cities. And when power politics enter over village 
with less thought of the welfare of the villages an d more of using them for 
increasing the parties' own power, this becomes a h indrance to the progress of 
the villages rather than a help. I would say that w hatever be the consequence, Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  we must make use as much as possible of local help and if we are free from the 
taint of power politics, we are not likely to go wr ong. Let us remember that the 
English-educated men and women from the cities have  criminally neglected the 
villages of India which are the backbone of the cou ntry. The process of 
remembering our neglect will induce patience. I hav e never gone to a single 
village which is devoid of an honest worker. We fai l to find him when we are 
not humble enough to recognize any merit in our vil lages. Of course, we are to 
steer clear of local politics and this we shall lea rn to do when we accept help 
from all parties and no parties, wherever it is rea lly good. ... I categorically say 
to the principal worker: 'If you have any outside h elp, get rid of it. Work singly, 
courageously, intelligently with all the local help  you can get and, if you do not 
succeed, blame only yourself and no one else and no thing else.' 
Harijan , 2-3-1947 
 
1 Gujarati word meaning an oil man. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40    
CHAPTER 18 
SHANTI DALS IN VILLAGES 
Some time ago an attempt was made, at my instance, to form  shanti dais  
but nothing came of it. This lesson, however, was l earnt that the membership, 
in its very nature, of such organizations could not  be large. Ordinarily, the 
efficient running of a large volunteer corps based on force implies the 
possibility of the use of force in the event of bre ach of discipline. In such 
bodies little or no stress is laid on a man's chara cter. Physique is the chief 
factor. The contrary must obtain in non-violent bod ies in which character or 
soul force must mean everything and physique must t ake second place. It is 
difficult to find many such persons. That is why no n-violent corps must be 
small, if they are to be efficient. Such brigades m ay be scattered all over; 
there may be one each for a village or a  mohalla.  The members must know one 
another well. Each corps will select its own head. All the members will have 
the same status, but where everyone is doing the sa me work there must be one 
person under whose discipline all must come, or els e the work will suffer. 
Where there are two or more brigades the leaders mu st consult among 
themselves and decide on a common line of action. I n that way alone lies 
success. 
If non-violent volunteer corps are formed on the ab ove lines, they can 
easily stop trouble. These corps will not require a ll the physical training given 
in akhadas,  but a certain part of it will be necessary. 
One thing, however, should be common to members of all such organizations 
and that is implicit faith in God. He is the only c ompanion and doer. Without 
faith in Him these Peace Brigades will be lifeless.  By whatever name one calls 
God, one must realize that one can only work throug h His strength. Such a man 
will never take another's life. He will allow himse lf, if need be, to be killed and 
thereby live through his victory over death. Panchayat Raj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41  The mind of the man in whose life the realization o f this law has become a 
living reality will not be bewildered in crisis. He  will instinctively know the 
right way to act. 
In spite, however, of what I have said above, I wou ld like to give some rules 
culled from my own experience. 
1.  A volunteer may not carry any weapons. 
2.  The members of a corps must be easily recognizable.  
3.  Every volunteer must carry bandages, scissors, need le and thread, surgical 
knife, etc. for rendering first aid. 
4.  He should know how to carry and remove the wounded.  
5.  He should know how to put out fires, how to enter a  fire area without 
getting burnt, how to climb heights for rescue work  and descend safely 
with or without his charge. 
6.  He should be well acquainted with all the residents  of his locality. This is a 
service in itself. 
7.  He should recite  Ramnama  ceaselessly in his heart and persuade others 
who believe to do likewise. 
Man often repeats the name of God parrot-wise and e xpects fruit from so 
doing. The true seeker must have that living faith which will not only dispel the 
untruth of parrot-wise repetition from within him b ut also from the hearts of 
others. 
Harijan,  5-5-1946 
 
 