 
Pathway to GOD 
 
 
By :  M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Compiled by : M. S. Deshpande  
 
 
 
 
First published : September 1971 
 
 
 
 
 
Rs. 15/-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: 079 – 27540635 
E-mail: jitnavjivanlO@gmail.com 
Website: www.navajivantrust.org 
  
Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
FOREWORD 
I deem it a privilege to be asked to contribute a F oreword to this slim volume 
of extracts from Gandhiji's writings and speeches. It is good to hark back to 
Gandhiji from time to time and get refreshed by wha t he had to say on human 
life and conduct as a Pathway to God, rather than a s a selfish satiation of one's 
egoistic urges and sentiments. How far it will attr act the young or influence 
their everyday life is more than I can say. Quite [ frankly I am little sceptical, 
but that is no reason why an attempt should not be made. Truth is its own 
justification and sooner or later, it is bound to t ell. 
Nevertheless, I would like to put in a plea to my y oung friends to get 
acquainted with Gandhiji's thoughts on life as a Pa thway to God. I know that 
many young people are allergic to the mention of Go d. They have seen too 
many people who talk of God and yet lead lives that  find no relation to what 
they talk about. Nowhere do they find the gap betwe en profession and practice 
so great as in the lives and the daily conduct of p eople who claim to be 
believers in God and would throw His name at the yo ung on the slightest 
provocation. The young tend to associate mention of  God with hypocrisy, 
bigotry, superstition and irrationality and it is n ot easy to attract their 
attention by talking about God. I do not blame the young for their attitude. We 
of the older generation are more to blame for takin g the name of God and then 
denying Him in practice by the way we live. But Gan dhiji was not like that. He 
was a man who practised what he preached; and acted  as he believed. His faith 
in God was intense and unequivocal; and it was this  that gave him the strength 
to walk alone if necessary in defence of his convic tions and face up to the 
mightiest enemy who stood against what he thought w as the right thing to do. 
Gandhiji was known for his outstanding courage not only in a physical sense but 
also in moral and social terms and his courage was the result of his belief that 
his actions were guided by God because they were co nsistent with the nature of 
God and the path He wanted His children to follow. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3  I know it is possible for a human being to delude h imself with the belief that he 
is carrying out God's purpose when what he is doing  is only satisfying his ego. 
But that is possible only when one has a deluded co nception of God. This was 
not so in the case of Gandhiji. He conceived of God  as Absolute Truth, Non-
violence and Love. With such a conception, belief i n God will not lead one 
astray and life becomes a real Pathway to God when one lives in search of 
Truth and surrenders to Non-violence and Love. This  was the life that Gandhiji 
led and that is why his life is and will remain a p erpetual source of inspiration 
to all who seek the highest satisfaction from their  lives. 
The extracts from Gandhiji's speeches and writings that Shri M. S. Deshpande 
has collected with such diligence and dedication wi ll help young people in India 
and elsewhere to find the ballast that will give st eadiness to their lives and the 
purpose which will make it a Pathway to God. I have  pleasure in commending 
this Voice of Gandhiji to the youth of India. 
V. K.  R. V.  RAO 
New Delhi, 
4th August 1971 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4   
PREFACE 
Mahatma Gandhiji was primarily a man of God. He was  a great devotee of 
Daridranarayan — an humble and passionate servant o f Humanity. Truth was his 
"End" and Love was his "Means". His ever- expanding  love aspired to embrace 
and serve the whole of humanity — especially the po or and the miserable. This 
passion for service led him to work in all spheres of life — social, educational, 
economic and even political. However, God-realizati on alone was his all-
absorbing ideal — the main spring of all his varied  activities. He ardently 
aspired to "see God face to face". 
In my earlier work entitled  Light of India  — acclaimed as "original", "unique" 
and "excellent" by the elite of Bharat, I have trie d to give a fairly 
comprehensive view of almost all the important aspe cts of Mahatmaji's message 
to humanity. Since then several monumental works al so have been published 
throwing light on this all-important subject. But u nfortunately, the fruit is 
missed among the rich foliage. The main spring of M ahatmaji's activities has 
been woefully overlooked as a result of which the p resent activities have been 
deprived of their energizing vitality. Hence I have  tried to bring the core of his 
message to the notice of the young aspirants, throu gh this fresh compilation, so 
that it may serve as a perennial source of inspirat ion to them in then- budding 
lives. 
Such is the object with which this "Great-Little" b ook has been designed — great 
in content, though small in size. A mere glance at the contents of the book 
would show how very valuable it is for everyday use , like the Gita, to all those 
who would aspire to make their lives sublime. If th e  Light of India  can be 
regarded as the Bible of Gandhiji, this little volu me would be his "Sermon on 
the Mount". Our Navajivan Trust, which is serving a s the Bible Society of 
modern Bharat, would, it is hoped, bring out cheap and fine editions of such 
books, in all the languages of Bharat as well as in , at least a few principal lan-
guages of the world, and place them in the hands of  all aspirants for their daily 
perusal, reflection and assimilation. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5  "Never in human history," writes a modern savant, " man experienced so much 
darkness within him in the midst of all-round enlig htenment outside of him, so 
much inner poverty in the context of measureless en richment without... The 
modern crisis is thus essentially a spiritual crisi s and modern man is seeking for 
light to lead him out of the encircling gloom. His heart, today, is crying for 
truth, for light and for life." 
We are also passing through a critical period when enthusiasm for spiritual and 
moral values, generated by Mahatmaji, has been fast  waning and that for 
material ones has been steadily gaining ground. So to restore genuine love for 
these high values among the people, we urgently req uire a band of young 
aspirants vibrating with zeal for noble life, ready  to tread the pathway chalked 
out by saints like Gandhiji. For achieving this hig h ideal, their living words of 
wisdom, "the precious life-blood of Master Spirits, " should be placed in the 
young hands, in an attractive garb, so that they ma y "read, re-read, chew and 
digest'' this rich, life-giving material and build their model lives for others to 
emulate. Such living ideals alone are capable of ra ising the moral and spiritual 
level of humanity. And it is only when this level i s sufficiently raised that the 
world would have the privilege of enjoying the bles sed era of lasting peace and 
prosperity. 
May this  Pathway to God  inspire young men throughout the world to lead the  
Life of Light practised and preached by Gandhiji, s o that our "Light of India" 
might soon become the "Light of the World". 
Finally let me express my deep sense of gratefulnes s to Dr. V. K. R. V. Rao, for 
his kindness in blessing this humble attempt with h is illuminating Foreword. My 
sincere thanks are also due to Shri Jitendrabhai De sai, Secretary, Navajivan 
Trust for bringing out this "Great-Little" book in such an attractive garb in such 
a short time. 
"Shanti Kunja" Vikrampura Extension Athani, Dist. B elgaum 
Mysore State M. S. Deshpande 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6   
INTRODUCTION  
Gandhiji's Spiritual Pilgrimage 
HIS  IDEAL 
Gandhiji was essentially a man of religion. His eve ntful life was really a 
spiritual pilgrimage. The supreme ideal which he tr ied to pursue, throughout 
his life, was God-realization. "I want to see God f ace to face," he used to say 
very often. He emphatically declares: 
"What I want to achieve — what I have been striving  and pining to achieve these 
thirty years — is Self-realization, to see God face  to face, to attain Moksha.  I 
live and move and have my being in pursuit of this goal. All that I do by way of 
speaking and writing, are directed to this same end ." 
Though Gandhiji started his life with disbelief in God and prayer and continued 
to maintain the same attitude for a long time, he d id feel a void in his life at a 
later stage, which led him to read the real meaning  of Creation. Thereafter he 
could write with the greatest assurance: "I am sure r of His existence than of the 
fact that you and I are sitting in this room." He f elt very miserable to find that 
he was still far away from God, even though he was conscious that God 
governed every breath of his life. However, the fee ling that he was journeying 
Godward gave him some solace for he occasionally fe lt the warmth of the 
sunshine of His presence. 
 
HIS  SADHANA 
The  Sadhana  which Gandhiji practised and preached for attainin g this ideal has 
three aspects: (i) Intellectual, (ii) Moral and (ii i) Spiritual. 
(i) The Intellectual aspect consists in the clear c onception regarding the nature 
of God, Soul and the World, their relation with one  another and the primary 
duty of man. Gandhiji soon realized the futility an d impossibility of reasoning 
out the existence of God. "God exists," says he, "b ecause we exist. Really, we Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  are not; He alone is. If we will be, we must eterna lly sing His praise and do His 
will." This is Gandhiji's first criterion to prove God's existence. The direct 
testimony of saints who have actually seen God, is his second criterion. 
Like all other saints Gandhiji maintained that God is one without a second. He 
has innumerable names, but he chose to call Him "Tr uth". Gandhiji's Absolute 
Truth has a very wide connotation. It not only conn otes Eternal Existence, both 
in time and space, but it also connotes Eternal Kno wledge, Power, and Bliss. 
Gandhiji's Truth is Light, Life, Goodness and Law. It is a mysterious Power that 
holds together, creates, dissolves and recreates. I nfinite is Its love and 
boundless Its compassion. Such is the Truth he wors hipped with perfect 
devotion. 
"Our soul is immortal," says Gandhiji. It is the et ernal spark of the Divine Fire. 
"We may not be God," he avers, "but we are of God, even as a little drop of 
water is the ocean. Imagine it torn away from the o cean and flung millions of 
miles away. It becomes helpless, and cannot feel th e might and majesty of the 
ocean. But if someone could point out to it that it  is the ocean (and teach it to 
realize it), its faith would revive, it would dance  with joy and the whole might 
and majesty of the ocean would be reflected in it."  
"Our earthly existence is," according to Gandhiji, "so fickle that it can be wiped 
out in the twinkling of an eye." He also tells us t hat death is as necessary for 
man's growth as life itself. Death is inevitable. I t is a welcome friend, a 
deliverer. It is a mere change when we work for God . Hence it is the primary 
duty of every man, according to Gandhiji, to carefu lly introspect, realize his 
nature, fight with the inner foes, develop his Godw ard faculties to perfection 
and enjoy the vision and bliss of God. 
(ii) The Moral aspect of Gandhiji's  Sadhana  concerns the fight with the inner 
foes, viz. vices and the acquisition of some cardin al virtues. In fact, our 
attempt at the cultivation of virtues, would automa tically bring about the 
elimination of vices. The main virtues which Gandhi ji tried to develop are 
truth, love, and self-restraint. These and selfless  service along with devotion to 
God which crowns them all, are the basic virtues wh ich he wants all to Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8  cultivate. Gandhiji's truth as a virtue is nothing but the correspondence 
between thought, word and deed. Prompting of the in ner voice or conscience is 
the true thought. Its accurate expression in speech  and action will invest the 
words and deeds with the sanctity of truth. Gandhij i wants us to realize such 
truth. 
"True love," says Gandhiji, "is boundless like the ocean and swelling within one, 
spreads itself out and envelops the whole world." S uch is the unselfish love 
which Gandhiji cultivated. "Love is life," he decla res, "and hatred is death. The 
law of love, call it attraction, affinity, cohesion , if you like, governs the world. 
Love is the reverse of the coin of which the obvers e is truth. Truth ever 
triumphs over untruth; love conquers hatred. Hatred  always tries to kill but 
love never dies." Non-violence is another name whic h Gandhiji has given to 
such a pure love. His love and non-violence are one  and the same. They depict 
the positive and negative aspects of the same attit ude of mind. Pure unselfish 
love is perfectly nonviolent, and perfect non-viole nce is full of pure love. Thus 
they are identical. 
Self-restraint is the third cardinal virtue which G andhiji attempted to cultivate 
and advocate. If truth supports and love unites, Se lf-restraint gives the 
necessary strength to the  Sadhaka  and enables him to walk with courage and 
confidence on the Pathway to God. Self-restraint is  the source of all strength, 
the spring of all power. It is the mother of so man y virtues like non-stealing, 
celebacy, non-taste etc. Voluntary restraint is the  privilege of man. Control of 
palate is the source of perfect health and strength . It will enable him to control 
all other senses with ease. And he who can conquer the senses can conquer the 
whole world. Complete control of thought, word and deed alike, will bring a 
power of the highest potency and purity of the high est type, so very necessary 
for receiving the grace of the Lord. 
Selfless service is the last aspect of his moral Sadhana.  "The only way to find 
God," he says, "is to see Him in His creation, and be one with it." "I am striving 
for the Kingdom of Heaven, which is spiritual deliv erance. For me the road to 
salvation lies through incessant toil in the servic e of my country and there Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  through of humanity." Gandhiji tried to reduce hims elf to a cipher, identify 
himself with everything that lives and live at peac e with friend and foe alike. 
Thus did he hope to attain salvation through selfle ss service. He strongly 
maintained that loving service, offered in a spirit  of humility, will bring about 
proper self-purification, which in the fullness of time, will lead to God-
realization. 
(iii) The Spiritual aspect of the  Sadhana  practised and preached by Gandhiji 
consisted of a living faith in God, heart-felt pray er, meditation on Ramanama, 
and self-surrender. Gandhiji highly extols "living immovable faith". "Intellect," 
he says, "takes us along the battle of life to a ce rtain extent, but at critical 
moments, it fails us. Faith transcends reason. It i s when the horizon is the 
darkest, and human reason is beaten down to the gro und, that faith shines the 
brightest and comes to our rescue." "Faith is not a  delicate flower that withers 
under the slightest stormy weather. It moves mounta ins and jumps across the 
ocean. That faith is nothing but the wide-awake con sciousness of God within. 
He who has achieved that faith wants nothing. Bodil y diseased, he is spiritually 
healthy; physically poor, he rolls in spiritual ric hes." 
Prayer is the next spiritual  Sadhana  performed by Gandhiji. He himself was 
essentially a man of faith and prayer. "Prayer is r eally," he tells us, "complete 
meditation and melting into the higher Self-God." " He who hungers for the 
awakening of the Divine in him, must fall back upon  prayer." Real prayer, ac-
cording to him, prefers heart without words, to wor ds without heart. It needs 
no speech. It must spring from the heart. Prayer is  a call to humility — a call to 
self-purification, to inward search and peace. "I b elieve," declares Gandhiji, 
"that prayer is the very soul and essence of religi on and therefore, it must be 
the very core of the life of man." Along with praye r, Gandhiji tried to enthrone 
Ramanama in his heart and took God's name with ever y breath. At the same 
time he developed the attitude of self- surrender t o the Lord. "I have no 
strength," he says "save what God has given me. I k now that I can do nothing, 
God can do everything. My greatest weapon is mute p rayer." "God demands 
nothing less than complete self-surrender as the pr ice for the only real freedom Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  that is worth having. And when a man thus loses him self, he immediately finds 
himself in the service of all that lives. It become s his delight and recreation. He 
is a new man, never weary of spending himself in th e service of God's Creation." 
 
His achievements 
Now let us try to understand Gandhiji's conception of God-realization as well as 
his actual achievement. Says he, "I hold that compl ete realization of God is 
impossible in this embodied life. Nor is it necessa ry. A living immovable faith is 
all that is required for reaching the full spiritua l height attainable by human 
being." To him, God-realization is a supersensuous experience, consisting in the 
feeling of His constant presence in the heart. Howe ver, he appears to have 
enjoyed other spiritual experiences as well. Shri G urudeva Dr. Ranade has told 
us that Gandhiji was more an audile than a photist 6r a morphist. Gandhiji 
speaks about the Inner Voice which may be likened t o the  Anahata  sound heard 
by the mystics. Though small in the beginning, it g radually appears to have 
assumed greater and greater sonorousness and power.  "The Divine Music," he 
tells us, "is incessantly going on within ourselves . But our loud senses drown the 
delicate music, which is unlike and infinitely supe rior to anything we can hear 
with our senses." Along with this "Still Smalt Voic e" Gandhiji speaks about "the 
Pillar of Fire" and the "Inner Light". "When this L ight corresponds, with the 
promptings of the Inner Voice," he says, "then that  spark has the flash of 
inspiration." He also speaks about the Lustre of Tr uth which is "million- times 
more brilliant than that of the sun." Gandhiji appe ars to have received 
messages and heard actual words emerging from the I nner Voice—words from 
God. About the authenticity of these messages Gandh iji declares: "I can say this 
that not the unanimous verdict of the whole world a gainst me could shake me 
from the belief that what I heard was the true Voic e of God. . . . For the Voice 
was. more real than my existence." 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11   
TO THE READER 
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wr itings and to others who are 
interested in them that I am not at all concerned w ith appearing to be con-
sistent. In my search after Truth, I have discarded  many ideas and learnt many 
new things. Old as I am in age, I have no feeling t hat I have ceased to grow 
inwardly or that my growth will stop at the dissolu tion of the flesh. What I am 
concerned with is my readiness to obey the call of Truth, my God, from 
moment to moment, and, therefore, when anybody find s any inconsistency 
between any two writings of mine, if he has still f aith in my sanity, he would do 
well to choose the later of the two on the same sub ject. 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Harijan , 29-4-1933, p. 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART I : INTELLECTUAL SADHANA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13   
Om  
The Supreme Ideal 
Man's Ultimate Aim 
is 
Realization of God. 
God is 
Sat-Chit-Ananda 
Existence, Knowledge, Power and Bliss. 
He is an 
Omnipresent, Omniscient, Omnipotent, Omniblissful  
Mysterious Power. 
Our Soul 
is 
A Spark of Divine Fire,  
A Drop in the Divine Ocean.  
The World 
is 
Full of Joy and Misery—  
Joy with God and Misery without Him. 
Man's Duty 
is  
to realize God, serve Humanity,  
and 
Enjoy His Eternal Bliss. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14   
CHAPTER ONE  
GOD 
(1)  GOD IS ONE , WITHOUT A SECOND  
God is certainly One. He has no second. He is unfat homable, unknowable and 
unknown to the vast majority of mankind. He is ever ywhere. He sees without 
eyes and hears without ears. He is formless and ind ivisible. He is uncreate, has 
no father, mother or child; and yet He allows Himse lf to be worshipped as 
father, mother, wife and child. He allows Himself e ven to be worshipped as 
stock and stone, although He is none of these thing s. He is the most elusive. He 
is the nearest to us, if we would but know the fact . But He is farthest from us 
when we do not want to realize His omnipresence. 
I dispute the description that Hindus believe in ma ny Gods and are idolaters. 
They do say that there are many gods, but they also  declare unmistakably that 
there is one God, the God of gods. It is, not there fore, proper to suggest that 
Hindus believe in many gods. They certainly believe  in many worlds. Just as 
there is a world inhabited by men and another by be ast, so also, is there one 
inhabited by superior beings called gods, whom we d o not see but who 
nevertheless exist. The whole mischief is created b y the English rendering of 
the word देव  or देवता ( deva  or devata)  for which you have not found a better 
term than "god". But God is  Ishwara, Devadhideva , God of gods. So you see it is 
the word "God" used to describe different divine be ings that has given rise to 
such confusion. I believe that I am a thorough Hind u but I never believe in many 
gods. Never even in my childhood did I hold that be lief and no one ever taught 
me to do so. 
 
(2)  HE IS OMNIPRESENT , OMNISCIENT AND OMNIPOTENT  
God is not some person outside ourselves or away fr om the universe. He 
pervades everything and is omniscient as well as om nipotent. He does not need 
any praise or petitions. Being immanent in all bein gs, He hears everything and Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  reads our innermost thoughts. He abides in our hear ts and is nearer to us than 
the nails on our fingers. 
God is then not a person. He is the all-pervading, all-powerful Spirit. Any one 
who hears Him in his heart has accession of a marve llous force or energy, 
comparable in its results to physical forces like s team or electricity but much 
more subtle. 
 
(3)  HE IS A MYSTERIOUS POWER  
There is an indefinable Mysterious Power that perva des everything. I feel it 
though I don't see it. It is this Unseen Power whic h makes itself felt and yet 
defies all proof, because it is so unlike all that I perceive through my senses. It 
transcends the senses. 
I do dimly perceive that whilst everything around m e is ever changing and ever 
dying, there is underlying all that change a Living  Power that is changeless, 
that holds all together, that creates, dissolves an d recreates. This informing 
Power or Spirit is God. 
The truth is that God is the Force. He is the essen ce of life. He is pure, 
undefiled consciousness. He is eternal. And yet, st rangely enough, all are not 
able to derive, either benefit from or shelter in t he all-pervading Living 
Presence. 
Electricity is a powerful force. Not all can benefi t from it. It can only be 
produced by following certain laws. It is a lifeles s force. Man can utilize it if he 
can labour hard enough to acquire the knowledge of its laws. The Living Force 
which we call God can similarly be followed if we k now and follow His law 
leading to the discovery of Him in us. 
God is an Unseen Power residing within us. There ar e many powers lying hidden 
within us and we discover them by constant struggle . Even so, we may find this 
Supreme Power, if we make deligent search with the fixed determination to 
find Him. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16  My God does not reside above. He has to be realized  on earth. He is here, 
within you, within me. He is omnipotent and omnipre sent. You need not think 
of the world beyond. If we can do our duty here, th e beyond will take care of 
itself. 
 
(4)  THE SUPREME GOOD  
Is this Power benevolent or malevolent? I see It as  purely benevolent. For I can 
see that in the midst of death, life persists; in t he midst of untruth, truth 
persists; in the midst of darkness, light persists.  Hence, I gather that God is 
Life, Truth, Light. He is Love. He is the Supreme G ood. 
God is wholly good. There is no evil in Him. God ma de man in His own image. 
Unfortunately for us, man has fashioned Him in his own. This arrogation has 
landed mankind in a sea of troubles. God is the Sup reme Alchemist. In His 
presence all iron and dross turn into pure gold. Si milarly does all evil turn into 
good.  
Again God lives, but not as we. His creatures live but to die. But God is Life. 
Therefore, goodness and all it connotes is not an a ttribute. Goodness is God. 
Goodness conceived as apart from Him, is a lifeless  thing and exists while it is a 
paying policy. So are all morals. If they are to li ve in us, they must be 
considered and cultivated in their relation to God.  We try to become good, 
because we want to reach and realize God. All the d ry ethics of the world turns 
to dust because apart from God they are lifeless. C oming from God they come 
with life in them. They become part of us and ennob le us. 
(5) GOD IS TRUTH AND LOVE  
The Absolute Truth, the Eternal Principle, that is God. There are innumerable 
definitions of God, because His manifestations are innumerable. They 
overwhelm me with wonder and awe and for a moment s tun me. But I worship 
God as Truth only. 
To me God is Truth and Love. God is ethics and mora lity; God is fearlessness. 
God is the source of Light and Life, and yet He is above and beyond all these. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17  God is conscience. He is even the atheism of the at heist. For in His boundless 
love, God permits the atheist to live. He is the se archer of the hearts. He 
knows us and our hearts better than we do ourselves . ... He is personal God to 
those who need His personal presence. He is embodie d to those who need His 
touch. He is the purest Essence. He is, to those wh o have faith. He is all things 
to all men. 
 
(6)  GOD IS SAT -CHIT -ANANDA  
The word  Satya  (Truth) is derived from  Sat  which means "Being". And nothing is 
or exists in reality except Truth. That is why  Sat  or Truth is perhaps the most 
important name of God. In fact, it is more correct to say Truth is God than to 
say God is Truth. 
And where there is Truth, there is also Knowledge, which is true. Where there 
is no Truth, there can be no true knowledge. That i s why the word Chit  or 
Knowledge is associated with the name of God. And w here there is true 
Knowledge, there is always Bliss ( Ananda ). Sorrow has no place there. And even 
as Truth is Eternal, so is the Bliss derived from i t. Hence we know God as  Sat-
Chit-Ananda , one who combines in Himself, Truth, Knowledge and  Bliss. 
 
(7)  HE Is  LAW ETERNAL  
God is an Idea, Law Himself. ... He and His Law abi de everywhere and govern 
everything. Therefore, though I do not think that H e answers in every detail, 
every request of ours, there is no doubt that He ru les our actions and I literally 
believe that not a blade of grass grows or moves wi thout His will. 
I do feel that there is orderliness in the universe , there is an unalterable Law 
governing everything and every being that lives and  moves. It is not a blind law, 
for no blind law can govern the conduct of living b eings. . . . The Law and the 
Law-giver are one. I may not deny the Law or Law-gi ver, because I know so 
little about It or Him. Even as my denial or ignora nce of the existence of an 
earthly power will avail nothing, so will not my de nial of God and His Law, Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  liberate me from its operation; whereas, humble and  mute acceptance of 
Divine Authority makes life's journey easier even a s acceptance of earthly rule 
makes life under it easier. 
 
(8) His  INFINITE MERCY  
God is, even though the whole world deny Him. God e mbraces not only this tiny 
globe of ours, but millions and billions of such gl obes. How can we, little 
crawling creatures so utterly helpless as He has ma de us, how could we possibly 
measure His greatness, His boundless love, His infi nite compassion? So great is 
His infinite love and pity that He allows man insol ently to deny Him, wrangle 
about Him, and cut the throats of his fellowmen. Ho w can we measure the 
greatness of God, who is so forgiving, so divine ? 
He allows us freedom and yet His compassion command s obedience to His Will. 
But if anyone of us disdains to bow to His Will, He  says: "So be it." "My sun will 
shine no less for thee, My clouds will rain no less  for thee. I need not force thee 
to accept My sway." Of such a God let the ignorant dispute the existence. I am 
one of the millions of wise men who believe in Him and am never tired of 
bowing to Him and singing His glory. 
God is the hardest task-master, I have known on ear th. He tries you through 
and through. And when you find your faith is failin g, or your body is failing you, 
and you are sinking, He comes to your assistance so mehow or other and proves 
to you that you must not lose your faith and that H e is always at your beck and 
call, but on His terms. So I have found. I cannot r ecall a single instance when at 
the eleventh hour, He has forsaken me. 
 
(9)  HE HAS MANY NAMES  
There is only one omnipotent and omnipresent God. H e is named variously and 
we remember Him by the name which is most familiar to us. Each person can 
choose the name that appeals most to him. Ishwara, Allah, Khuda, God mean 
the same. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19  God has a thousand names, or rather, He is nameless . We may worship or pray 
to Him by whichever name that pleases us. All worsh ip the same Spirit, but as 
all foods do not agree with all, all names do not a ppeal to all. Each chooses the 
name according to His associations and He being the  Indwell- er, Ail-Powerful 
and Omniscient, knows our inmost feelings and respo nds to us according to our 
deserts. 
In my opinion, Rama, Rahaman, Ahurmazda, God or Kri shna, are all attempts on 
the part of man to name that invisible Force. . . .  Man can only conceive God 
within the limitations of his own mind. What matter s, then, whether one man 
worships God as a person and another as Force? Both  do right according to their 
lights. One need only remember that God is the Forc e among all the forces. All 
other forces are material. But God is the Vital For ce or Spirit which is all-
pervading, all-embracing and therefore beyond human  ken. 
Daridranarayan  is one of millions of names by which humanity know s God who 
is unnameable and unfathomable by human understandi ng. And it means God of 
the poor, God appearing in the hearts of the poor. 
 
(10)  HIS INCARNATIONS  
God is not a person. To affirm that He descends to earth every now and again, 
in the form of human being, is a partial truth, whi ch merely signifies that such 
a person lives near to God. Inasmuch as God is omni present, He dwells within 
every human being and all may, therefore, be said t o be incarnations of Him. 
But this leads us nowhere. Rama, Krishna, etc. are called incarnations of God 
because we attribute divine qualities to them. Whet her they actually lived or 
not does not affect the picture of them in man's mi nd. 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20   
CHAPTER TWO  
SOUL   
(1)  SPARK OF DIVINITY  
We may not be God, but we are of God—even as a litt le drop of water is of the 
ocean. Imagine it torn away from the ocean and flun g millions of miles away. It 
becomes helpless, torn from its surroundings and ca nnot feel the might and 
majesty of the ocean. But if some one could point o ut to it that it is the ocean, 
its faith would revive, it would dance with joy and  the whole of the might and 
majesty of the ocean would be reflected in it. 
 
(2)  MAN IS THE IMAGE OF GOD  
Man alone is made in the image of God. That some of  us do not recognize that 
status of ours, makes no difference, except that we  do not get the benefit of 
the status, even as a lion brought up in the compan y of sheep, may not know 
his own status and therefore, does not receive its benefits; but it belongs to 
him, nevertheless, and the moment he realizes it, h e begins to exercise his 
dominion over the sheep. But no sheep masquerading as a lion can ever attain 
the leonine status. And to prove the proposition, t hat man is made in the image 
of God, it is surely un necessary to show that all men admittedly exhibit that 
image in their own person. It is enough to show tha t one man at least has done 
so. And will it be denied that the great religious teachers of mankind have 
exhibited the image of God in their persons ? 
 
(3)  LIFE  Is  A MERE BUBBLE  
Our existence as embodied beings is purely momentar y; what are a hundred 
years in Eternity? But if we shatter the chains of egotism, and melt into the 
ocean of humanity, we share its dignity. To feel th at we are something, is to 
set up a barrier between God and ourselves; to ceas e feeling that we are some-
thing is to become one with God. A drop in the ocea n partakes of the greatness Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21  of its parent, although it is unconscious of it. Bu t it is dried up as soon as it 
enters upon an existence independent of the ocean. We do not exaggerate 
when we say that life is a bubble. 
 
(4)  LIFE AND DEATH  
It is as clear to me as daylight that life and deat h are but phases of the same 
thing, the reverse and obverse of the same coin. In  fact, tribulation and death, 
seem to me to present a phase far richer than happi ness or life. What is life 
worth without trials and tribulations, which ar£ th e salt of life? ... I want you 
all to treasure death and suffering more than life and to appreciate their 
cleansing and purifying character. 
The body must suffer for its ill-deeds. We die to l ive once more, even as we 
live to die at last. Life, therefore, is not an occ asion for joy, nor is death an 
occasion for sorrow. But there is one thing needful . We must ascertain our duty 
in life and continue to discharge it till we die. 
Death is at any time blessed, but it is twice bless ed for a warrior who dies for 
his cause, i.e. Truth. Death is no fiend, he is the  truest of friends. He delivers 
us from agony. He helps us against ourselves. He ev er gives us new chances, 
new hopes. He is like a sleep, a sweet restorer. Ye t it is customary to mourn 
when a friend dies. The custom has no operation whe n the death is that of a 
martyr. 
 
(5)  FREEDOM OF CHOICE  
Man has reason, discrimination and free-will such a s it is. The brute has no such 
thing. It is not a free agent and knows no distinct ion between virtue and vice, 
good and evil. Man being a free agent, knows these distinctions and when he 
follows his higher nature, shows himself far superi or to the brute but when he 
follows his baser nature, can show himself lower th an the brute. 
But this free-will we enjoy is less than that of a passenger on a crowded deck... 
Man is the maker of his own destiny in the sense th at he has freedom of choice Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22  as to the manner in which he uses his freedom. But he is no controller of 
results. The moment he thinks he is, he comes to gr ief. 
It is man's special privilege and pride to be gifte d with the faculties of head and 
heart both, that he is a thinking no less than a fe eling animal, as the very 
derivation of the word shows. ... In man reason qui ckens and guides the 
feeling. In brute the soul lies dormant. To awaken the heart is to awaken the 
dormant soul, to awaken reason is to inculcate disc rimination between good 
and evil. 
 
(6)  MAN 'S PRIMARY DUTY  
It is the duty of every human being to look careful ly within and see himself as 
he is and spare no pains to improve himself in body , mind and soul. He should 
realize the mischief wrought by injustice, wickedne ss, vanity and the like and 
do his best to fight them. 
Man's estate is one of probation. During that perio d he is played upon by evil 
forces as well as good. He is ever prey to temptati ons. He has to prove his 
manliness by resisting and fighting temptations. He  is no warrior who fights 
outside foes of his imagination and is powerless to  lift his little finger against 
innumerable foes within or what is worse, mistakes them for friends. 
It is not man's duty to develop all his faculties t o perfection; his duty is to 
develop all his Godward faculties to perfection and  to suppress completely 
those of contrary tendencies. 
It is inherent in man, imperfect though he is, ceas elessly to strive after 
perfection. In the attempt he falls into reverie. A nd just as a child tries to 
stand, falls down again and again and ultimately le arns how to walk, even so, 
man, with all his intelligence, is a mere infant as  compared to the infinite and 
ageless God. 
The goal ever recedes from us. The greater the prog ress the greater the 
recognition of our unworthiness. Satisfaction lies in the effort, not in the 
attainment. Full effort is full victory. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23   
CHAPTER THREE  
WORLD   
(1)  THE WORLD IS ONE BODY  
God has so ordered this world that no one can keep his goodness or badness 
exclusively to himself. The whole world is like the  human body with its various 
members. Pain in one member is felt in the whole bo dy. Rot in one part must 
inevitably poison the whole system. Let us, therefo re, cease to think in terms 
of the whole country. We must put faith in God and be careful for nothing. We 
hold our destiny in our own hands and no one but ou rselves can make or mar it. 
 
(2)  UNIVERSE —A FAMILY OF NATIONS  
Nations cohere because there is mutual regard among  the individuals composing 
them. Some day we must extend the nation law to the  universe, even as we 
have extended the family law to form nations —a lar ger family. God has 
ordained that India should be such a nation. 
Indeed, Hinduism teaches us to regard the whole hum anity as one indivisible 
undivided family. 
 
(3)  THE PROBLEM OF EVIL  
Why is there evil in the world, is a difficult ques tion to answer. I can only give 
what I may call a villager's answer. If there is go od, there must also be evil, 
just as where there is light there is also darkness . But it is true only so far as 
we human mortals are concerned. Before God there is  nothing good, nothing 
evil. We may talk of His dispensation in human term s, but our language is not 
God's. 
I cannot account for the existence of evil by any r ational method. To want to 
do so is to be coequal with God. I am therefore, hu mble enough to recognize 
evil as such. And I call God long suffering and pat ient, precisely because He Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  permits evil in the world. I know that there is no evil in Him and yet if there is 
evil, He is the author of it and yet untouched by i t. 
 
(4)  PAIR OF OPPOSITE FORCES  
The distinction between good and evil thoughts is n ot unimportant. Nor do 
these thoughts come haphazard. They follow some law , which the scriptures 
have tried to enunciate. There are certain problems  in mathematics, for the 
solution of which some workable assumptions have to  be made. They help the 
solution of the problem. But they are purely imagin ary, and have no other 
practical use. Similarly, psychologists have procee ded upon the assumption that 
a pair of opposite forces is warring against each o ther in the universe, of which 
one is divine and the other is devilish. The distin ction is made by all the 
scriptures of the world. I say this distinction is imaginary. God is one, without a 
second. He alone is. He is indefinable. In reality there is no war between God 
and Satan. 
 
(5)  GOD 'S HAND BEHIND GOOD AND EVIL  
In strictly scientific sense, God is at the bottom of both good and evil. He 
directs the assassin's dagger no less than the surg eon's knife. But for all that, 
good and evil are, for human purposes, from each ot her, distinct and 
incompatible, being symbolical of Light and Darknes s, God and Satan . . . 
respectively. 
God's hand is behind good, but in God's hand it is not mere good. His hand is 
behind evil also but there it is no longer evil. 'G ood' and 'Evil' is our own 
imperfect language. God is above both good and evil . 
It is we who entertain thoughts, and it is we ourse lves who repulse them. We 
have, thus, to strive against ourselves. The script ures have, therefore, said that 
there is duel in the world. This duel is imaginary,  not real. We can, however, 
sustain ourselves in the world by assuming the exis tence of the imaginary duel Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25  to be real. 
 
(6)  BLESSINGS OF CALAMITY  
It is the universal experience that every calamity brings a sensible man down on 
his knees. He thinks that it is God's answer to his  sins and that he must 
henceforth behave better. His sins have left him ho pelessly weak, and in his 
weakness he cried out to God for help. Thus million s of human beings used their 
personal calamities for self-improvement. Nations t oo have been known to 
invoke the assistance of God when calamities have o vertaken them. They have 
abased themselves before God and appointed days of humiliation, prayer and 
purification. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART II : MORAL SADHANA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27   
Om  
Three Great Jewels 
(Cardinal Virtues) 
 
Truth—Love—Restraint  
Truth supports.  
Love unites.  
Restraint enlivens. 
 
We can conquer the world  
by 
Truth and Love. 
 
Control 
of 
Thought, Word and Deed 
is 
Brahmacharya— 
a 
Perennial Spring  
of 
Eternal Energy.  
Selfless Service  
leads to Salvation. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28   
CHAPTER FOUR  
TRUTH 
 (1)  WHAT IS TRUTH ? 
What is Truth ?  A difficult question, but  I have solved it for myself, by saying 
that it is what the Voice within tells you. How the n, you ask, different people 
think of different and contrary truths? 
It is because we have at the present moment everybo dy claiming the right of 
conscience without going through any discipline wha tsoever, there is so much 
untruth being delivered in a bewildered world. All that I can, in true humility, 
present to you is that Truth is not to be found by anybody, who has not got an 
abundant sense of humility. If you would swim on th e bosom of the ocean of 
Truth, you must reduce yourself to a zero. 
Truth is within ourselves. There is an inmost centr e in us all, where Truth 
abides in fulness. Every wrong-doer knows within hi mself that he is doing 
wrong, for untruth cannot be mistaken for Truth. . . . Truth and Righteousness 
must for ever remain the Law in God's world. 
The Law of Truth is merely understood to mean that we must speak the Truth. 
But we understand the word in a much wider sense. T here should be Truth in 
thought, Truth in speech, and Truth in action. 
 
(2)  TRUTH IS THE SOURCE OF CHARACTER  
Character is based on virtuous action, and virtuous  action is grounded on Truth. 
Truth, then, is the source and foundation of all th ings that are good and great. 
Hence fearless and unflinching pursuit of the ideal  of Truth and Righteousness 
is the key of true health as of all else. 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29  (3) How  TO REALIZE IT? 
But how is one to realize Truth, which may be liken ed to the Philosopher's 
Stone or the Cow of Plenty? By single-minded devoti on  (Abhyasa)  and 
indifference to every other interest ( Vairagya).  
Silence is a great help to a seeker after Truth lik e myself. In the attitude of 
silence, the soul finds the path in clearer light a nd what is elusive and 
deceptive, resolves itself into crystal clearness. Our life is long arduous quest 
after Truth, and the Soul requires inward restfulne ss to attain its full height. 
Experience has taught me that silence is a part of the spiritual discipline of a 
votary of Truth. Proneness to exaggerate, to suppre ss or to modify Truth, 
wittingly or unwittingly, is a natural weakness of man, and silence is necessary 
in order to surmount it. A man of few words will ra rely be thoughtless in his 
speech. He will measure every word. 
 
(4)  NEED OF FEARLESS VIGILANCE  
There is so much superstition and hypocrisy around,  that one is afraid even to 
do the right thing. But if one gives way to fear, e ven Truth will have to be 
suppressed. The golden rule is to act fearlessly up on what one believes to be 
right. . . . The danger is that when we are surroun ded by falsehood on all sides, 
we might be caught in it and begin to deceive ourse lves. We should be careful 
not to make a mistake, out of our laziness and igno rance. Constant vigilance 
under all circumstances is essential. 
 
(5)  ITS SUPREME VALUE  
How beautiful it would be if all of us young and ol d, men and women, devoted 
ourselves wholly to Truth in all that we might do, in our waking hours, whether 
working, eating, drinking or playing, till pure dre amless sleep claimed us for 
her own. God as Truth has been for me a treasure be yond price. May He be so 
to everyone of us! Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  Therefore, the pursuit of Truth is true  Bhakti. It is the path that leads to God. 
There is no place in it for cowardice, no place for  defeat. It is the talisman by 
which death itself becomes the portal to Life Etern al. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31   
CHAPTER FIVE  
LOVE  (AHIMSA)   
(1)  TRUTH AND LOVE  
Love and Truth are the faces of the same coin, and both very difficult to 
practise, and the only things worth living for.  A person cannot be true, if he 
does not love all God's creatures. Truth and Love a re therefore the complete 
sacrifice. 
Without Truth there is no Love. Without Truth it ma y be affection, as for one's 
country, to the injury of others; or infatuation as  of a young man for a girl. . . . 
Love transcends all animality and is never partial.  
True Love is boundless like the ocean and swelling within one, spreads itself 
out and crossing all boundaries and frontiers, enve lops the whole world. 
 
(2)  LOVE UNITES  
Scientists tell us that without the presence of the  cohesive force amongst 
atoms that comprise the globe of ours, it would cru mble to pieces and we 
would cease to exist; and even as there is a cohesi ve force in the blind matter, 
so must there be in all things animate and the name  for that cohesive force 
among animate beings is Love. We notice it between father and son, between 
brother and sister, friend and friend. But we have to learn to use that force 
among all that lives and in the use of it consists our knowledge of God. 
 
(3)  LOVE IS LIFE  
If Love was not the law of life, life would not hav e persisted in the midst of 
death. Life is a perpetual triumph over the grave. If there is fundamental 
distinction between man and beast, it is the former 's progressive recognition of 
the Law and its application in practice to his own personal life. All the saints of 
the world, ancient and modern, were each according to his light and capacity, Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32  a living illustration of that supreme Law of our be ing. That the brute in us 
seems so often to gain easy triumph, is true enough . How should it be 
otherwise with a Law which is as high as Truth itse lf? When the practice of the 
Law becomes universal, God will reign on earth as H e does in Heaven. ... I need 
not be re minded that earth and heaven are within u s. We know the earth, we 
are strangers to heaven within us. 
It is my firm belief that it is Love that sustains the earth. There only is life 
where there is Love. Life without Love is death. Lo ve is the reverse of the coin 
of which the obverse is Truth. 
Hatred ever kills; Love never dies. Such is the vas t difference between the two. 
What is obtained by Love is retained for all time. What is obtained by hatred, 
proves a burden in reality, for it increases hatred . The duty of a human being is 
to diminish hatred and to promote Love. 
 
(4)  THE LAW OF LOVE  
The Law of Love, call it attraction, affinity, cohe sion if you like, governs the 
world. The universe continues in spite of destructi on incessantly going on. 
Truth triumphs over untruth. Love conquers hatred. God eternally triumphs 
over Satan. 
We will have ample cause to congratulate ourselves,  if we learn to substitute 
the Law of Love in society for that of the jungle a nd instead of harbouring ill 
will and enmity in our bosoms against those whom we  regard as our enemies, 
we learn to love them, as actual and potential frie nds. 
 
(5)  THE RELIGION OF AHIMSA  
The world is full of  Himsa , and Nature does appear to be "red in tooth and 
claw". But if we bear in mind that the man is highe r than the brute, then is man 
superior to Nature. If man has a divine mission to fulfill, a mission that 
becomes him, it is that of Ahimsa. 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  I am not a visionary. I claim to be a practical ide alist. The religion of non-
violence is not meant merely for Rishis and saints.  It is meant for the common 
people as well. Non-violence is the law of our spec ies, as violence is the law of 
the brute. The dignity of man requires obedience to  a higher law, to strengthen 
the spirit. 
Man as animal is violent, but as a Spirit is nonvio lent. The moment he awakes 
to the Spirit within, he cannot remain violent. Eit her he progresses towards 
Ahimsa or rushes towards his doom. That is why, the  Prophets and the Avatars 
have taught the lesson of truth, harmony, brotherho od, justice etc.— all 
attributes of Ahimsa. 
So let no one doubt that the salvation of all the e xploited peoples of the earth 
and therefore of the world, lies in the strictest r eliance on the coin on whose 
one face is written Truth and on the other Non-viol ence in large letters. Sixty 
years of experience has taught me no other method. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34   
CHAPTER SIX   
SELF-RESTRAINT 
(1)  RESTRAINT SHOULD BE VOLUNTARY  
Restraint self-imposed is not compulsion. A man who  chooses the path of 
freedom from restraint, i.e. self-indulgence, will be a bondslave of passions, 
whilst a man who binds himself to rules and restrai nts, releases himself. All 
things in the universe including the sun and the mo on and the stars — obey 
certain laws. Without the restraining influence of these laws, the world would 
not go on for a single moment. ... It is discipline  and restraint that separates us 
from the brute. If we would be men walking with our  heads erect and not 
walking on all fours, let us understand and put our selves under voluntary 
discipline and restraint. 
 
(2)  CONTROL OF PALATE  
True happiness is impossible without true health an d true health is impossible 
without a rigid control of the palate. All the othe r senses will automatically 
come under our control when the palate has been bro ught under control. And 
he who has conquered his senses has really conquere d the whole world. 
One should eat not in order to please the palate bu t just to keep the body 
going. When each organ of sense subserves the body and through the body the 
soul, its specific relish disappears and then alone  does it begin to function in 
the way nature intended it to •do. Any number of ex periments is too small and 
no sacrifice too great for attaining this symphony with nature. 
 
(3)  CONQUEST OF LUST  
The conquest of lust is the highest endeavour of ma n or woman's existence. 
Without overcoming lust man cannot hope to rule ove r self. And without rule 
over self there can be no Swaraj or Ramaraj. Rule o f all without rule of oneself Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35  would prove to be as deceptive and disappointing as  a painted toy-mango, 
charming to look at outwardly, but hollow and empty  within... Great causes... 
call for spiritual effort or soul- force. Soul-forc e comes only through God's 
grace, and God's grace never descends upon a man wh o is a slave to lust. 
Brahmacharya  means control of all organs of sense. He who attem pts to control 
only one organ and allows all others free play, is bound to find his effort futile. 
To hear suggestive stories with ears, to see sugges tive sights with the eyes, to 
taste stimulating food with the tongue, to touch ex citing things with the hands 
and then at the same time, try to control the only remaining organ, is like 
putting one's hand in fire and then trying to escap e being burnt. ... If we 
practise simultaneous self-control in all direction s, the attempt is scientific and 
easy of success. Perhaps the palate is the chief si nner. Hence we have assigned 
to its control, a separate place among the observan ces. 
 
(4)  SUBLIMATION OF VITALITY  
All power comes from the observation and sublimatio n of the vitality that is 
responsible for the creation of life. If the vitali ty is husbanded instead of being 
dissipated, it is transmuted into creative energy o f the highest order. . . . This 
vitality is . . . dissipated by evil . . . thoughts . And since thought is the root of 
all speech and action, the quality of the latter co rresponds to that of the 
former. Hence perfectly controlled thought is itsel f a power, of the highest 
potency and can become self-acting. . . . Such powe r is impossible in one who 
dissipates his energy . . . even as steam kept in a  leaking pot yields no power. 
 
(5)  RESTRAINT  VS . SUPPRESSION  
It is harmful to suppress the body if the mind at t he same time is allowed to go 
astray. Where the mind wanders, the body must follo w sooner or later. It is 
necessary here to appreciate one distinction. It is  one thing to allow the mind 
to harbour impure thoughts, it is different thing a ltogether if it strays among 
them in spite of ourselves. Victory will be ours in  the end, if we non-co-operate 
with the mind in this evil process. . . . Hence the  body must be immediately Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36  taken in hand and then we must put forth a constant  endeavour to bring the 
mind under control. We can do nothing more, nothing  less. 
Restraint never ruins one's health. What ruins one' s health is not restraint but 
outward suppression. A really self-restrained perso n grows every day from 
strength to strength and from peace to more peace. The very first step in self-
restraint is the restraint of thoughts. Understand your limitations and do only as 
much as you can. . . . Let not what I have told you  alarm you or weaken you. 
Always aim at complete harmony of thought and word and deed. Always aim at 
purifying your thoughts and everything will be well . There is nothing potent 
than thought, deed follows word and word follows th ought. The world is the 
result of a mighty thought, and where the thought i s mighty and pure, the 
result is always mighty and pure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37   
CHAPTER SEVEN  
SELFLESS SERVICE 
(1)  SELFLESS SERVICE A SOURCE OF JOY  
The human body is meant solely for service, never f or indulgence. The secret of 
happy life lies in renunciation. Renunciation is li fe. Indulgence is death. 
Therefore everyone has a right and should desire to  live 125 years while 
performing service without an eye on result. Such l ife must be wholly and solely 
dedicated to service. Renunciation made for the sak e of service is an ineffable 
joy, of which none can deprive one, because that ne ctar springs from within 
and sustains life. In this there can be no room for  worry or impatience. Without 
this joy, long life is impossible and would not be worth-while even if possible. 
The soul is omnipresent; why should she care to be confined within the cage-
like body, or do evil and even kill for the sake of  the cage ? We thus arrive at 
the ideal of total renunciation and learn to use th e body for the purpose of 
service, so long as it exists, so much so, that ser vice and not bread becomes 
with us, the staff of life. We eat and drink, sleep  and awake, for service alone. 
Such an attitude of mind brings us real happiness a nd beatific vision in the 
fullness of time. 
 
(2)  SERVICE MEANT FOR SELF -REALIZATION  
I am here to serve no one else but myself, to find my own self-realization 
through the service of these village folk. Man's ul timate aim is the realization of 
God, and all his activities — social, political, re ligious — have to be guided by 
the ultimate aim of the vision of God. The immediat e service of human beings 
becomes a necessary part of the endeavour, simply b ecause the only way to 
find God is to see Him in His creation and be one w ith it. This can only be done 
through one's country. I am part and parcel of the whole, and I cannot find Him 
apart from the rest of humanity. My countrymen are my nearest neighbours. 
They have become so helpless, so resourceless, so i nert that I must concentrate Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  on serving them. If I could persuade myself that I should find Him in a Hima-
layan cave, I would proceed there immediately. But I know that I cannot find 
Him apart from humanity. 
 
(3)  SERVICE LEADS TO SALVATION  
I am striving for the Kingdom of Heaven, which is s piritual deliverance. For me 
the road to salvation lies through incessant toil i n the service of my country and 
my humanity. I want to identify myself with everyth ing that lives. In the 
language of the Gita > I want to live at peace with both friend and foe. M y 
patriotism is for me a stage on my journey to the l and of Eternal Freedom and 
Peace. Thus it will be seen that for me there is no  politics devoid of religion. 
They subserve religion. Politics bereft of religion  is a death-trap because they 
kill the Soul. 
 
(4)  SERVICE SHOULD BE CONSTANT  
A life of service must be one of humility. He, who could sacrifice his life for 
others, has hardly time to reserve for himself a pl ace in the sun. Inertia must 
not be mistaken for humility, as it has been in Hin duism. True humility means 
most strenuous and constant endeavour, entirely dir ected towards the service 
of humanity. God is continuously in action without resting for a single moment. 
If we should serve Him or become one with Him, our activity must be as 
unwearied as His. There may be momentary rest in st ore for the drop which is 
separated from the ocean, but not for the drop in t he ocean, which knows no 
rest. The same is the case with ourselves. As soon as we become one with the 
ocean in the shape of God, there is no more rest fo r us, nor indeed do we need 
rest any, longer. Our very sleep is action. For we sleep with the thought of God 
in our hearts. This restlessness constitutes true r est. This never-ceasing 
agitation holds the key to peace ineffable. This su preme state of total 
surrender is difficult to describe, but not beyond the bounds of human 
experience. It has been attained by many dedicated souls, and may be attained 
by ourselves as well. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART III : SPIRITUAL SADHANA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40   
Om  
Firm Faith  
strengthens the Will; 
Sincere Prayer  
develops Devotion; 
Soulful Meditation  
awakens Intuition; and 
Perfect Dedication  
attracts Grace ! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41   
CHAPTER  EIGHT 
FAITH   
(1)  DISBELIED,  A DISEASE 
It is the fashion, nowadays, to dismiss God from li fe altogether and insist on the 
possibility of reaching the highest kind of life, w ithout the necessity of a living 
faith in a living God. I must confess my inability to drive the truth of the law 
home to those who have no faith in and no need for,  a power infinitely higher 
than themselves. My own experience has led me to th e knowledge that fullest 
life is impossible without an immovable belief in a  living Law, in obedience to 
which the whole universe moves. A man without that faith is like a drop thrown 
out of the ocean which is bound to perish. Every dr op in the ocean shares its 
majesty, and has the honour of giving us the ozone of life. 
It is easy enough to say, "I do not believe in God"  for God permits all things to 
be said of Him with impunity. He looks at our acts.  And any breach of His Law 
brings with it not its vindictive but its purifying , compelling punishment. God's 
existence cannot be, does not need to be proved. Go d is. If He is not felt, so 
much the worse for us. The absence of feeling is a disease which we shall 
someday throw off,  nolens volens. 
 
(2)  NEED OF A LIVING FAITH  
No search is possible without some working assumpti ons. If we grant nothing we 
find nothing. Ever since its commencement, the worl d, the wise and foolish 
included, has proceeded on the assumption that, if we are, God is, and that, if 
God is not, we are not. And since belief in God, is  co-existent with the human-
kind, existence of God is treated as a fact more de finite than the fact that the 
sun is. This living faith has solved the largest nu mber of puzzles of life. It has 
alleviated our misery. It sustains us in life, it i s our solace in death. 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42   
(3)  TESTIMONY OF SAINTS  
True faith is appropriation of the reasoned experie nce of people whom we 
believe to have lived a life purified by prayer and  penance. Belief, therefore, in 
Prophets and Incarnations who have lived in remote ages, is not an idle 
superstition but a satisfaction of an inmost spirit ual want. 
They say that anybody following the path they have trodden, can realize God. 
The fact is, we do not want to follow the path lead ing to realization and we 
won't take the testimony of eye-witnesses about ihe  one thing that really 
matters. 
 
(4)  FAITH AND REASON  
There are subjects where reason cannot take us far and we have to accept 
things on faith. Faith, then, does not contradict r eason but transcends it. Faith 
is a kind of sixth sense which works in cases which  are without the perview of 
reason. 
Faith only begins where reason stops. But there are  very few actions in the 
world for which reasonable justification cannot be found. 
Experience has humbled me enough to let me realize the specific limitations of 
reason. Just as matter misplaced becomes dirt, reas on misused becomes 
lunacy. If we but render unto Caesar that which is Caesar's all would be well. 
 
(5)  LIMITATIONS OF INTELLECT  
There is something infinitely higher than intellect  that rules us as even the 
sceptics. Their scepticism and philosophy do not he lp them in the critical 
period of their lives. They need something better, something outside them. And 
so if someone puts a conundrum before me, I say to him: "You are not going to 
know the meaning of God or prayer unless you reduce  yourself to a cipher. You 
must be humble enough to see that in spite of your greatness and gigantic Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43  intellect you are but a speck in the universe. A me rely intellectual conception 
of things of life is not enough. It is the spiritua l conception which eludes the 
intellect, and which alone can give one satisfactio n. Even moneyed men have 
critical periods in their lives. Though they are su rrounded by everything that 
money can buy and affection can give, they find at certain moments in their 
lives utterly distracted. It is in these moments th at we have a glimpse of God, a 
vision of Him who is guiding everyone of our steps.  
Intellect takes along, in the battle of life, to a certain extent, but at the 
crucial moment fails us. Faith transcends reason. I t is when the horizon is the 
darkest and our human reason is beaten down to the ground, that faith shines 
the brightest and comes to our rescue. It is such f aith that our youth requires 
and this comes when one has shed all pride of intel lect and surrendered oneself 
entirely to His will. 
 
(6)  HAVE CHILDLIKE FAITH  
I would have brushed aside all rational explanation s and begin with a simple 
childlike faith in God. If I exist God exists. With  me it is a necessity of my being 
as it is with millions. They may not be able to tal k about it but from their lives 
you can see that it is a part of their life. I am o nly asking you to restore the 
belief that has been undermined. In order to do so you have to unlearn a lot of 
literature that dazzles your intelligence and throw s you off your feet. Start 
with the faith which is also a token of humility an d an admission that we know 
nothing, that we are less than atoms in this univer se. We are less than atoms, I 
say, because the atom obeys the law of its being, w hereas, we, in the insolence 
of our ignorance deny the law of nature. But I have  no argument to address to 
those who have no faith. 
I claim to be a man of faith and prayer and even if  I were to be cut to pieces, I 
trust God would give me the strength not to deny Hi m, but to assert that He is. 
... I am surer of His existence than of the fact th at you and I are sitting in this 
room. Then I can also testify that I may live witho ut air and water but not 
without Him. You may pluck out my eyes, but that ca nnot kill me. You may Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44  chop off my nose, but that will not kill me. But bl ast my faith in God, and I am 
dead. You may call this a superstition, but I confe ss it is a superstition that I 
hug, even as I used to hug the name of Rama in my c hildhood when there was 
any cause of danger or alarm. 
 
(7)  POWER OF LIVING FAITH  
We want the steady light, the infallible light of r eligious Faith; not Faith which 
merely appeals to the intelligence but a Faith whic h is indelibly inscribed on 
the heart. First we want to realize our religious c onsciousness, and immediately 
we have done that, the whole department of life is open to us; and it should 
then be a sacred privilege of all, so that when you ng men grow to manhood 
they may do so properly equipped to battle with lif e. 
It is Faith that steers us through stormy seas; Fai th that moves mountains, and 
Faith that jumps across the ocean. That Faith is no thing but a living and wide-
awake consciousness of God within. He who has achie ved that Faith, wants 
nothing. Bodily diseased, he is spiritually healthy ; physically poor, he rolls in 
spiritual riches. 
 
(8) How  TO ACQUIRE FAITH ? 
But Faith cannot be acquired by force of intellect.  It comes but slowly after 
deep meditation and continuous practice. We pray, s ing hymns, read books, 
seek the association of men of God, and perform the  spinning sacrifice in order 
to attain that Faith. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45   
CHAPTER NINE  
PRAYER   
(1)  NATURE OF PRAYER 
The Divine Mind is unchangeable, but that Divinity is in everyone and 
everything — animate and inanimate. The meaning of prayer is that I want to 
invoke that Divinity in me. ... I beg it of myself,  of my Higher Self, the Real 
Self, with which I have not yet achieved complete i dentification. You may, 
therefore, describe it as a continual longing to lo se myself in the Divinity which 
comprises all. 
Prayer really is complete meditation and melting in to the Higher Self, though 
one occasionally does lapse into imploration like t hat of a child to his father. I 
would not call it lapse. It is more in the fitness of things to say that I pray to 
God who exists somewhere in the clouds and the more  distant He is, the 
greater is my longing for Him and I find myself in His presence in thought. And 
thought, you know, has a greater velocity than ligh t. Therefore, the distance 
between me and Him though so incalculably great, is  obliterated. He is so far 
and yet so near. 
 
(2)  SOURCE OF PEACE AND LIGHT  
There is an eternal struggle raging in man's breast  between the powers of 
Darkness and Light, and he who has the sheet-anchor  of prayer to rely upon, 
will not be a victim to powers of Darkness. The man  of prayer will be at peace 
with himself and with the whole world and the man w ho goes about the affairs 
of world without a prayerful heart will be miserabl e and will also make the 
world miserable. 
It is a universal experience that every calamity br ings a sensible man down on 
his knees. He thinks that it is God's answer to his  sins and he must henceforth 
behave better. His sins have left him hopelessly we ak and in his weakness he Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46  cries out God for help. Thus millions of human bein gs used their personal 
calamities for self-improvement. 
Prayer is the only means of bringing about orderlin ess and peace and repose in 
our daily acts. 
 
(3)  THE ESSENCE AND POWER OF PRAYER  
He who hungers for the awakening of the Divine in h im, must fall back on 
prayer. . . . But it is not a repetition of an empt y formula. ... It is better in 
prayer to have a heart without words than words wit hout heart. It must be in 
clear response to the spirit which hungers for it. And even as a hungry man re-
lishes a hearty meal, a hungry Soul will relish a h eartfelt prayer. And I am 
giving you a bit of my experience and that of my co mpanions when I say that he 
who has experienced the magic of prayer, may do wit hout food for days 
together but not a single moment without prayer. Fo r without prayer there is 
no peace. 
Prayer is no flight of eloquence. It is no lip- hom age. It springs from the heart. 
If, therefore, we achieve that purity of the heart,  when it is emptied of all but 
love, if we keep all the chords in proper tune, the y "trembling pass in music out 
of sight". Prayer needs no speech. I have not the s lightest doubt that prayer is 
an unfailing means of cleansing the heart of passio ns. But it must be combined 
with utmost humility. 
Our prayer is a heart-search. It is a reminder to o urselves that we are helpless 
without His support. No effort is complete without prayer, without a definite 
recognition that the best human endeavour is of no effect if it has not God's 
blessings behind it. Prayer is a call to humility. It is a call to self-purification. 
 
(4)  PATIENCE NECESSARY FOR SUCCESS  
Real prayer is an absolute shield and protection ag ainst . . . evils. Success does 
not always attend the very first effort at such a l iving prayer. We have to strive 
against ourselves, we have to believe in spite of o urselves, because months are Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47  as our years. We have, therefore, to cultivate illi mitable patience if we will 
realize the efficacy of prayer. There will be darkn ess, disappointment and even 
worse; but we must have courage enough to battle ag ainst all these and not 
succumb to cowardice. There is no such thing as ret reat for a man of prayer. 
It may take time for the recitation to come from th e heart, even as a seed 
sown has to be nurtured and bears fruit only in due  season. If the desire to have 
God within us is there, progress, however slow, is bound to be. Man cannot be 
transformed from bad to good, overnight. God does n ot exercise magic. He too 
is within His own Law. His Law, however, is differe nt from the law of the State. 
There may be mistakes in the latter but God cannot err. If He were to go 
beyond the limits of His Law, the world would be lo st. He is changeless, 
unchanging, unequalled, the same yesterday, today a nd forever. His Law is 
written on the tablets of their hearts. They could become changed men and 
women, only if they had the desire of reform and if  they were prepared for 
ceaseless endeavour. 
 
(5)  PERIOD OF PRAYER  
There can be no fixed rule laid down as to the time  these devotional acts 
should take place. It depends upon individual tempe raments. There are 
precious moments in one's daily life. The exercises  are intended to sober and 
humble us and enable us to realize that nothing hap pens without His will and 
that we are but "clay in the hands of the Potter". These are moments when one 
reviews one's immediate past, confesses one's weakn esses, asks for forgiveness 
and strength to be and to do better. One minute may  be enough for some, 
twenty-four hours would be too little for others. F or those who are filled with 
the presence of God in them, to labour is to pray. The life is one continuous 
prayer or act of worship. For those who act only to  sin, to indulge themselves 
and to live for self, no time is too much. If they had patience and faith and the 
will to be pure, they would pray till they feel the  definite purifying presence of 
God within them. For us ordinary mortals there must  be a middle path between 
these two extremes. We are not so exalted as to be able to say that all our acts Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48  are a dedication, nor perhaps are we so far gone, a s to living purely for self. 
Hence have all religions set apart times for genera l devotion. 
 
(6)  BEGIN AND CLOSE THE DAY WITH PRAYER  
I believe that prayer is the very soul and essence of religion and therefore 
prayer must be the very core of the life of man. . . . 
Begin, therefore, your day with prayer and make it so soulful that it may 
remain with you until evening. Close the day with p rayer so that you may have 
a peaceful night free from dreams and nightmares. D o not worry about the 
forms. Let it be any form; it should be such as can  put us in communion with 
the Divine. Only let not the spirit wander while th e words of prayer run on out 
of your mouth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49   
CHAPTER TEN 
MEDITATION (RAMANAMA) 
(1) The Virtue of Silence 
Experience has taught me that silence is part of Sp iritual Discipline of a votary 
of Truth. . . . When one comes to think of it, one cannot help feeling that 
nearly half the misery of the world would disappear  if we, fretting mortals, 
knew the virtue of silence. Before modern civilizat ion came upon us, at least 
six to eight hours of silence out of twenty-four we re vouchsafed to us. Modern 
civilization has taught us to convert night into da y and golden silence into 
brazen din and noise. What a great thing it would b e if we in our busy lives, 
could retire into ourselves each day, for at least a couple of hours and prepare 
our minds to listen to the voice of the great Silen ce. The Divine Radio is always 
singing if we could only make ourselves ready to li sten to it, but it is impossible 
to listen without silence. St. Theresa has used a c harming image to sum up the 
sweet result of silence: 
"You will at once feel your senses gather themselve s together, they seem like 
bees which return to the hive and they shut themsel ves up from work without 
effort or care on your part. God thus rewards the v iolence which your soul has 
been doing to itself; and gives to it such a domina tion over the senses that a 
sign is enough when it desires to recollect itself,  for them to obey and so 
gather themselves together. At the first call of th e will, they come back more 
and more quickly. At last after many and many exerc ises of this kind, God 
disposes them to a state of absolute repose and of perfect contemplation." 
 
(2)  SILENCE FACILITATES COMMUNION WITH GOD  
Silence has now become both a physical and spiritua l necessity for me. 
Originally it was taken to relieve the sense of pre ssure. Then I wanted time for 
writing. After, however, I had practised it for som etime, I saw the spiritual 
value of it. It suddenly flashed across my mind tha t that was the time when I Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50  could best hold communion with God. And now I feel as though I was naturally 
built for silence. 
Silence is a great help to a seeker after Truth lik e myself. In the attitude of 
silence the soul finds the path in a clearer light,  and what is elusive and 
deceptive resolves itself into crystal clearness. O ur life is long and arduous 
quest after Truth and the soul requires inward rest fulness to attain its full 
height. 
 
(3)  TRUE MEDITATION  
True meditation consists in closing the eyes and ea rs of the mind to all else 
except the object of one's devotion. Hence, the clo sing of the eyes during 
prayers is an aid to such concentration. Man's conc eption of God is naturally 
limited. Each one has, therefore, to think of Him a s best appears to him, 
provided that the conception is pure and uplifting.  
 
(4)  POWER OF GOD 'S NAME  
Rama is the strength of the weak. This strength is not to be obtained by taking 
up arms or by similar means. It is to be had by thr owing oneself on His name. 
Rama is but a synonym of God. You may say God or Al lah or whatever other 
name you like, but the moment you trust naught but Him, you are strong. All 
disappointment disappears. 
Ramanama is an alchemy such as can transform t he b ody. The conservation of 
vital energy has been likened to accumulated wealth  but it is in the power of 
Ramanama alone to make it a running stream of ever- increasing spiritual 
strength, ultimately making a fall impossible. 
Just as the body cannot exist without blood, so the  soul needs the matchless 
and pure strength of faith. This strength can renov ate the weakness of all man's 
physical organs. That is why it is said that when R amanama is enshrined in the 
heart, it means the rebirth of man. This law applie s to the young, old, man and Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51  woman alike. 
 
(5)  TAKE THE NAME WITH EVERY BREATH  
Though my reason and heart long ago realized the hi ghest attribute and name 
of God as Truth, I recognize Truth by the name of R ama. In the darkest hour of 
my trial, that one name has saved me and is still s aving me. 
When a child my nurse taught me to repeat Ramanama whenever I felt afraid or 
miserable, and it has been second nature with me, w ith growing knowledge and 
advancing years. I may even say that, the word is i n my heart, if not actually on 
my lips, all the twenty-four hours. It has been my saviour and I am ever stayed 
on it. 
What is the mark of a man who has Rama enshrined in  his heart? Such a man 
will take God's name with every breath. His Rama wi ll be awake even whilst the 
body is asleep. Rama will be always with him in wha tever he does. The real 
death for such a devoted man will be loss of this s acred companionship. 
A devotee of Rama may be said to be the same as the  steadfast one—
Sthitaprajna  — of the Gita. He will live in the consciousness o f the soul and 
look to the care, first and last of the Indweller. Such a man will take God's 
name with every breath. 
 
(6)  BLESSINGS OF RAMANAMA  
My Rama ... is not the historical Rama. . . . He is  the eternal, the unborn, the 
one without a second. Him alone I worship. 
A Christian may find the same solace from the repet ition of the name of Jesus 
and a Muslim from the name of Allah. All these thin gs have the same 
implications and they produce identical results. On ly the repetition must not be 
a lip-expression, but part of your very being. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52  I have said that to take Ramanama from the heart me ans deriving help from an 
incomparable Power. The atom bomb is as nothing com pared with it. This 
power is capable of removing all pain. 
There is no doubt whatsoever that Ramanama contains  all the power that is 
attributed to it. No one can by mere wishing enshri ne Ramanama in his heart. 
Untiring effort is required as also patience. What an amount of labour and 
patience have been lavished by men to acquire non-e xistent philosopher's 
stone? Surely, God's name is of infinitely richer v alue. 
With my hand on my breast, I can say that not a min ute in my life am I 
forgetful of God. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53   
CHAPTER ELEVEN  
DEDICATION  (SELF-SURRENDER) 
(1)  SURRENDER BRINGS JOY  
Who am I? I have no strength save what God gives me . I have no authority over 
my countrymen save the purely moral. If He holds me  to be a pure instrument 
for the spread of non-violence, He will give me the  strength and show me the 
way. My greatest weapon is mute prayer. The cause o f peace is, therefore, in 
God's good hands. Nothing can happen but by His wil l expressed in His eternal, 
changeless Law which is He. We neither know Him nor  His Law, save through 
the glass darkly. But the faint glimpse of the Law is sufficient to fill me with 
joy, hope and faith in the future. 
I must go with God as my only guide. He is a jealou s Lord. He will allow no one 
to share His authority. One has, therefore to appea r before Him in all one's 
meekness, empty-handed and in a spirit of full surr ender, and He enables you 
to stand before the whole world and protects you fr om all harm. 
I have been a willing slave to this most exacting M aster for more than half a 
century. His voice has been increasingly audible as  years have rolled by. He has 
never forsaken me in my darkest hour. He lias saved  me often against myself 
and left me not a vestige of independence. The grea ter the surrender to Him 
the greater has been my joy. 
 
(2)  GOD MOVES AND PROTECTS ALL  
We are but straws in the hands of God. He alone can  blow us where He pleases. 
We cannot oppose His wish. 
If we can but throw ourselves into His lap as our o nly Help, we shall come out 
scatheless through every ordeal. If nothing happens  without His permission, 
where is the difficulty in believing that he is try ing us. I would take our Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54  complaints to Him for so cruelly trying us. And He will soothe us and forgive us 
if we will but trust Him. 
We must learn, each one of us, to stand alone. God only is our infallible and 
eternal guide. . . .God helps the helpless not thos e who believe they can do 
something. . . . Those who put their implicit faith  in Him cannot but reach their 
aims. 
No one can see God face to face who has aught of an  "I" in him. He must 
become a cipher if he would see God. Who shall dare  say in this storm- tossed 
universe: "I have won" ? God triumphs in us, never we. 
 
(3)  DEDICATE ALL TO GOD  
In a moment of introspection, the poet asks himself : 
“O man, why have you left off taking God's name ? 
You have not given up anger or lust or greed, But y ou have forgotten Truth. 
What a tragedy to save worthless pennies, 
And to let go the priceless gem of God's love 
O Fool, renounce all vanities, 
And throw yourself on the grace of God alone." 
This does not mean that if one has wealth, it shoul d be thrown away, and wife 
and children should be turned out of doors. It simp ly means that one must give 
up attachment to these things and dedicate one's al l to God and make use of 
His gifts to serve Him only. It also means that if we take His name with all our 
being, we are automatically weaned from all lust, u ntruth and baser passions. 
We must eternally sing His praise and do His will. Let us dance to the tune of 
His  bansi  (flute) and all would be well. 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART IV : SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56   
God  
reveals Himself everyday 
to 
All Human Beings. 
But 
Unfortunately 
We shut our minds 
to 
The Feeling of His Presence; 
We shut our eyes 
to 
His Inner Light; 
and 
We shut our ears 
to 
His Inner Voice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57   
CHAPTER TWELVE  
SOME  ASPECTS  OF  EXPERIENCE 
 (1)  BLESSED FEELINGS OF GOD 'S PRESENCE  
I believe it to be possible for every human being t o attain that blessed and 
indescribable state in which he feels within himsel f the presence of God to the 
exclusion of everything else. 
I hold that complete realization is impossible in t his embodied life. Nor is it 
necessary. A living immovable faith is all that is required for reaching the full 
spiritual height, attainable by human beings. God i s not outside the earthly 
case of ours. Therefore exterior proof is not of mu ch avail if at all. We must 
ever fail to perceive Him through the senses, becau se He is beyond them. We 
can feel Him, if we will but withdraw ourselves fro m the senses. 
Seeing God face to face is to feel that He is enthr oned in our hearts, even as a 
child feels a mother's affection without needing an y demonstration. Does a 
child reason out the existence of a mother's love? Can he prove it to others ? He 
triumphantly declares "It is". So must it be with t he existence of God. He defies 
reason. But He is experienced. Let us not reject th e experience of Tulsidas, 
Chaitanya, Ramdas and a host of other spiritual tea chers, even as we do not 
reject that of mundane teachers. 
There is not a moment when I do not feel the presen ce of a Witness, whose eye 
misses nothing and with whom I strive to keep in tu ne. 
If I did not feel the presence of God within me, I see so much of misery and 
disappointment every day that I would be a raving m aniac and my destination 
would be the Hoogli. 
 
(2)  VISION OF GOD  
What is the vision of God? It does not mean seeing something with the physical 
eye or witnessing a miracle. Seeing God means reali zation of the fact that God Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58  abides in our hearts. The yearning must persist unt il one has attained this 
realization, and will vanish upon realization. Real ization is the final fruit of 
constant effort. God is there in the tabernacle of the heart. 
We cannot see God with these eyes. God is spirit wi thout body and is, 
therefore, visible only to the eye of faith. If the re are no evil thoughts 
troubling our mind and no fears but constant cheerf ulness in our heart, that is 
an indication of God's presence in ourselves. Indee d He is there at all times but 
we fail to notice His presence as we have no faith,  and thus undergo much 
suffering. When once we have cultivated real faith,  calamities cease to upset 
us. 
One who looks upon the universe as various facets o f God, will certainly have 
the beatific vision. All our knowledge and spiritua l exercises are fruitless, so 
long as we have not had this vision. 
When I admire the wonder of a sunset or the beauty of the moon, my soul 
expands in worship of the Creator, I try to see Him  and His mercies in all these 
creations. 
 
(3)  HIS LIGHT AND MUSIC  
The fleeting glimpses that I have been able to have  of Truth can hardly convey 
an idea of the indescribable Lustre of Truth, a mil lion times more intense than 
that of the sun, we daily see with our eyes. In fac t, what I have caught is only 
the faintest glimmer of that Mighty Effulgence. I f eel the warmth and sunshine 
of His Presence. 
The sun in heavens fills the whole universe with it s life-giving warmth. But if 
one went too near it, it would consume him to ashes . Even so, it is with 
Godhead. We become Godlike to the extent we realize  non-violence; but we 
never become wholly God. 
My firm belief is that He reveals Himself daily to every human being but we 
shut our ears to the "still small voice". We shut o ur eyes to the Pillar of Fire in 
front of us. I realize His omnipresence. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59  The Divine! Music is incessantly going on within ou rselves; but the loud senses 
drown the Delicate Music which is unlike and infini tely superior to any we can 
perceive or hear with our senses. 
When this Inner Light corresponds with the promptin gs of the smaller Inner 
Voice, then that flash has a mark of inspiration. 
 
(4)  THE INNER VOICE  
The Inner Voice defies description. But sometimes w e do feel that we receive 
an inspiration from within. The time when I learnt to recognize it may be called 
my prayer time, say about 1906. I recollect it. For  the rest, never did I feel at 
any time in my life that I had some new experience.  My spiritual growth has 
been unnoticed like the growth of hair on our heads . 
Nobody has to my knowledge questioned the possibili ty of the Inner Voice 
speaking to some and it is a gain to the world even  if one person's claim to 
speak under the authority of the Inner Voice can be  really sustained. Many may 
make the claim but not all will be able to substant iate it. But it cannot and 
ought not to be suppressed for the sake of preventi ng false claimants. There is 
no danger whatsoever, if many people could truthful ly represent the Inner 
Voice. But unfortunately there is no remedy against  hypocrisy. Virtue must not 
be suppressed because many will feign it. Men have always been found 
throughout the world claiming to speak for the Inne r Voice. But no harm has yet 
overtaken the world through their short-lived activ ities. Before one is able to 
listen to that Voice, one has to go through a long and severe course of training, 
and when it is the Inner Voice that speaks, it is u nmistakable. The world cannot 
successfully be fooled for all time. There is, ther efore, no danger of anarchy 
setting in, because an humble man like me, will not  be suppressed and will 
dare to claim the authority of the Inner Voice, whe n he believes that he has 
heard it. 
Man is a fallible being. He can never be sure of hi s steps. What he may regard 
as an answer to prayer may be an echo of his pride.  For infallible guidance man 
has to have a perfectly innocent heart incapable of  evil. I can lay no such Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60  claim. Mine is a struggling, striving, erring, impe rfect soul. 
 
(5)  DIVINE MESSAGES  
[There were two occasions when Gandhiji heard Divin e- Messages. The first was 
in 1933 and the second in 1936. Both were connected  with the problem of 
untouchability. Gandhiji tells us:] 
The first question that has puzzled many is about t he Voice of God. What was 
it? What did I hear? Was there any person I saw? If  not, how was the Voice 
conveyed to me? These are pertinent questions. 
I saw no form. I have never tried for it, for I hav e always believed God to be 
without form. But what I did hear was like a Voice from afar and yet quite 
near. It was as unmistakable as some human voice, d efinitely speaking to me, 
and irresistible. I was not dreamig at the time I h eard the Voice. The hearing of 
the Voice was preceded by a terrific struggle withi n me. Suddenly the Voice 
came upon me. I listened, made certain that it was the Voice and the struggle 
ceased. I was calm. The determination was made acco rdingly, the date and the 
hour of the fast fixed. Joy came over me. This was between 11 and 12 
midnight. I felt refreshed. 
Gould I give any further evidence that it was truly  the Voice I heard and that it 
was not an echo of my own heated imagination? I hav e no further evidence to 
convince the sceptic. He is free to say it was all self-delusion or hallucination. 
It may well have been so. I can offer no proof to t he contrary. But I can say this 
that not the unanimous verdict of the whole world a gainst me could shake me 
from the belief that what I heard was the true Voic e of God. . . . For me the 
Voice was more real than my existence. (1933) 
One experience stands quite distinctly in my memory . It relates to my twenty-
one days' fast for the removal of untouchability. I  had gone to sleep the night 
before without the slightest idea of having to decl are a fast the next morning. 
At about 12 o'clock in the night something wakes me  up suddenly and some 
voice—within or without, I cannot say—whispers, "Th ou must go on fast." "How Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61  many days ?" I ask. It says: "Twenty-one days." "Wh en does it begin?" I ask. It 
says: "You begin tomorrow." I went quietly off to s leep after making the 
decision. I did not tell anything to my companions until after the morning 
prayer. I placed into their hands a slip of paper a nnouncing my decision and 
asking them not to argue with me as the decision wa s irrevocable. Well, the 
doctors thought that I would not survive the fast. But something within me said 
I would and that I must go forward. That kind of ex perience has never in my life 
happened before after that date. 
This I know that all that glitters is not gold, and  also that if a man has really 
heard the Voice of God, there is no sliding back, j ust as there is no forgetting it 
by one who had learnt to swim. The listening in mus t make people's lives daily 
richer and richer. (1936), 
 
(6)  AN IDEAL SAGE  
That man alone can be called truly religious or mor al whose mind is not tainted 
with hatred or selfishness, and who leads a life of  absolute purity and of 
disinterested service; and that man alone can be ca lled truly wealthy or happy 
either. Only such man can do good to mankind; for T ruth is the foundation of 
all that is good and great. To a true servant of hu manity the question never 
arises as to the best form of service. When we have  realized the majesty of the 
Moral Law, we shall see how little our happiness or  unhappiness depends on 
health and success and fame and the like. As has be en said by Emerson, 'even 
the pains and griefs of good men contribute to thei r happiness, while even the 
wealth and fame of bad men cause misery to themselv es as well as to the 
world'. 'Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and His r ighteousness and all other 
things shall be added unto you.' 
He is a real devotee who is jealous of none, who is  a fount of mercy, who is 
without egoism, who treats alike cold and heat, hap piness and misery, who is 
ever forgiving, who is always contented, whose reso lutions are firm, who has 
dedicated mind and soul to God, who causes no dread , who is not afraid of 
others, who is free from exultation, sorrow and fea r, who is pure, who is versed Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62  in action and yet remains unaffected by it, who ren ounces all fruit, good or 
bad, who treats friend and foe alike, who is untouc hed by respect or 
disrespect, who is not puffed up with praise, who d oes not go under when 
people speak ill of him, who loves silence and soli tude, who has disciplined 
reason. 
The Yogin is therefore one who reflects all these a ttributes in his life, who, in 
the midst of raging storm and blinding spray, will keep his vision of the sun 
undisturbed, who will look difficulties and death i n the face, who goes with the 
same mind to the shambles and the scaffold and whos e mind is so serene that 
thunder rocks him to sleep. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63   
APPENDIX 
HIS PATH TO PEACE 
Gandhiji has been rightly called a "Prophet of Peac e". I am a fitting tribute to 
him, because all his activities had becu actuated b y, and directed towards the 
achievement of universal peace. The peace he tried to establish had two 
aspects: one internal and the other, external. He w anted to bring about 
internal peace in the lives of individuals and exte rnal peace in the affairs of 
societies and nations. 
The lives of individuals are very often disturbed b y internal conflicts, just as 
those of societies and nations are disturbed by ext ernal ones. In fact, these 
internal discords of individuals- are projected out side in societies and bring 
about external discords. Hence, if the internal one s are satisfactorily resolved 
the external ones also could be easily lessened. 
Each individual has his own internal conflicts — co nflicts among his ideals and 
his thoughts, among his feelings and his tastes, am ong his thousand and one 
desires, as well as the numerous demands of his sen ses. He experiences clashes 
among them every day, nay, every hour, which underm ine his peace of mind 
and throw him in the cauldron of eternal unrest. Th e smooth tenor of his life is 
violently disturbed and it becomes a prey to- terri ble storms and whirlwinds. 
How to resolve these conflicts and remove these dis cords is a very important 
problem. Eminent thinkers, both of the East and the  West, after long and deep 
thinking, have hit upon only one remedy for their s uccessful elimination viz. 
the integration of personality. People, nowadays, m ore than ever before, are 
suffering from divided personality. Their lives hav e lost old moorings, and have 
not secured new ones. Hence they are drifting aimle ssly — they know not 
where. They are assailed by doubts at every step, w hich remain unanswered, as 
they have not developed any proper philosophy of li fe which is capable of 
resolving them. They thus become nervous wrecks, sp end sleepless nights, and Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64  allow themselves to be assailed by imaginary nightm ares requiring mental 
treatment. 
Integration of personality is, thus, the only remed y to bring peace to our 
disturbed lives. Such integration required the incu lcation of proper philosophy 
of life. A sound philosophy not only gives a correc t view of life, enabling a 
person to formulate a proper goal for himself, but also shows him the correct 
way towards the goal. Thus it serves both as a scie nce as well as an art of life, 
making a person well-versed both in the theory and practice of proper living. 
The spread of such a philosophy will soon bring abo ut integration and 
automatically result in the descent of peace. 
What was the philosophy of life that Gandhiji pract ised and preached, for the 
achievement of integration and peace? His philosoph y had given him a clear 
idea about the nature of God, soul, and the world, as well as their relation with 
one another. This had enabled him to formulate and fix the goal of his life, 
together with the pathway leading to it. With the h elp of this philosophy and 
his  Sadhana  to reach the goal, he had succeeded in creating a sound integration 
in his life, which enabled him to enjoy undisturbed  peace throughout his 
eventful life—even during the most critical period* . Gandhiji could thus leave 
behind him a well-formulated philosophy of life for  the guidance of the future 
generations. 
In our "Introduction" we discussed Gandhiji's path to peace internal—peace in 
individual life. Let us now turn to an understandin g of his path to peace 
external, viz, peace in the lives of societies, nat ions, and humanity in general. 
Societies, like individuals, had also their own con flicts from time immemorial.  
NO period of recorded history throughout the world wa s entirely free from such 
conflicts. The peace of every society was endangere d and disturbed by a 
variety of conflicts. There were religious and cult ural conflicts, political and 
economic conflicts; in fact,, there were various ki nds of conflicts in all walks of 
social life. These conflicts were, at times, of a m oderate type. At other times, 
they assumed a terrible shape, so terrible that the y resulted in bloody 
revolutions, shaking the very foundation of the soc ial structure of the nation Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65  where they made their appearance. Such being the ca se, the imperative need 
of finding out ways and means for the proper resolu tion of such conflicts and 
introduction of peace in society has attracted the attention of all the great 
savants of all the times and climes. 
In the beginning, these conflicts appear to have be en resolved on the basis of 
superior strength—the strong subduing the weak and surviving by suppressing 
and eliminating his adversary. But as societies evo lved culturally, brute 
strength appears to have given place to moral, inte llectual, and spiritual 
strength. However, the principle that was followed by. these enlightened 
person also was the same, namely, elimination and s ubstitution. In their 
respective spheres, these leaders tried to eliminat e the conflicting factors by 
substituting a fresh one, which they considered to be all inclusive and capable 
of removing the conflict on account of its supposed  all-inclusiveness. History 
tells us that such attempts not only did not succee d in eliminating the con-
flicting factors, but they added one more to the lo t. 
This unfortunate experience called forth new effort s on the part of leaders of 
humanity to find out fresh principles that would br ing about better results and 
a lasting peace. The principle that was discovered by our seers, but neglected 
so far, attracted their attention; and they serious ly tried to make use of it, 
because, after careful investigation, they found it  to be scientifically correct 
and sound. This principle is the principle of harmo ny, which is nothing but an 
extension and application of the principle of integ ration to society. What is 
integration to an individual, that is harmony to so ciety. Integration is harmony 
in individual life; while harmony is integration in  social life. Though names are 
different on account of their different spheres of application,, they are one and 
the same. 
This harmony is not uniformity; it is not identity;  it is not unity  of  diversity, but 
unity  in  diversity. It is not oneness without a second, but  oneness with the 
second. It is a fine combination—a sweet intermingl ing of various things of the 
same class, without the loss of their special ident ity. It is well known that the 
word "harmony" has been imported originally from th e province of music. A fine Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66  blending of different notes giving out enchanting m usic was called harmony in 
the beginning. Later on, the term was being applied  to all delightful 
combinations. People began to speak about the harmo ny of colours, harmony of 
rasas,  harmony of sentiments, thoughts, and relations. No t only that; they have 
recently realized the great potential blessing whic h this principle embodies, 
and have been trying to make the best use of it in straightening and improving 
the relation between individuals as well as groups of individuals. 
Just as the principle of intergration of personalit y plays an important part in 
Gandhiji's pathway to peace in the individual,, thi s principle of harmony plays a 
prominent role in his pathway to peace in society. Gandhiji's philosophy of God-
realization helps in the integration of personality  and consequently brings about 
internal peace. In the same way, his philosophy of Sarvo- daya or Universal 
Brotherhood is capable of promoting harmony and pea ce in society. His 
Sarvodaya philosophy is mainly derived from the pri nciple of the Fatherhood of 
God and the Brotherhood of man. Hence we may even c all it the philosophy of 
Universal Brotherhood. Gandhiji believed strongly t hat "the world is moving 
towards Universal Brotherhood, when mankind would b e one nation". Gandhiji 
advocated "not the good of the few, not even the go od of the many, but the 
good of all, as we are made in His own image". It i s this broad, universal out-
look, which Gandhiji had inherited from his philoso phy of God- realization and 
Universal Brotherhood, that enabled him to find out  fresh, effective remedies 
to solve the several problems in the different sphe res of social, national, and 
international life. Let us try to have a glimpse at  some of the details of his 
solutions. 
Religion, which first made its appearance in the in dividual and social life as a 
messenger of peace and goodwill, later on proved to  be, on account of its 
distortion, a source of eternal conflict, even of b loody wars. The great  avatdras  
and prophets, saints and sages, who had given their  message of love and peace 
through religion, must be looking with horror at th e abominable use to which 
their benign blessing has been put by the erring, t houghtless humanity. 
Religious fanaticism has led men to hate one anothe r, not to love one another. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67  Love of one's own religion is now expressed in term s of hatred of others' 
religions. The very instrument meant for the spread  of love has become an 
instrument for the propagation of hatred. Strange i ndeed are the ways of man! 
Gandhiji had all this dire and rich experience to l earn from. So he never 
attempted to introduce a new religion in place of t he existing great religions of 
the world. He believed and declared that all these religions are God-given and 
necessary for the people for whom they were reveale d. He discovered, after 
prayerful search and deep study, that all religions  were true and also that all 
had some error in them. He found that all worship t he same God, that the Spirit 
is the same, and that names and forms alone are dif ferent. "The soul of 
religion," he says, "is one. It is encased in many forms. The final goal of all 
religions is the realization of this essential onen ess of Spirit." He asked people 
to follow their own religion—their own  sevadharma —by understanding its spirit. 
At the same time, he wanted all to cultivate broad toleration based on the 
proper understanding of other faiths. "True knowled ge of religion," says 
Gandhiji, "will break down the barriers between fai th and faith, and cultivation 
of tolerance for other faiths will impart to us an understanding of our own. 
People of different faiths will be better by contac t with one another, and the 
world will be a better place to live than today." T hus, through the spread of 
mutual understanding, toleration, and respect, Gand hiji hoped to create 
harmony in the sphere of religion. 
In the matter of culture also, Gandhiji advocated " harmony and not a mere 
external unity brought by force". He aimed at a fin e synthesis of the old and 
new cultures, both of the East and of the West. "Ou r new culture should be 
constructed", he says, "on the foundation of the pa st, enriched by the 
experience of the centuries. It should be a synthes is of the different civiliza-
tions which have influenced India and have naturali zed here." "Wise assimilation 
and not thoughtless imitation should be our goal." Both the East and the West, 
he maintained, should mutually exchange what is goo d in them and reject the 
evil. Still he wanted all to love other cultures, b ut live their own. "I want the 
cultures of all the lands to be blown about my hous e as freely as possible. But I Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68  refuse to be blown off my feet by any." Thus Gandhi ji allowed other cultures to 
blow, but not to blow ours away. 
Gandhiji's politics was entirely different from the  politics of the current brand. 
It was based on truth and love, not on deceit and h atred. He wanted to build 
political States on the foundation of truth and lov e. He considered a State or a 
nation to be a big family, consisting of a number o f self-governing villages. "In 
this structure," he says, "composed of villages, th ere will be ever-widening, 
never ascending circles. Life will not be a pyramid  with the apex sustained by 
the bottom. But it will be an oceanic circle whose centre would be the 
individual, always ready to perish for the village,  the village ready to perish for 
the circle of villages, till at last the whole beco mes one life composed of 
individuals, never aggressive in their arrogance, b ut ever humble, sharing the 
majesty of the oceanic circle, of which they are in tegral units." At the same 
time, Gandhiji wanted to extend this "nation-law" t o the whole world and 
consider it as a family of nations, as one indivisi ble, undivided family. The time 
is ripe for it, he says, because the wonderful inve ntions of science have 
reduced the distance of space and time and brought humanity closer. 
Gandhiji advocated a broad nationalism leading to i nternationalism. His 
conception of Swaraj was never narrow. It was prepa red to undergo any amount 
of suffering for the benefit of the world. "In the Swaraj based on non-violence," 
he says, "no one should suffer for want of food and  clothing. They should be 
freely available to all, as God's air and water are . Everyone from the king to the 
poorest citizen must prosper. Nobody is anybody's e nemy. All can read and 
write, and their knowledge keeps on growing from da y to day. Sickness and 
disease are reduced to the minimum." "I shall work for an India in which the 
poorest shall feel that it is their country, in who se making they have an 
effective voice; an India in which there will be no  high class and low class of 
people; an India in which all communities live in p erfect harmony. This is the 
India of my dreams." Such is the Swaraj which Gandh iji wanted to build for the 
welfare of the world. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69  Gandhiji's economy is based on ancient Indian tradi tions, which, if worked out 
in details, may give to the world a sound plan of p eace, security, and progress. 
It is built on these four corner-stones: (i) simpli city, (ii) non-violence, (iii) 
sanctity of labour, and (iv) human values. 
Simplicity in life is the first principle which Gan dhiji advocates. Modern 
civilization makes bodily welfare the object of lif e. It increases animal 
appetites and goes to the end of the earth in searc h of their satisfaction. 
Gandhiji totally detests this mad desire. So he wan ts to set limits to our 
indulgence and advises us to lead a life of plain l iving and high thinking. 
Gandhiji does not consider complexity to be the sig n of progress. He 
discourages "wreckless pursuit of wealth", which un dermines character and 
human values. He stresses the need of decentralizat ion and localization of 
industries. 
The second principle of Gandhian economy is non-vio lence. He wants India to 
develop along the bloodless non-violent way that co mes from simple and godly 
life. Localization of industry, according to him, i s sure to bring about this sort 
of development, which is at the same time not incom patible with wider 
nationalism and with still wider internationalism i n the sphere of thought and 
culture. 
Bread labour is the third principle which underlies  Gandhiji's economy. Labour 
is the law of Nature. We are expected by Nature to earn our bread with the 
sweat of our brow. Our real happiness consists in t he proper use of our hands 
and feet. "If all laboured for their food and no mo re," writes Gandhiji, "there 
would be enough food and enough leisure for all." M achine has its place in life, 
but it should not be allowed to kill man. Says Gand hiji with extreme regret> 
"We are destroying the matchless living machines, i .e. ouf oWn bodies, by 
leaving them to rust and trying to substitute lifel ess machinery for them." "By 
using machines, men go on saving labour, till thous ands are without work and 
thrown on the streets to die of starvation." Gandhi ji detests this "lure of 
leisure". Leisure is good and necessary, according to him, up to a point, beyond Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70  which it becomes a veritable curse by turning the v acant mind into a devil's 
workshop. Gandhiji advised all to earn by labour an d eat with pleasure. 
Gandhiji substituted moral and human values in plac e of money values. He 
made no distinction between economics and ethics. " The value of an industry 
should be gauged," he says, "less by the dividend i t pays to the sleeping share-
holders than by its effects on the bodies, souls, a nd spirits of the people em-
ployed in it." The  khadi- spirit meant to Gandhiji "a fellow- feeling with ev ery 
human being on earth". It represented, according to  him human values, while 
mill-cloth represented, metallic values. 
Gandhiji advised the capitalists to regard themselv es not as owners, but as 
trustees of their wealth and use it for the service  of society. He also asked 
labour to organize themselves, develop their skill and gift of intelligence, and 
have confidence in their capacity to secure a fair deal. At the same time, he 
wanted the rich to learn and teach contentment, as happiness was largely a 
mental condition. The rich should not try to enrich  themselves at the expense 
of the poor, and the poor should not envy the rich.  They should constitute a 
great family living in unity and harmony and workin g in loving co-operation for 
mutual material and moral welfare. This is the idea l which Gandhiji tried to 
inculcate throughout his life. 
In the social sphere, Gandhiji tried to remove cast e-prejudices by explaining 
the correct significance and value of varnashrama.  "Hinduism startled the 
world," he says, "by its discovery and application of the law of  varna.  When 
Hindus were seized with inertia, abuse of  varna  resulted in innumerable 
castes." So he considered the four divisions alone to be fundamental, natural 
and essential. However, Gandhiji considered untouch ability to be a crime 
against humanity—a curse eating into the vitals of Hinduism—a sin of which the 
sooner Hinduism purges itself, the better it is for  itself. Thus did Gandhiji want 
to establish harmony among the social groups of Ind ia. 
Gandhiji also tried to introduce harmony in human r elations, i.e. between man 
and man, man and woman, by giving them a correct id ea about their respective 
places and duties in social life. The two misconcep tions that have poisoned Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71  their harmonious relations are: (i) the conception of superiority and inferiority, 
on the one hand, and (ii) that of equality, on the other. The second conception 
was, in fact, introduced and advocated to counterac t and remove the evil 
effects of the first. In God's universe, there is p lace for everyone and 
everything; there is none high or low. But narrow a rrogance tried to assert its 
superiority by treating the weak as inferiors and i ntroduced this poison in the 
body politic. Soon the conception of equality was p owerfully inculcated to wipe 
out the dire effects of the former conception. But,  unfortunately, this second 
principle also lost its proper significance in cour se of time. It was misunder-
stood, misinterpreted, and misapplied. 
Gandhiji tried to correct both these conceptions. H e told that there is both 
equality and inequality in life. "Equality," he mai ntains, "is of souls, not of 
bodies; of opportunities, not of capacity." Really,  Nature abhors equality. Its 
beauty and grandeur consists in rich variety. There fore Gandhiji wants us "to 
realize equality in the midst of this apparent ineq uality" and to feel kinship 
with everyone in the world and try to promote the h appiness even of the 
humblest of human beings. 
Gandhiji considered woman as a companion of man, gi fted with equal mental 
capacities. "Man and woman are equal in status, but  not identical. They are a 
peerless pair complementary to each other. Both are  entitled to a supreme 
place in their own sphere of activities. Man is the  bread-winner, woman is the 
keeper and distributor of bread. Man is active, wom an is passive." "The art of 
bringing up the infants of the race is her special and sole prerogative. Without 
her care, the race would be extinct." "Woman is an incarnation of Ahimsa—
infinite love, which means infinite capacity for su ffering." "If nonviolence is the 
law of our being, the future is with women." Theref ore Gandhiji advises women 
to transfer their love to humanity, consider spirit ual union as the ideal of 
marriage, occupy a proud position by the side of ma n as mother, and teach the 
art of peace to the warring world. 
To inculcate the above-mentioned principles among t he people and to resist 
and eradicate evil tendencies in them, Gandhiji use d two effective means, viz. Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72  education and Satyagraha. "If we are to reach real peace in this world," says 
Gandhiji, "and if we are to wage real war against w ar, we shall have to begin 
with the education of children. We shall then go fr om love to love and peace to 
peace until at last all the corners of the world ar e covered by them." But he 
says: "Our education must be revolutionized. The br ain must be educated 
through the hands, and the brain should awaken the soul." "Useful labour," 
according to him, "develops a balanced intellect, w hich presuppses a 
harmonious growth of body, mind and soul. Literary education should follow 
and not precede the education of the hand." The rel igion of truth and Ahimsa 
should be imparted along with cultural education, e specially through the 
examples of teachers' lives. 
Gandhiji also wanted us to make full use of art, mu sic, and literature for giving 
man a fine heart-culture. "There is an art that kil ls," he says, "and an art that 
gives life. True art must be an expression of the s oul and must help the soul to 
realize its inner Self." "Life is greater than all art," he observed; and he 
considered the man whose life came nearest to perfe ction as the greatest 
artist. Noble life was, according to him, the found ation of art. He advocated 
the propagation of such art for giving proper cultu re to the hearts of all. 
It is admitted on all hands that evil exists in thi s world. It is the real cause of so 
much misery here. To Gandhiji, goodness misplaced i s evil, no doubt. Still his 
soul refused to be satisfied so long as it was a he lpless witness of a single 
wrong. He also thought that he would never know God  if he did not wrestle 
with and against evil, even at the cost of life its elf. Hence he found it 
absolutely necessary to resist and supplant evil fo r the spread of peace and 
goodwill on earth. And the weapon he devised for th is was 'the matchless 
weapon of Satyagraha'. Gandhiji called Satyagraha " truth-force, love-force or 
soul-force". "We may use this weapon," he says, "in  any sphere of life and to get 
rid of any grievance. It purifies one who uses it a s one against whom it is used." 
His Satyagraha presupposes self-discipline, self-co ntrol, self-purification, and a 
recognized status in the person offering it. It req uires special training. Any 
Tom, Dick and Harry cannot and should not use it. " The purer he is and the Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73  more he suffers, the quicker the progress. The pure r the suffering, the greater 
the progress towards freedom, God, and religion." T he spirit of non-violence, 
which is the soul of Satyagraha, ought to take the form of purest love, ever 
fresh— an ever-gushing spring of life expressing it self in every act. Ill will 
cannot stand in its presence. "God is the shield of  the nonviolent." "Non-
violence is the summit of bravery—the greatest spir itual force that mankind has 
known." 
"A  Satyagrahi  must never forget," says Gandhiji, "the distinctio n between evil 
and evil doer." He must hate the sin and not the si nner. He must always try to 
overcome evil by good, anger by love, untruth by tr uth,  himsa  by Ahimsa. 
There is no other way of purging the world of evil.  "A Satyagrahi has no power 
he could call his own. All the power he may seem to  possess is from and of 
God." "If I could popularize the use of soul-force, " says Gandhiji, "which is but 
another name of love- force, in place of brute forc e, I know I could present you 
with an India that could defy the whole world to do  its worst." "India is less in 
need of steel weapons; it has fought with divine we apons; it can still do so. . . 
„ India can win all by soul- force." Such was Gandh iji's firm faith in the supreme 
efficacy and value of Satyagraha in resisting and o vercoming evil in life. This, in 
short, is the nature of the pathway to peace extern al chalked out by Gandhiji. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74   
SOURCES 
ABBREVIATIONS 
A. — An Autobiography  (Ed. 1945) by Gandhiji 
C.G.G.V.L. — Conversations of Gandhiji, quoted in  Gandhiji's View of Life  
E.F.  — Epic Fast 
E. R. — Ethical Religion 
F.P.J. — Free Press Journal 
F. Y. M. — From Teravda Mandir 
G. — Gandhiji, published in 1944 on Gandhiji's 75th Bi rthday;  
     Karnatak Publishing House, Bombay. 
G.C.  — Gandhiji in Ceylon 
G.H.  — Guide to Health 
G.S. — Gospel of Selfless Action or The Gita According t o Gandhi by  
   Mahadev Desai 
H  — Harijan 
M.D.  — The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I 
S.W. —Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi  
Y.  - Young India 
 
 
 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75   
SOURCE  REFERENCES 
CHAPTER 1 
1.  Y. 25-9-'24; H. 13-3-'37 
2.  H. 14-7-'46 
3.  Y. ll-10-'28;tf. 24-11-'46; tf. 22-6-'47 ,H. 28-3-' 53; Y. 11-10-'28 
4.  Y. ll-10-'28;//.24-8-'47 
5.  A p. 6; T. 5-3-'25 
6.  Y. 30-7-'39 
7.  H. 23-3-'40;  Y.  9-3-'22 
8.  r. 9-3-'22;  Y.  21-l-'26; S.W.  p. 1069 
9.  H. 3-3-'46; Y. 24-9-'25; H. 18-8-'46; Y. 5-5-'27 
10.  22-6-'47 
 
CHAPTER 2 
1.  3-6-'39 
2.  H. 8-7-'36 
3.  F.Y.M. p. 30 
4.  Y. 12-3-'20; G. p. 389  
 Y. 20-10-'26  
5.  Y. 3-6-'26; H. 23-3-'40; H. 21-11-'36 
6.  E.R. p. 3; H. 4-4-'36; r. 20-9-'28; Y. 9-3-'22 
 
CHAPTER 3 
1.  H. 26-5-'46 
2.  Y. 2-3-'22;  Y.  13-5-'26 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76  3.  H. 7-9-'35; r. ll-10-'28 
4.  C.G.G.V.L. p. 49 
5.  H. 20-2-'37;  C.G.G.V.L. p. 47;  C.G.G.V.L.  p. 49 
6.  H. 15-6-'35 
 
CHAPTER 4 
1.  Y. 31-12-'31; Y. 30-7-'31 
2.  G.H.p. 114  
3.  3.  Y.  30-7-'31;  H.  10-12-'38; A.  p.  84 
4. H.  2-6-'46 
5. Y.  30-7-'31;  F.Y.M.  p.  3 
 
CHAPTER 5 
1. M.D.  p.  54;  Y.  20-9-'28 
2. R. 5-5-'20 
3. H.  26-9-'36;  Y.  23-10-'24; 
 Y.  10-5-'19 
4. Y.  10-5-'19;  H.  15-9-'40 
5. Y.  24-6-'26;  Y.  LL -8-'20; H.  11-8-'40;  H.  7-5-'47 
 
CHAPTER 6 
1.Y. 23-l-'30 
2. G.H.  p.  131;  A.  p.  392 
3. H,  21-LL -'36;  F.Y.M. p.19  
4. H.  23-7-'38 
5. F.Y.M.  p.  8,H.  24-4-'37 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77   
CHAPTER 7 
1.  H. 24-2-'46; F.T.M. p. 17 
2.  29-8-'36 
3.  H. 22-8-'39 
4.  Y. 3-4-'24 
 
CHAPTER 8 
1.  H. 25-4-'36; H. 22-6-'47 
2.  H. 12-9-'34 
3.  H.. 21-6-'27 
4.  H. 6-3-'37; Y. 24-6-'26; Y. 14-10-'26 
5.  19-8-'39; Y. 21-6-'29 
6.  T. 24-9-'31; Y. 8-12-'27 H. 14-5-'38 
7.  S.W. Speech on 16-2-'16 at  T.M.C.A. ; r. 24-9-'25 
8.  G. p. 397 
 
CHAPTER 9 
1.  H. 19-3-'39 
2.  Y. 30-1-'30; H. 18-8-'46; Y. 30-1-'30 
3.  Y. 23-1-'33;  A.  p. 96; H. 8-6-'35 
4.  Y. 20-12-'28; H. 19-5-'46 
5.  Y. 10-6-'26 
6.  Y. 23-1-'30 
 
 Pathway to GOD 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78   
CHAPTER 10 
1.  A. p. 84; H. 24-9-'38 
2.  H, 10-12-'38 
3.  H. 18-8-'46 
4.  Y. 1-6-'25; H. 29-6-'47 
5.  H. 18-3-'33; H. 17-8-'34; H. 29-6-'47 
6.  H. 28-4-'46; H. 5-12-'36; 13-10-'46;  H.  17-2-'46 Y. 27-6-27  
 
CHAPTER 11 
1.  H. 9-12-'39; Y. 3-9-'31; H. 6-5-'33 
2.  Y. 15-5-'24; Y. 15-12-'21; Y. 29-9-'21; Y. 23-2-'22 ; Y. 1-11-'25; Y. 25-6-'25 
3.  H. 28-4-'46; Y. 5-3-'25 
 
CHAPTER 12 
1.  Y. 17-11-'21; H, 13-6-'36; Y. 9-7-'25; H. 24-12-'38 ; Y. 6-8-'25 
2.  M.D. p. 54; M.D. p. 114; M.D. p. 244; Y.13-11-'24 
3.  A. p. 615;  H.  12-11-'38; Y. 25-5-'21;  H.  13-6-'36; F.P.J.  10-1-'33  
4.  M.D. p. 275; H. 18-3-'33; Y. 25-9-'24 
5.  H. 8-7-'33; H 10-12-'38; H, 7-10-'39 
6.  E.R. p. 31;  G.S.  p. 126, & p. 51 