 
A Pinch of Salt 
Rocks An Empire 
 
Compiled & Edited by: Sarojini Sinha 
 
 
Illustration by : Mrinal Mitra 
 
 
First Published : 1985 
 
 
 
 
Rs. 30/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by : Children's Book Trust 
 
Printed at : 
Indraprastha Press, Nehru House, 
4 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 
New Delhi, India  
 
 
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
A PINCH OF SALT - ROCKS AN EMPIRE  
(For Children)  
 
 
Map of March Route - March 12 to April 5, 1930  
 
 (I)  
They had been walking for more than three weeks. Da y after day, they had 
trudged over the flat, dry countryside turned brown  and dusty by the hot 
summer sun. And now they stood on the sea shore, at  the village of Dandi, with 
the waves of the Arabian Sea lapping the beach. 
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3  They were the 'law-breakers' and that was where the y were to break the law, 
forbidding them to make salt or even pick it up for  their use from the deposits 
left by the sea. 
 
Their leader was Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, known all over India as 
Gandhiji or Mahatma Gandhi. The Dandi march was a p art of the movement he 
called Satyagraha  or the pursuit of truth. 
Twenty-four years earlier, in South Africa, where h e was then living, his 
satyagraha  had forced the government to repeal the law forcin g Indians in the 
Transvaal to register themselves and carry certific ates bearing their finger 
prints to prove that they had the right to live in that country. 
In India, he was applying the same tactics of defyi ng the authority of the alien 
British Government in a peaceful, non-violent way a nd refusing to co-operate 
with it. 
The British had come to India 330 years earlier, la nding at the port of Surat, 
hardly 50 Kilometers from Dandi, where Gandhiji and  his followers stood on 
April 5, 1930, ready to begin the struggle against them.  
It was to trade that the British came, but they sta yed to rule. In 1599, the East 
India Company was formed in London to trade with th e East and in 1600 a small 
ship commanded by Captain Hawkins dropped anchor at  Surat. A few years 
later the British went to the court of the Mughal E mperor, Jehangir, in Agra. 
The Emperor welcomed Hawkins and gave the East Indi a Company permission 
to trade and to have trading depots north of Bombay . 
The trade was profitable and the company prospered.  When the Mughal Empire 
became weak in the 18th century and was on the poin t of breaking up, the East 
India Company started taking part in local politics  and soon became powerful. 
By the early 19th century the British were ruling l arge portions of India. From 
the very beginning, there was resistance to their r ule. In 1857, there was an 
armed uprising against the British but it was suppr essed. The British A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  Government then abolished the East India Company an d took upon itself the 
administration of India. 
Though Indians were not reconciled to foreign rule,  Gandhiji and other leaders 
were loyal to the British during the first World Wa r, thinking that after the war 
the government would be sympathetic to their demand  for freedom. Instead, 
when the war ended, the government tried to suppres s the freedom 
movement. In protest Gandhiji and the Indian Nation al Congress decided to 
have a countrywide hartal  on April 6, 1919. All over India shops were closed , 
people did not go to work, factories were shut and classrooms empty. 
On April 13, 1919, in spite of the ban on meetings,  a large and peaceful crowd 
collected at Jallianwala Bagh in Amritsar. The army  had been brought in to 
control the situation and General Dyer decided to t each the crowd a lesson. He 
ordered firing and several hundred people were kill ed or wounded. 
The country was outraged and Gandhiji gave the call  for non-cooperation and 
civil disobedience. He also asked the people to giv e up wearing foreign cloth 
and start using rough cotton khadi  made of yarn spun by the charka , the 
wooden spinning wheel. This would not only undermin e Britain's economic 
power ―India was a most profitable market for English clot h ―but also give 
employment to the poor in the countryside. 
Gandhiji traveled widely, visiting villages, towns and cities. Everywhere crowds 
gathered to see him and hear him. His simplicity, a usterity and saintly life won 
him love and admiration. 
He told the people that, if India was to win freedo m, they would have to give 
up using foreign cloth. At every meeting, Gandhiji would ask people to take off 
articles made of foreign cloth that they were weari ng and make a bonfire of 
these. Many would obey him, taking off their shirts , trousers, ties and hats and 
throwing them in a heap at his feat. They would the n set the pile ablaze. 
Those were stirring times. All over India piles of foreign cloth were burnt and 
people swore to wear khadi . Thousands of people were arrested and meetings 
and processions broken up by force. But not all the  satyagrahis  had learnt the A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5  rules of peaceful civil disobedience and non-cooper ation. Violence broke out. 
To Gandhiji, non-violence was all important and he called off the agitation. 
Soon afterwards, he was arrested and sentenced to s ix years' simple 
imprisonment. But, because of ill health, he was re leased before the end of the 
term. While in jail, Gandhiji had time to work out his future programme. He 
realized that for freedom to be worthwhile it was n ecessary to abolish poverty 
and social evils. He outlined a programme to recons truct the village economy, 
giving employment to all. For this, he thought it n ecessary to restore hand 
spinning and hand weaving in the villages. He wante d the abolition of the caste 
system and untouchability, removal of the disabilit ies of women, ending of 
social evils like child marriage and elimination of  insanitary conditions. 
He also realized that the British were trying to di vide the people on communal 
lines and decided to work for Hindu-Muslim unity. W hile Gandhiji was busy with 
these reforms, younger leaders like Pandit Jawaharl al Nehru found the pace of 
progress towards independence too slow. Gandhiji ag reed with them and said, 
"Unless India has Dominion Status by December 31, 1 929, I must declare myself 
an Independence-wallah.' 
Dominion Status meant that India would have self-go vernment like Australia 
and Canada without severing her links with Britain.  
Though Gandhiji held no office in the Indian Nation al Congress, the party 
fighting for India's freedom, its leaders followed his advice and guidance. On 
December 31, 1929, the Congress declared that Domin ion Status was not 
enough. Nothing less than ' Purna Swaraj ' complete independence, would  do. 
They decided that January 26 would be celebrated as  Purna Swaraj  Day. 
On January 26, 1930, public meetings were held all over the country. A 
resolution drafted by Gandhiji was read. It said: 
"We believe that it is the right of the Indian peop le, as of any other people, to 
have freedom and to enjoy the fruits of their toil and have the necessities of 
life...We recognize, however, that the most effecti ve way of gaining our 
freedom is not through violence. We will, therefore , prepare ourselves by 
withdrawing as far as we can all voluntary associat ion from the British A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6  Government and will prepare for civil disobedience,  including non-payment of 
taxes. We are convinced that, if we can but withdra w our voluntary help and 
stop payment of taxes without doing violence even u nder provocation, the end 
of this inhuman rule is assured." 
Gandhiji retired to his ashram  by the Sabarmati river near Ahmedabad to plan 
a campaign that would make India free. He knew, and  everyone else knew, 
that he would be directing the coming civil disobed ience movement. He 
wanted the people to rise against the government bu t, at the same time, 
remain non-violent. 
That was not easy. The people were tired of British  rule and there was violence 
in the air. A terrorist exploded a bomb under the t rain in which the Viceroy, 
Lord Irwin, was returning to Delhi. The Viceroy was  not hurt, but it showed the 
mood of the people. Gandhiji condemned the attack a nd requested the people 
to be non-violent and follow his constructive progr amme. 
Rabindranath Tagore, the poet, visited Gandhiji at the Sabarmati ashram  and 
asked him what he was planning for the country. Gan dhiji could only say, "I am 
thinking night and day, but I do not see any light coming out of the surrounding 
darkness." He had to find an issue which would rous e everyone, one which 
would make the evil and injustice of the government  clear to everyone. 
For six long weeks he thought over it and then he h eard his 'inner voice' telling 
him to defy the salt law. 
This was a stroke of genius. Gandhiji himself had n o use for salt ―he had given 
it up a few years earlier. But, by basing the campa ign for independence on this 
issue, he made it easy for the people of not only t his country but of all 
countries of the world to understand the justness o f his cause and the injustice 
of British rule. 
But the Viceroy scoffed at "Mr. Gandhi's crazy sche me of upsetting the 
government with a pinch of salt." 
 
 A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7   
(II)  
The salt law affected every Indian, rich or poor, o ld or young, educated or 
illiterate. 
In 1835, a commission had recommended that Indian-m ade salt could be sold in 
India. The Salt Act gave the government the sole ri ght to manufacture salt. No 
one else could make it. If anyone made salt, the sa lt could be confiscated and 
the offender sentenced to six months' imprisonment.  A tax of 2400 per cent of 
the price of salt was also levied. 
Writing in his weekly journal Young India , Gandhiji pointed out the injustice of 
it: "There is no article like salt, outside water, by taxing which the State can 
reach even the starving millions, the sick, the mai med and the utterly 
helpless... The necessary consequence of salt monop oly is the destruction, that 
is closing down, of salt works in thousands of plac es where the poor people 
manufactured their own salt. The illegality is in a  government that steals the 
people's salt and makes them pay heavily for it. Th e people will have every 
right to take possession of what belongs to them." 
Many fair-minded Englishmen in Britain and India kn ew that the salt law was 
unjust. Before coming to power the British Prime Mi nister, Ramsay Macdonald, 
had denounced the salt law. By choosing to flout th e law, Gandhiji brought 
India's desire for freedom to the notice of the wor ld and soon everyone was 
talking about it. 
Gandhiji had got the Working Committee of the India n National Congress to 
agree that the Salt Satyagraha  would be launched, controlled and guided only 
by those who believed in non-violence. He said, "Fo r me there is no hope save 
through truth and non-violence. I know that they wi ll triumph when everything 
else has failed." 
The plan was for Gandhiji to go to some place and p ick up salt, thus breaking 
the law. He was to take with him only a chosen grou p of people from the A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8  Sabarmati ashram . Everyone else was to wait until he had broken the  law. 
After that, he expected the movement to spread. 
He said, "We must conquer or be wiped out. If we ar e wiped out, that very act 
would shake the Empire.... If people ask what would  happen if the government 
should shower bombs, the answer is, "If innocent me n, women and children 
should be thus reduced to ashes, from out of those very ashes would rise a fire 
hich would react on the Empire." 
On his return from South Africa in 1915, Gandhiji h ad established Satyagraha 
Ashram  on the banks of the Sabarmati. In the beginning th e ashram  had only 25 
members and they lived like one family. Gandhiji ma de it a laboratory for his 
social experiments and a place where he could train  workers for the service of 
the country. 
Right from the start he admitted untouchables, or H arijans, as he called them, 
to the ashram  and he made it clear that he would not tolerate th e social evil of 
untouchability. Food was made in a common kitchen a nd cleaning of latrines 
was everyone's task, not that of Harijans alone. Sp inning on the charka  was 
essential for all inmates of the ashram . 
Gandhiji named the ashram  Satyagraha Ashram  because he wanted to practice 
in India the methods of Satyagraha  he had found so successful in South Africa. 
Since Gandhiji lived among them, the inmates were f ully aware of his views on 
non-violence and Satyagraha . 
For this reason he decided that only they should ac company him when he set 
out to break the salt law. 
Before starting the Salt Satyagraha , Gandhiji sent a letter to the Viceroy, Lord 
Irwin. Addressing him as "Dear Friend," he wrote: 
"Before embarking on Civil Disobedience and taking the risk I have dreaded to 
take all these years, I would fain approach you and  find a way out. My personal 
faith is absolutely clear. I cannot intentionally h urt anything that lives, much 
less human beings, even though they may do the grea test wrong to me and 
mine. Whilst, therefore, I hold British rule in Ind ia to be a curse, I do not A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  intend to harm a single Englishman.... And why do I  regard British rule to be a 
curse? It has impoverished the dumb millions by a s ystem of progressive 
exploitation and by a ruinously expensive military and civil administration 
which the country can never afford.  
 
Sevagram Ashram  
"It has reduced us politically to serfdom. It has s apped the foundations of our 
culture.... I fear there..... never has been any in tention of granting Dominion 
Status to India in the immediate future.... 
"Let me put before you some of the salient points.. .. The whole revenue 
system has to be revised as to make the peasant's g ood its primary concern. But 
the British system seems to be designed to crush th e very life out of him. Even 
the salt he must use to live is so taxed as to make  the burden fall heaviest on 
him.... The tax shows itself still more burdensome on the poor man when it is 
remembered that salt is the one thing he must eat m ore than the rich man. 
The drink and drug revenue too is derived from the poor.... 
"The iniquities sampled above are maintained in ord er to carry on a foreign 
administration, demonstrably the most expensive in the world. Take your own 
salary. It is over 21,000 rupees per month. The Bri tish Prime Minister gets 
£5,000 per year, that is over 5400 rupees per month . You are getting over 
seven hundred rupees per day against India's averag e income of less than two 
annas per day. The British Prime Minister gets only  180 rupees per day against 
Britain's average income of nearly two rupees per d ay. Thus, you are getting 
much over five thousand times India's average incom e. The British Prime 
Minister is getting only ninety times Britain's ave rage income. On bended knees 
I ask you to ponder over this phenomenon.... 
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  "What is true of the Viceregal salary is true gener ally of the whole 
administration. A radical cutting down of the reven ue, therefore, depends on 
an equally radical reduction in the expenses of adm inistration. 
"If India is to live as a nation, if the slow death  by starvation of her people is to 
stop, some remedy must be found for immediate relie f. 
"The conviction is growing deeper and deeper in me that nothing but non-
violence can check the organized violence of the Br itish Government....This 
non-violence will be expressed through Civil Disobe dience, for the moment 
confined to the inmates of the Sabarmati ashram , but ultimately designed to 
cover all those who choose to join the movement. 
"My ambition is no less than to convert the British  people through non-violence 
and then make them see the wrong that is done to In dia.... If my letter makes 
no appeal to your heart, on the 11th of this month,  I shall proceed with such 
co-workers of the ashram  as I can take to disregard the provisions, of the salt 
law. I regard this tax to be the most unjust of all  from the poor man's 
standpoint. As the independence movement is for the  poorest in the land, the 
beginning will be made with this evil. The wonder i s that we have submitted to 
this cruel monopoly for so long. It is, I know, ope n to you to frustrate my 
design by arresting me. I hope that there will be t ens of thousands ready, in a 
disciplined manner, to take up the work after me... . 
"This letter is not in any way intended as a threat , but is a simple and sacred 
duty peremptory on a civil resister. Therefore, I a m having it specially 
delivered by a young English friend who believes in  the Indian cause and is a 
full believer in non-violence.... I remain, your si ncere friend, M. K. Gandhi." 
The young English friend who carried the letter was  Reginald Reynolds, who 
was living in the Sabarmati ashram . Dressed in khadi and with his head covered 
by a sun helmet (being an Englishman, he felt the h eat of the sun greatly) he 
entered Viceroy's House to deliver the letter. 
The Viceroy had just returned from Meerut. He did n ot reply to the letter. 
Instead, his secretary wrote: "His Excellency.... r egrets to learn that you A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11  contemplate a course of action which is clearly bou nd to involve violation of 
the law and danger to the public peace." 
Gandhiji was sad to get this reply. He wrote, "On b ended knees, I asked for 
bread and received a stone instead. The English nat ion responds only to force 
and I am not surprised by the Viceregal reply. The only public peace the nation 
knows is the peace of the public prison house. I re pudiate this law and regard it 
as my sacred duty to break the...compulsory peace t hat is choking the heart of 
the nation." 
Lord Irwin refused to see Gandhiji, but he did not order his arrest. Gandhiji 
remarked, "The Government is puzzled and perplexed. " 
 
(III)  
Gandhiji started making preparations for the civil 
disobedience campaign. And as March 11 drew nearer,  
India bubbled with excitement. 
Gandhiji explained what he meant by satyagraha  and 
what a satyagrahi was expected to do. A satyagrahi  
looked upon all men as brothers. He believed that t he 
practice of love and self-suffering would bring abo ut a 
change of heart in his opponent. He had faith that the 
power of love was great enough to melt the stoniest  
heart. Satyagraha  was a peaceful way and did not 
create bitterness as violence did. 
Gandhiji declared that cowardice and love "do not g o together any more than 
water and fire". A satyagrahi  must have courage and love to be able to face 
violence and still love his opponent and try to cha nge his heart. A satyagrahi's  
lack of fear and his faith in truth gave him the co urage to challenge evil, no 
matter how great the odds against him. A satyagrahi appealed to the 
commonsense and morality of his adversary through w ords, purity, humility, 
honesty and self-suffering. 
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12  Gandhiji believed that ends and means should be equ ally pure. Based on this 
thinking, Gandhiji published in Young India  the rules for satyagrahis . Some of 
these were as follows:- 
1. A satyagrahi , that is, a civil resister, will harbour no anger.  
2. He will suffer the anger of the opponent. 
3. He will put up with assaults from the opponent but will not retaliate. 
4. When a person in authority seeks to arrest him, he will submit to the 
arrest. 
5. A civil resister will not insult his opponent. 
6. A civil resister will not salute the Union Jack, no r will he insult it. 
7. In the course of the struggle if anyone insults or assaults a government 
official, a civil resister will protect him. 
Gandhiji also laid down rules of conduct for satyagrahis  who were arrested and 
sent to prison. As a prisoner, a satyagrahi  was to behave courteously to prison 
officials and follow the prison discipline. A satyagrahi  was not to behave in a 
superior manner to ordinary prisoners, nor was he t o ask for special treatment. 
He was to eat prison food if it was cleanly cooked and served and refuse to eat 
food served insultingly or in unclean vessels. 
On going to prison or losing his life a satyagrahi  was not to expect maintenance 
for his family and dependents. Last, but not least,  a satyagrahi  was not to take 
part in communal quarrels. In case of such a quarre l he was not to take sides, 
but was to help whoever was in the right. 
In Young India  was also published the punishment for breaking the  salt law so 
that the satyagrahis  might know what to expect.  
Mahatma Gandhi set a high standard of conduct for h imself and expected the 
same from his followers. He wanted political power for India so that the life of 
the masses could be improved, but he was sure in hi s mind that if power could 
only be got by wrong means, he would rather do with out it. So, a satyagrahi  
had to follow the highest standards of conduct and to believe in truth and non-
violence. 
Satyagraha  could take various forms like fasting, non-violent  picketing, non-A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13  cooperation, civil disobedience and willingness to suffer legal penalties. But no 
matter how the satyagrahi was treated, he should not be violent or have 
hatred for his opponent. 
Gandhiji insisted that all satyagrahis  should wear khadi . 
It was Mahatma Gandhi's intention to march to the s ea and pick up the salt 
lying there. It lay in great white sheets along the  seashore, a gift from the sea 
that the people were forbidden to pick up and use. 
It took several days to select the place where the Salt Satyagraha  would start. 
A three-member selection committee was formed and i t visited several places 
on the Gujarat coast. Various places in Surat distr ict were considered before 
Dandi, near Navsari, was chosen. One drawback was t hat this remote village 
did not have enough drinking water. But the citizen s of Navsari promised to 
send drinking water to Dandi in tankers. The three- member team 
recommended the village to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel , one of his earliest 
associates in the freedom struggle, who got it appr oved by Gandhiji. 
Meanwhile, the All India Congress Committee too was  preparing for the 
campaign. Volunteers were being enrolled and given training, especially in 
controlling large crowds. They drilled regularly, b ut without arms. 
Though Gandhiji was yet to set the date for the mar ch, people flocked to 
Ahmedabad as they knew that it could not be long de layed. News of the 
Satyagraha  had spread all over the world and Indian and forei gn newspaper 
correspondents crowded into Ahmedabad and the Sabar mati ashram . 
On January 1, 1930, a foreign newspaper had written , "In England and India the 
crisis is not yet a topic of general conversation.. .... and in India itself millions 
of people know nothing about it." 
But by March almost everyone in England, India and much of the rest of the 
world knew what was happening. 
Letters and telegrams kept pouring into the Ahmedab ad post office. From New 
York, the Reverend Dr. John Haynes Holmes sent a me ssage to Gandhiji, "God A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14  guard you". From Germany a doctor wrote, "A humble fellow pilgrim is praying 
for you and your work every morning and evening." 
The days were tense. Sardar Patel had gone to Borsa d to prepare the villagers 
to give Mahatma Gandhi and his band of satyagrahis  a fitting welcome. He 
made stirring speeches, telling the people, "Give u p your wedding festivities; a 
people at war with a mighty government cannot affor d to indulge in these 
pastimes... I know some of you are afraid of your l ands being confiscated. What 
is confiscation? Will they take away your land to E ngland?..... I want to 
inoculate you with fearlessness."  
For making such spirited speeches, Sardar Patel was  arrested at Ras. Hearing of 
it, a crowd of 75,000 people gathered on the sands of the Sabarmati and passed 
a resolution: 
"We the citizens of Ahmedabad determine hereby that  we shall go the same 
path as Vallabhbhai Patel and we shall attain full independence while 
attempting to do so. Without achieving freedom for our country we shall not 
rest in peace, nor will we give the government peac e." 
While everyone else was tense and excited, Gandhiji  carried on with his usual 
routine of spinning, answering letters, writing in his diary, meeting visitors, 
playing with the ashram  children and holding prayer meetings. 
At the prayer meetings there would be recitations f rom the Gita, the Koran and 
the Bible. Gandhiji believed in one God, no matter by what name people called 
Him and how they worshipped Him. And the hymn that he asked the crowd to 
sing, "Raghupati Raghav Raja Ram ", laid emphasis on this. After prayers, 
Gandhiji would address the crowd. 
On March 10, Gandhiji spoke at his prayer meeting a bout the coming march and 
the non-violent nature of the struggle. He told the  people: 
"Though the battle is to begin in a couple of days how is it that you can come 
here quite fearlessly? I do not think any of you wo uld be here if you had to face 
rifle shots or bombs. But you have no fear of rifle  shots or bombs. Why? A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  "Supposing I had announced that I was going to laun ch a violent campaign, do 
you think the government would have left me free un til now? Can you show me 
an example in history where the state has tolerated  open defiance of authority 
for a single day? But here you know the government is puzzled. And you have 
come here because you have been familiarized by now  with the idea of seeking 
voluntary imprisonment." 
The people listened attentively as Gandhiji continu ed: "I would ask you to go a 
step further. Suppose ten men in each of the seven lakhs of villages in India 
come forward to manufacture salt and to disobey the  Salt Act, what do you 
think this government can do? Even the worst autocr at would not dare to blow 
regiments of peaceful resisters out of a cannon's m outh. If only you bestir 
yourself just a little, I assure you we should be a ble to tire this government out 
in a very short time. 
"I don't want any money from you.... I want you to take your courage in both 
your hands and contribute in men towards the strugg le....May God give you the 
strength to rise to the occasion." 
 
(IV)  
On March 11, 1930 the evening prayer meeting was at tended by 10,000 people. 
Gandhiji felt that it was the "opportunity of a lif etime" to launch the struggle. 
He said, "I have faith in the righteousness of our cause and the purity of our 
weapons. And when the means are clean, God is prese nt with His blessings..... 
God bless you all and keep off all obstacles from t he path in the struggle that 
begins tomorrow. Let this be our prayer." 
He concluded: "In all probability this will be my l ast speech to you. Even if the 
government allows me to march tomorrow morning, thi s will be my last speech 
on the sacred banks of the Sabarmati. Possibly, the se may be the last words of 
my life here." 
The city of Ahmedabad was nearly deserted that nigh t as word spread that 
Gandhiji was to begin his march the next morning. A lmost the whole population A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16  and thousands from all over India and even outside the country who had come 
to the city were at the Sabarmati ashram  to see the beginning of the march. 
Hundreds of thousands of people lined both sides of  the route the marchers 
were to take. 
As Gandhiji appeared, a frail figure slightly bent and carrying a long bamboo 
stick tipped with iron for support, a shiver of exc itement ran through the 
crowd. His head appeared big for his tiny body. His  upper lip was covered with 
a moustache turning white and many of his teeth wer e missing. But there was a 
certain beauty about his gentle face, inner nobilit y and strength of character 
stamped on it. 
He was dressed in his usual coarse khadi  dhoti . He wore spectacles with a steel 
frame and a cheap watch dangled from a string round  his waist. He had long 
ago decided not to waste a minute, knowing that tim e was important to him. 
The seventy-eight satyagrahis  included people from all the provinces of India 
and even from Nepal, though, of course, Gujarat had  the largest 
representation. There were two Muslims and a Christ ian. Some of the marchers 
were rich, some poor. Some were educated, some illi terate. But all were fired 
by the common ideal of seeing a free India. Among t he marchers were three 
generations of the Gandhi family ― Gandhiji, his son, Manilal, and grandson, 
Kantilal. 
Gandhiji at 61 was the oldest of the marchers. The youngest was 18. 
 
Gandhiji and Abbas Tyabji at a meeting in Navsari  
On the list was Abbas. Abbas Tyabji, a retired judg e of the Baroda High Court, 
now more than 75 years old, recalls how overjoyed h e was because he thought 
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17  that he had been selected. He rushed to meet Gandhi ji, but the Mahatma 
laughed and said, "It is not you, my friend, but yo ung Abbas of the ashram who 
is to go with me." 
Hearing this, Abbas Tyabji was downcast, but Gandhi ji said, "Don't be 
disappointed that you are not included in the first  batch of satyagrahis . There 
is another honour in store for you. If I am arreste d, you shall lead the march to 
Dandi." Abbas Tyabji was happy to hear this. Later he led the march on the 
Dharasana Salt Works and was arrested. 
Ratnaji, who still lives at the Sabarmati ashram , has this tale to tell. Gandhiji 
knew that all the inmates of the ashram  were eager to accompany him to 
Dandi, but when selecting the band of satyagrahis  he kept in mind their family 
and domestic circumstances. Ratnaji, a weaver, his father-in-law, Ramjibhai, 
and a brother-in-law, Harakhji, were among those se lected. But when his other 
brother-in-law also wanted to be included, Gandhiji  said, "No, I cannot include 
you. It is not proper for every man in the family t o leave. You must stay back 
to take care of the women, the children and the age d." 
After prayers, Gandhiji and his band of satyagrahis  left the ashram  at dawn. 
The first night halt was 20 kilometers away. On bot h sides of the road, along 
the entire stretch, were rows of people. Many of th em had been standing for 
hours to have darshan  of Gandhiji. Those who could not find standing pla ce in 
the streets through which the satyagrahis  marched were perched on house tops 
and trees. 
Policemen were out in force, but the discipline of the crowd and the marchers 
was such that there was no danger of any disorder. "We are marching in the 
name of God," Gandhiji said. 
At Aslali, Gandhiji told the people, "The soldiers of the first batch had burnt 
their boats the moment the march began." He vowed n ot to return to the 
Sabarmati ashram  until the Salt Act was repealed and Swaraj  won. He defied 
the British Government to arrest him. A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  At a nearby village, Gandhiji was sad to see no spi nning wheel and he urged the 
people to wake up from their sleep if they wished t o win independence. "If you 
do not wake up, you will be looted by other people,  if not Englishmen." 
 
 (V)  
The scene was almost the same all along the 400 kil ometer route that the 
satyagrahis  took to reach Dandi, with excited but orderly crow ds, who had 
been waiting for hours, greeting them at every vill age. And the message that 
Gandhiji had for them was the same. Be pure in thou ght, word and deed; spin 
yarn and wear khadi ; give up liquor, end social evils, be united, peac eful and 
non-violent; be ready to break the salt law. It was  a simple message, simply 
given. The impact was tremendous. 
This message had preceded the marchers. Everyone kn ew all about the Salt 
Satyagraha  and why Gandhiji and his band of followers were ou t to break the 
salt law. The Arun Tukdi (Army of the Dawn) had tra veled by rail ahead of 
Gandhiji giving the villagers the message and makin g arrangements for the 
night halt of the satyagrahis . 
During the march, the ashram  routine was maintained. Prayers were said twice 
a day. Everyone had to spin on the charka  and keep a diary. They walked 
almost 20 kilometers in the day and several of them  were footsore. But 
Gandhiji, the oldest among them, had no difficulty.  He said, teasing his 
followers, "The modern generation is weak and pampe red." There was a horse 
for Gandhiji's use, but he did not ride it. 
Everyday, after morning prayers, Gandhiji addressed  the marchers and 
answered any questions they might have. And the mar ch started punctually at 
6 a.m. Time was important. Gandhiji said, "Ours is a sacred pilgrimage and we 
should be able to account for every moment of our t ime." 
Everyone retired at 9 p.m. But long before the othe rs got up, Gandhiji would 
be up, often at 4 a.m., to deal with his correspond ence. Once he had to write A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19  by moonlight as his lamp had gone out for lack of o il and he did not want to 
disturb anyone. 
Every Monday was a day of silence for Gandhiji and a day of rest for the 
marchers. Five years earlier he had decided on maki ng Monday a day of silence 
and he would not break the rule for anyone. Even if  he had to meet the Viceroy 
or some other important person on a Monday, he woul d not speak but write 
what he had to say. Once, asked why he did not spea k on Mondays, he laughed 
and answered, "I want a day of rest in the week. So  many people ask me so 
many questions that I do not have a moment's peace.  I need a day off." 
The satyagrahis  marched in the cool of early morning and evening, resting at 
one village in the day and another at night. They s lept in the open and ate the 
simplest food. The villagers were told not to spend  anything on the marchers' 
food or accommodation or donate money. Gandhiji tol d them, "Money alone 
will not win Swaraj . If money could win it, I would have got it long a go. What is 
required is your blood." All that the satyagrahis  needed was uncooked food and 
a clean resting place. 
The march to Dandi was more than a political campai gn. It was aimed at 
educating the people. By leading a simple life and making a minimum of 
demands on the villagers, Gandhiji wanted to emphas ize his nearness to and 
fellow feeling with the poor and the lowly. For thi s reason he criticized some of 
his companions who ordered fresh milk and vegetable s by lorry from Surat and 
some who, on the slightest excuse, tried to climb i nto carts or cars passing by. 
He was angry when, one night, he found a labourer c arrying a heavy kerosene 
lamp for the marchers. 
He wanted to emphasize that his movement was for th e lowly and poor 
peasants who formed the majority of the people of I ndia. He was against all 
exploitation and he saw no reason why imperial expl oitation should be replaced 
by exploitation by Indians. 
He said that they would have no moral right to crit icize the government for 
luxurious living if they too were going to live lux uriously. They should live at 
the same level as the common people in India. They had no right to eat better A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20  food than what those among whom they lived and work ed ate. "To live above 
the means befitting a poor country is to live on st olen food," he said. "The 
battle for independence can never be won by living on stolen food." 
At halts all along the way, local leaders met Gandh iji to discuss plans for the 
civil disobedience campaign they were to launch in their areas after the salt 
law was broken at Dandi. 
In answer to Gandhiji's call more than 300 village headmen resigned their 
government jobs. Gandhiji had to restrain his over- enthusiastic followers from 
going too far in their social boycott of government  servants who did not resign 
their posts. At some places, the boycott against po licemen and village officials 
was so strict that they could not even buy food. Ga ndhiji told the people that it 
was against religious principles to starve official s. He said, "I would suck snake's 
poison from General Dyer if he was bitten." 
It was General Dyer who had ordered the Jallianwala  Bagh massacre eleven 
years earlier. He and his action will not easily be  forgotten, but what, perhaps, 
brought him freshly to Gandhiji's mind were the wor ds of a Gurkha, Kharag 
Bahadur, who wanted to join the march after it had started. Gandhiji had said 
'no' at first, but relented when Kharag Bahadur sai d that he wanted to atone for 
the sins of the Gurkhas who had obeyed General Dyer 's order to fire at the 
peaceful crowd at Jallianwala Bagh. Thus it was tha t one more was added to 
the seventy-eight satyagrahis  who had set out from the Sabarmati ashram . 
 
(VI)  
The slow march to Dandi that took twenty-four days drew the attention not 
only of the people in India but all over the world.  
It dominated newspapers and newsreels. When the gov ernment banned the 
showing of newsreels in several provinces in India,  Gandhiji's secretary 
commented, "India's battle for freedom does not dep end in the least on cinema 
films." 
The entire nation's attention was focused on Gandhi ji. Nehru said: "And today A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21  the pilgrim marches on his long trek. Staff in hand , he goes along the dusty 
roads of Gujarat, clear-eyed and firm of step, with  his faithful band trudging 
along behind him. Many a journey has he undertaken in the past, many a weary 
road had he traversed. But longer than any that hav e gone before is this last 
journey of his and many are the obstacles in his wa y. The fire of a great resolve 
is in him and a surpassing love of his miserable co untrymen. And love of truth 
that scorches and love of freedom that inspires....  It is a long journey, for the 
goal is the independence of India and the ending of  the exploitation of her 
millions." 
The All India Congress Committee met at Ahmedabad o n March 21, nine days 
after the march to the sea had started. It approved  of Mahatma Gandhi's 
campaign and hoped that the whole country would res pond. It authorized 
Congress Committees in the provinces to organize th e breaking of the salt law 
after Mahatma Gandhi had broken it at Dandi. 
Pandit Nehru, who was then President of the Indian National Congress, met 
Gandhiji at Jambusar. With him was his father, Moti lal Nehru. 
They drafted a pledge that every volunteer who want ed to take part in the 
coming satyagraha  would have to take. It said: 
1. I desire to join the civil resistance campaign for the independence of India 
undertaken by the National Congress. 
2. I accept the creed of the National Congress, that i s the attainment of 
Purna Swaraj  by the people of India by all peaceful and legitim ate means. 
3. I am ready and willing to go to jail and undergo al l other sufferings and 
penalties that may be inflicted on me in the course  of this campaign. 
4. In case I am sent to jail I shall not seek any mone tary help for my family 
from Congress funds. 
5. I shall obey the order of those who are in charge o f the campaign. 
There was no doubt that thousands were ready to tak e the pledge. As the 
march continued, a wave of patriotic feeling swept the country. The 
national flag was being hoisted all over India and speeches were being 
made in defiance of the law. A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22  Many people had been and were being arrested and se nt to prison. But they 
had remained peaceful, as instructed by Gandhiji. H e had said, "If you are sent 
to prison, you should go piously. If assaulted, you  should bear it cheerfully, 
and, if shot, you should die peacefully." 
Such was his hold on the people that they were read y to follow him 
unquestioningly. They were convinced of the justnes s of the cause, 
remembering the words: "The present government is c orrupt and evil.... 
Loyalty to a State so corrupt is a sin, disloyalty a virtue.... The spectacle of 
three hundred million people being cowed down and l iving in dread of three 
hundred Englishmen is demoralizing alike for the de spot as the victims.... It is 
the duty of those who have realized the evil nature  of the system... to destroy 
it. It is their clear duty to run any risk to achie ve this end." Seeing the strong 
nationalistic feelings that had been aroused, the g overnment gave signs of 
weakening. It promised to refer the question of the  Salt Tax to the Tariff Board 
so as to provide salt to the masses at a low price.  Gandhiji, however, refused 
to be satisfied with this. 
The satyagrahis  were now nearing the sea. Palm trees became more c ommon, 
sea birds could be seen and they could feel the coo ling sea breeze blowing in 
land. In the little town of Navsari, just twenty ki lometers from Dandi, Gandhiji 
addressed a meeting and said, "I shall return with what I want or my dead body 
will float in the ocean". 
On April 3, Gandhiji wrote in Young India  an article giving the call for the mass 
civil disobedience campaign to begin on April 6, wh en he would break the salt 
law at Dandi. The date was chosen to coincide with the beginning of "National 
Week" in homage to the victims of the Jallianwala B agh massacre of 1919. 
On April 5, in the morning, the satyagrahis  reached Dandi. Gandhiji retired to a 
bungalow on the beach which had been offered to him  by its owner, a 
merchant, for his stay. He spent the day in prayer and meditation. Passages 
from the Vedas were read to him. From the bungalow he could see the rolling 
waves. On the sand lay great sheets of salt that ha d been left by the sea. A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23  There were many journalists at Dandi to interview G andhiji and he told the 
Associated Press: 
"I cannot withhold my compliments from the governme nt for the policy of 
complete non-interference adopted by them throughou t the march... It 
remains to be seen if the government will tolerate,  as they have tolerated the 
march, the actual breach of the salt law by countle ss people from tomorrow... 
God willing, I expect, with my companions, to comme nce actual civil 
disobedience at 6.30 tomorrow morning. 
"The 6th of April has been to us, since the Jallian wala Bagh massacre, a day of 
penance and purification. We, therefore, commence i t with prayers and 
fasting. I hope the whole of India will observe Nat ional Week commencing from 
tomorrow in the spirit in which it is conceived. 
"I want world sympathy in this battle of right agai nst might." 
The satyagrahis  who had come with Gandhiji strolled on the beach a nd many 
bathed in the sea. Police were posted in the compou nd of the bungalow where 
Gandhiji was staying, but everything was peaceful a nd they had no reason to 
worry. 
 
 
 
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24   
(VII)  
 
On the morning of April 6, 1930, as Gandhiji walked  down the steps of the 
bungalow, he was greeted by about four thousand peo ple who had been 
gathering all night. 
Gandhiji swam for a while in the sea and came out w hen his companions told 
him that it was nearly time for the start of the satyagraha . Gandhiji bent down 
and scooped up a handful of salt. 
Gandhiji's face was calm as he held out his fist to  the crowd and opened it to 
show the white crystals. It was the newest symbol i n the struggle for India's 
freedom. 
Shortly afterwards the satyagrahis  went to a creek nearby where the salt 
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25  deposits were thicker than on the beach. At another  creek fifty-six volunteers 
from a neighbouring village collected salt, piled i t up and carried it away in 
bags. The whole operation was done in an orderly ma nner with a leader giving 
sharp blasts on a whistle to mark each stage. It lo oked as if the group had been 
drilled for a long time. 
About five hundred kilos of salt was collected that  morning. Late in the 
afternoon, the police seized the salt. But as soon as the police left, the 
villagers again collected salt and distributed it i n the village. 
The Salt Act had been broken. The signal had been g iven for Indians to act. In a 
press statement Gandhiji urged people everywhere to  violate the salt law. 
Those who knew how to clean and prepare salt should  show others how to do 
it. But the villagers should be clearly told that, in making salt, they ran the risk 
of arrest, fine and imprisonment. The law had to be  broken openly. 
The attack on the Salt Act was to continue througho ut National Week. Also, 
people were asked to boycott foreign cloth, produce  and use khadi  and give up 
drinking liquor. 
The country was flooded with pamphlets explaining h ow to make salt from sea 
water. And all along India's long coastline, villag ers waded into the sea with 
pans. 
Inland also people made salt. There were mass meeti ngs, fiery speeches and 
large processions. From one end of India to the oth er bonfires of British cloth 
were lighted. Liquor shops were picketed. Some gove rnment servants resigned. 
In Gujarat, the civil disobedience movement spread fast. The government 
arrested the leaders, but new leaders came forward to take their places. 
Gandhiji congratulated those who were arrested. "Im prisonment and the like 
are a test which the civil resistor has to pass", h e said. 
He told the people, "The honour of India has been s ymbolized by a fistful of 
salt in the hand of a man of non-violence. The fist  which held the salt may be 
broken, but it will not yield up its salt. A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26  "Salt in the hands of satyagrahis  represents the honour of the nation. It cannot 
be yielded up, except to force that will break the hand to pieces. Let the 
people defend the salt in their possession till the y break in the attempt, but 
they should do so without anger." 
Addressing a women's conference at Dandi on April 1 3 he said that women 
should join the national movement. 
How well Gandhiji's instructions were understood wa s evident when police 
raided Congress House in Bombay. They rushed upstai rs and began breaking the 
thirty-two salt pans that had been placed on the ro of. During the two hours it 
took them to finish that operation a crowd of sixty  thousand gathered round 
the building and on the roads leading to it. 
When the policemen came down and tried to enter the  office, they found six 
women blocking their way. Their leader said, "You m ay arrest us or do what 
you like, but we will not desert our post of duty."  
The police lost patience and pushed the women aside , while the crowd outside 
sang national songs. They then turned their attenti on to the salt pans 
downstairs, but a party of a hundred volunteers had  formed a circle round the 
pans and the cordon could be broken only after repe ated charges. The 
volunteers suffered the attacks cheerfully and made  no attempt to harm the 
policemen or even try to push them back. And the cr owd outside remained 
peaceful. 
It was a remarkable demonstration of non-violent ag itation and an example 
that must have gladdened Gandhiji's heart. The crow d could easily have over-
powered the few policemen, but it desisted. On seei ng the volunteers' 
patience, courage and patriotism, several people en rolled themselves to offer 
satyagraha . 
As the movement spread, salt illegally made or coll ected was openly sold in the 
streets of cities. In Ahmedabad, contraband worth R s 11,000, all of it made in 
the first week of the satyagraha , was sold or distributed. The salt picked up by 
Gandhiji at Dandi was of such poor quality that it could hardly be used, but it 
had symbolic value. When auctioned, it fetched Rs 1 ,600. A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27   
 
A Charkha  
 
(VIII)  
More and more people were arrested as the movement spread. Soon almost a 
lakhs of people were in jail. 
And the government began to turn brutal. It became common for three or four 
policemen to pounce on a single satyagrahi  and twist his wrist and thumb or 
throw him on the ground and trample on him till he bled, to make him 
surrender the salt in his possession. 
An eye-witness gave this account of the Salt Satyagraha  in a village in the 
Balasore district of Orissa: "When volunteers were bringing 'salt-earth' to make 
salt, policemen fell on them and started beating an d kicking them. Their 
patient suffering drew tears from the eyes of spect ators. At last, tired of 
beating and kicking them, the policemen stood besid e the volunteers as they 
made a pile of the "salt-earth" and kicked and leve led the pile. In spite of this, 
the volunteers worked from early morning to noon an d again from three to six 
in the afternoon. Many succeeded in taking the 'sal t-earth' to their camp and 
made salt from it. This salt was publicly sold in B alasore town." 
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  The police then tried to prevent the volunteers fro m collecting 'salt-earth' by 
seizing them by the arms. But they could not restra in all of them and salt was 
again made and sold in Balasore. 
Meanwhile, people from nearby villages started maki ng salt. The authorities 
knew of it but could not do much, with thousands of  people flouting authority. 
They followed the policy of arresting those who app eared to be the leaders, 
but that did not deter the people. 
The villagers retaliated by boycotting government s ervants. No official could 
buy any article in the village. Everything had to b e brought from Balasore. 
This kind of social boycott of government servants took place all over India and 
caused great hardship to them. 
There were reports of brutality by policemen everyw here. In Delhi, it was 
reported: "Ten satyagrahis  were injured, five of them seriously, as the polic e 
tried to wrest a bucket of salt from their hands." 
From Bihar, Rajendra Prasad, who was later to be th e first President of 
independent India, gave this report: 
"According to our plan the first batch of five volu nteers went in the morning 
and when they were walking along the road they were  overtaken by a body of 
sowars  under the command of an European officer. Three of  them were 
mercilessly beaten by the European officer and thro wn into the drain from 
where they were removed by our stretcher bearers. 
"A second batch of volunteers was sent, but they to o were beaten. In the 
evening, a third batch of five volunteers was sent.  They were challenged by the 
police who tried to snatch away the flags they had in their hands. The two 
European officers used their batons on the leaders.  There was no retaliation or 
fight by the people." 
When thousands of people set out from Patna to go t o a spot where salt could 
be made, police blocked the highway. The crowd stay ed and slept on the road 
and the surrounding fields for forty hours. A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29  After Rajendra Prasad, who was leading them, had re fused to ask the crowd to 
disperse, a charge by mounted police was ordered. A s the horses galloped 
forward, men and women threw themselves on the grou nd. The horses reared 
and stopped. They would not trample them. Then the constables lifted those 
lying on the ground and took them to jail. But othe r demonstrators took their 
place. 
At Ludhiana, in Punjab, fifty men were injured in a  police lathi  charge. 
At Peshawar, in the North-West Frontier Province, w hich is now a part of 
Pakistan, two armoured cars full of soldiers were d riven into a crowd returning 
from a meeting. Many people were run over and injur ed and at least three 
were killed on the spot. In spite of this, the crow d continued to be peaceful. As 
they were collecting the dead and injured, an Engli sh officer on a motorcycle 
who dashed into the crowd was killed when he collid ed with one of the 
armoured cars. 
More English soldiers had by then reached the place , and, without warning, 
started firing into the crowd in which there were w omen and children. 
The people gave a good demonstration of the lesson of non-violence they had 
learnt. When those in front fell, those behind came  forward to expose 
themselves to the firing. Soon there were heaps of dead and wounded. The 
firing continued from eleven in the morning till fi ve in the evening. But not one 
broke ranks or fled. When the bodies were collected , it was found that not a 
single demonstrator had bullets in the back. Not on e made a hostile move. 
Even the police admitted that the crowd was perfect ly peaceful throughout. In 
no battle was greater courage ever shown. Gandhiji had inspired them. 
Another noteworthy feature of the movement was the way in which women 
took part in it. Gandhiji had always insisted on tr eating women as equals and 
on removing their disabilities. Now they came forwa rd to take part in the 
demonstrations and picketing of shops selling forei gn cloth or liquor. The 
government was taken aback. 
The movement launched by Gandhiji had proved succes sful. Pandit Jawaharlal 
Nehru wrote, "It was as though a spring had been su ddenly released. We A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  marveled at the amazing knack of the man to impress  the multitude and make 
it act in an organized manner." 
 
(IX)  
On May 4, 1930, Gandhiji wrote a second letter to t he 
Viceroy. He was at the small village of Karadi, sev en 
kilometers from Dandi. He again addressed the Vicer oy 
as "Dear Friend" and wrote that it was his intentio n to 
reach Dharasana with his companions and ask for 
possession of the Government Salt Works there. 
Gandhiji wrote that the government could prevent th e 
raid, "as it was playfully and mischievously called ," by 
abolishing the salt tax, by arresting him and his p arty, 
or by brutally attacking the satyagrahis . 
Gandhiji gave the brutal repression of satyagrahis  as his reason for raiding the 
Dharasana Salt Works. 
He wrote: "I had hoped that the government would fi ght the civil resisters in a 
civilized manner... While the known leaders have be en dealt with more or less 
according to the legal formality, the rank and file  have been often 
savagely...assaulted. 
"Had these been isolated cases, they might have bee n overlooked. But accounts 
have come to me from Bengal, Bihar, Utkal, U.P., De lhi and Bombay confirming 
the experiences of Gujarat of which I have ample ev idence. 
"In Karachi, Peshawar and Madras the firing would a ppear to have been 
unprovoked and unnecessary... In Bengal... unthinka ble cruelties are said to 
have been practiced in the act of snatching the nat ional flag from volunteers. 
Paddy fields are reported to have been burnt, eatab les forcibly taken. A 
vegetable market in Gujarat has been raided because  the dealers would not 
sell vegetables to officials. 
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31  "These acts have taken place in front of crowds who , for the sake of the 
Congress mandate, have submitted without retaliatio n. 
"According to the law of Satyagraha , the greater the repression and lawlessness 
on the part of authority, the greater should be the  suffering courted by its 
victims. Success is the certain result of suffering  of the extreme character 
voluntarily undergone...I have been saying for the last fifteen years in India, 
and outside for twenty years more, and repeat now, that the only way to 
conquer violence is through non-violence." 
Gandhiji begged the Viceroy, Lord Irwin, to abolish  the salt tax, "which many of 
your illustrious countrymen have condemned in unmea sured terms and 
which....has evoked universal protest and resentmen t expressed in civil 
disobedience. You may condemn civil disobedience as  much as you like. Will 
you prefer violent revolt to civil disobedience?" 
It was evening and, after writing the letter and fi nishing his routine work, 
Gandhiji dropped off to sleep on a cot in a shed be neath the branches of an old 
mango tree. Some of his followers slept by his side , while others slept 
elsewhere in the grove. 
At dead of night, at 12.45 a.m. they were awakened by the tramp of heavy 
boots. It was the District Magistrate of Surat, an Englishman, accompanied by 
two Indian officers and thirty policemen armed with  rifles, pistols and lances. A 
party of armed constables entered the shed and the District Magistrate flashed 
his torch on Mahatma Gandhi's face. He woke up and asked the Magistrate, "Do 
you want me?" 
"Are you Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi?" the District Magistrate asked formally. 
"Yes", Gandhiji answered with equal formality.  
When the District Magistrate said that he had come to arrest him, Gandhiji 
said, "Please give me time for my ablutions." 
The official agreed and, while brushing his teeth, Gandhiji asked, "Mr. District 
Magistrate, may I know under what charge I am arres ted? Is it section 124?" A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32  "No, not under Section 124. I have a written order" , was the curt reply. 
"Please", said Gandhiji, "would you mind reading it  to me?" 
The District Magistrate read, "Whereas the Governor -in-Council views with 
alarm the activities of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi,  he directs that the said 
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi should be placed under r estraint under 
Regulation XXV of 1827 and suffer imprisonment duri ng the pleasure of the 
Government, and that he be immediately removed to t he Yeravda Central Jail." 
Gandhiji packed some articles and papers in a small  bag and asked for "a few 
more minutes for prayers." 
The District Magistrate agreed and one of the men r ecited a hymn. Then 
Gandhiji stepped to the side of the District Magist rate, who led him to a 
waiting vehicle. 
Gandhiji was put on a train to Bombay. The authorit ies had decided that at 
Borivili he was to change to a car and travel by it  to the Yeravda Central Jail in 
Pune. 
Foreign newspaper correspondents had got wind of wh at was happening and 
they were waiting when the train stopped at Borivli . An American 
correspondent asked, "Have you any farewell message , Mr. Gandhi?" 
"Tell the people of America to study the issues cle arly and to judge them on 
their merits," Gandhiji replied. 
"You have no bitterness or ill feeling towards anyo ne?" the correspondent 
asked. 
"No. I have long expected to be arrested," Gandhiji  replied. 
"Do you think your arrest will lead to great distur bances throughout India?" 
"No, I do not. In any case, I can say that I have t aken every precaution to avoid 
disturbances," Gandhiji replied. 
Gandhiji was taken in a car, with curtains drawn, t o the Yeravda Central Jail. 
The prison authorities noted down these details abo ut their prisoner: 5 feet 5 
inches (about 166 centimeters); identification mark s: scar on the right thigh, A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  small mole on the lower right eyelid and a scar abo ut the size of a pea below 
the left elbow. 
There was no trial, no sentence and no fixed term o f imprisonment. Gandhiji 
was to be held in prison for as long as the governm ent thought it necessary. 
When the news of Gandhiji's arrest spread, there we re demonstrations 
everywhere, but the people were non-violent. Hartals  were declared in 
Bombay, Delhi, Navsari, Ahmedabad and Surat. The ne xt day more areas were 
on hartal . 
There were reactions abroad, too. Indian businessme n in Panama closed their 
business for 24 hours. Indians in Sumatra did the s ame. In Nairobi, the Indian 
community went on hartal . From America, 102 clergymen sent a telegram to 
the British Prime Minister urging him to seek a fri endly settlement with 
Gandhiji and the Indian people. Reports of Gandhiji  and his doings filled 
newspapers all over Europe. 
Seeing the support that Gandhiji had, the Governmen t feared that there might 
be demonstrations at the Yeravda Central Jail and s ecretly took him from there 
to Shivaji's fortress in the Purandar Hills. 
Gandhiji had expected to be arrested, and as far ba ck as April 9 he had drafted 
a message to the Indian people which was released u pon his arrest: 
"If the struggle so auspiciously begun is continued  in the same spirit of non-
violence to the end, not only shall we see Purna Swaraj established in our 
country before long, but we shall have given to the  world an object lesson 
worthy of India and her glorious past. 
"Swaraj  won without sacrifice cannot last long.... Let not  my companions or 
the people at large be perturbed over my arrest, fo r it is not I but God who is 
guiding this movement..... 
"Let every villager fetch or manufacture contraband  salt, sisters should picket 
liquor shops, opium dens and foreign cloth dealers'  shops. Young and old in 
every home should spin and get woven heaps of yarn every day. Foreign cloth 
should be burnt. A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  "Hindus should give up untouchability. Hindus, Musl ims, Sikhs, Parsees and 
Christians should all achieve unity of heart..... L et students leave government 
schools and colleges and government servants resign  their services and devote 
themselves to the service of the people and we shal l find that Purna Swaraj 
will come knocking at our door." 
 
(X)  
Since Gandhiji was under arrest and could not lead the raid on the Dharasana 
salt depot, his successor, Abbas Tyabji, set out fr om Karadi to lead the raid. On 
the morning of May 12, the satyagrahis  got up early, said their prayers and fell 
into line, ready to march to Dharasana. The party h ad hardly started walking 
when it was confronted by the District Magistrate a nd the District 
Superintendent of Police of Surat with four hundred  policemen armed with 
rifles and lathis . Abbas Tyabji and the satyagrahis  were arrested, put in buses 
and taken to Jalalpur. 
Now it became Sarojini Naidu's responsibility to le ad the raid. She was in 
Allahabad attending a meeting of the Congress Worki ng Committee when she 
learnt of Abbas Tyabji's arrest. She immediately hu rried to Dharasana, 250 
kilometers north of Bombay. 
 
During the Salt Satyagraha with Sarojini Naidu in D andi (Gujarat), 1930  
She said, "I go to victory or death. I shall march ahead of the satyagrahis ....... 
when they try to break through the military guards at the salt depot. I shall cut 
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35  the barbed wire with pliers and seize the salt with  my own hands..... 
"I am a woman but I shall actively participate in t his campaign for liberty as 
though I were a man. I realize the tremendous respo nsibility entrusted to me 
by the Mahatma and the nation, but in making the mo st of this heaven-sent 
opportunity, neither jail nor death shall hold any terror for me.  
"At daybreak on May 15, Sarojini Naidu and fifty vo lunteers, clad in khadi , 
marched towards the depot, armed with pliers to cut  the barbed wire. Half an 
hour later they were stopped by a police force. The  Superintendent of Police 
told Sarojini Naidu that she could go no further an d she replied, "Well, I shall 
stay here. I am not going back."  
The Superintendent of Police said, "We are going to  stay here and offer 
satyagraha  as long as you stay." 
Both sides sat facing each other. Sarojini Naidu go t a chair from a house nearby 
and sat writing letters and later spinning yarn. Th e sun blazed overhead and it 
was very hot, but the volunteers sat on the road se eking no shelter. 
After 28 hours of this peaceful confrontation, the police threatened to arrest 
Sarojini Naidu. She retired to the volunteers' camp  to arrange for more groups 
to march to the depot. The others were then removed  by the police. 
More volunteers took their place and, when they wer e taken away, there were 
more to replace them. The volunteers would squat on  their haunches, waiting 
for an opportunity to dash to the barbed wire round  the depot. Every time they 
tried to reach it, the police would block them. Dur ing the four days that this 
"game" lasted, two hundred and fifty volunteers wer e taken from the road and 
lodged in a temporary jail nearby. 
On May 20 the volunteers were ordered to adopt any means short of violence to 
get through the wire fence and seize the salt pans.  They were told not to 
return without doing what they had set out to do. T hat day more than 150 
volunteers were arrested, but later, they were rele ased. A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36  Very early the next morning, by moonlight, prayers were said and Sarojini 
Naidu exhorted the volunteers to start the attack o n the Dharasana Salt Works. 
She said: 
"India's prestige is in your hands. You must not us e any violence under any 
circumstance. You will be beaten, but you must not resist. You must not even 
raise a hand to ward off blows. Although Gandhiji's  body is in prison, his soul 
goes with you." 
The volunteers shouted, "Gandhiji ki Jai !", formed columns and, with their 
leaders carrying ropes and wire cutters, advanced o n the depot. 
Heaps of shining salt lay behind the barbed wire, g uarded by four hundred 
policemen who were directed by several British offi cers. 
Manilal Gandhi, the second son of Gandhiji, was in the front rank of the 
marchers. As they approached the barbed wire they s tarted chanting, " Inquilab 
Zindabad ! Inquilab Zindabad !" 
The column reached the depot at 6.30 a.m. When the leaders tried to throw 
ropes round the posts holding the barbed wire to pu ll and uproot them, the 
police rushed on them with steel tipped lathis . 
Not a single marcher raised his arm to defend himse lf as the police repeatedly 
beat him. In two or three minutes the ground was co vered with fallen 
volunteers, their skulls or shoulders fractured wit h the blows. Great patches of 
blood stained their white clothes. But those behind  them continued to press 
forward till they too were struck down. 
When everyone in the first column had been struck d own, stretcher bearers 
rushed up and carried the injured to a thatched hut . 
Another column then formed up and marched towards t he barbed-wire fence. 
This column also was struck down. There was no figh t or struggle. The 
marchers just walked forward until they fell injure d. 
The brutal beating of unresisting men angered many in the watching crowd. 
The leaders had a hard time persuading them to rema in peaceful, reminding A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37  them of Gandhiji's instructions. The British Superi ntendent of Police also 
sensed their anger and posted twenty-five of his me n armed with rifles on 
raised ground to fire if the crowd turned violent. 
The volunteers now changed their tactics. In groups  of twenty-five they sat 
near the wire fence, making no attempt to go throug h it. Yet the police 
attacked them. Bleeding bodies toppled over, but fr esh groups of men took 
their place and allowed themselves to be beaten. 
The police then started dragging the men away, seiz ing their arms or legs. 
Some were thrown into a nearby ditch filled with wa ter. 
Hour after hour, the stretcher bearers carried away  bleeding bodies and put 
them in rows in the temporary hospital. The few doc tors there were unable to 
cope with the number of injured. 
At last a British Officer went up to Sarojini Naidu  and touching her arm, said, 
"You are under arrest." 
She said, "I will come with you, but don't touch me ."  
The crowd cheered as she followed the officer to th e barbed-wire enclosure 
that served as jail. Later, Manilal Gandhi was also  arrested. 
The volunteers then decided to suspend the operatio n for two days, till 
reinforcements of satyagrahis  arrived. But the police and the military blocked 
the main road to Dharasana and managed to prevent v olunteers from getting 
through. 
Though denied reinforcements, the satyagrahis continued the attempt to enter 
the salt works till June 6. 
Writing about the action at Dharasana, Young India  reported, "And this is the 
Government of India, red in all its tooth and claw.  It can strike its lathis  on 
harmless, unarmed citizens.... The satyagrahis  did not succeed in bringing salt 
from the salt heaps. They were beaten, wounded, abu sed. They sustained a 
partial defeat in as much as some of them gave way before the furious lathi  
charges. A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  "But those who suffered the blows did so quite joyf ully.... They unmasked to 
the whole world that the Government is not founded on love and consent of 
the people, but it rules the people against their w ill, keeping them down by 
sheer physical force. 
"They can only rule India as long as the people are  not strong and determined 
enough to undergo all possible suffering unflinchin gly in order to overthrow this 
Government.... Who will say that the  satyagrahis  are defeated?.... We hope 
that their sufferings will bring about a change of heart in the oppressors." 
The ultimate aim was not so much to seize salt as t o bring to light the violence 
on which British rule rested and to put moral press ure on the government. 
Gandhiji also wanted Indians to regain their self-r espect by showing them that 
they could challenge the all powerful British Gover nment. 
As he had hoped, the Government's repressive measur es, far from cowing the 
people, only made them intensify the satyagraha . All over the country, people 
either made salt or raided government salt works. N early fifteen thousand 
marched on the salt depot at Wadala near Bombay. Ma ny were beaten with 
lathis  and badly injured. 
The boycott of foreign cloth was having its effect on the textile industry in 
England. Hardly any cloth could be sold in India. S o many mills in Lancashire 
were idle. 
The no-tax campaign also spread, particularly in Gu jarat. In the taluks  of 
Bardoli, Borsad and Kambusar the peasants had to su ffer great repression for 
refusing to pay land revenue. The property they own ed was sold at ridiculously 
low price. At one place, property worth Rs. 3,000 w as sold for just Rs. 15. 
When they could no longer bear the repression, abou t eighty thousand people 
migrated from Gujarat to the State of Baroda. 
A report said, "One passed row after row of padlock ed cottages, and through 
the bars of windows one could see only empty rooms.  The streets were silent 
lakes of sunlight." A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39 Unrest had spread. About one lakh satyagrahis, seventeen thousand of them 
women, were in jail. The Indian National Congress now called upon students to 
boycott schools and colleges and take part in the national struggle for freedom. 
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru called upon the people to boycott the coming census 
operations. 
The administration was nearly paralyzed. The Viceroy, who had laughed at 
Gandhiji's "crazy scheme of upsetting the government with a pinch of salt", 
found that he was no longer in control. The pinch of salt had proved more 
powerful than a trainload of dynamite! 
 
(XI) 
T
he British Government was now inclined to negotiate. It called a Round Table 
Conference, which opened in London on November 12, 1930. But with neither 
Mahatma Gandhi nor any of the leaders of the Indian National Congress there, 
it was a meaningless exercise. The government realized this and the British 
Prime Minister, Ramsay MacDonald, expressed the hope that the Congress 
would send delegates to the Second Round Table Conference. 
Gandhiji, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Motilal Nehru, and more than twenty other 
Congress leaders were released from prison on January 26, 1931, the second 
Independence Day. Gandhiji immediately wrote a letter to the Viceroy asking 
for an interview. 
Lord Irwin promptly agreed and the two met on February 17, 1931. And they 
met as equals, not as ruler and subject. It was the representative of one nation 
meeting the representative of another. It was a historic moment when Gandhiji 
climbed the steps of the Viceroy's House. The frail figure, clad in khadi, made a 
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40  mockery of the imperial splendor around him. The Vi ceroy lived in such luxury 
that the Prince of Wales on a visit to India had re marked, "I never understood 
how a king should live until I saw the Viceroy of I ndia." 
The contrast between Gandhiji and Lord Irwin was ma rked, but the 
negotiations were held in an atmosphere of great co rdiality and goodwill. This 
again showed how successful Gandhiji had been with the weapon of satyagraha  
which does not hate or harm the opponent but tries to turn his heart with love 
and non-violence. 
One night, Gandhiji insisted on walking from the Vi ceroy's palace to where he 
was staying. It was an eight-kilometer walk and the  Viceroy said, "Good night, 
Mr. Gandhi, and my prayers go with you." 
Once, when leaving, Gandhiji forgot his shawl. Lord  Irwin gave it to him saying, 
"Gandhi, you haven't so much on that you can afford  to leave this behind." 
At one of the meetings, Lord Irwin asked Gandhiji i f he would have tea. 
Gandhiji thanked the Viceroy, took a paper bag out of a fold in his shawl and 
said playfully, "I will put some of this salt into my tea to remind us of the 
famous Boston Tea Party." Both men laughed. 
Under what came to be known as the Gandhi-Irwin Pac t or the Delhi Pact, the 
civil disobedience movement was called off, prisone rs were released and salt 
manufacture allowed on the coast. It was also agree d that the Indian National 
Congress would attend the Round Table Conference in  London. 
India is not a sickly child requiring nursing, outs ide 
help and other props. 
In speeches and articles, Gandhiji urged unity 
between Hindus and Muslims, strict observance of th e 
conditions of the pact, energetic work on the 
constructive programmes, including boycott of forei gn 
cloth and non-violent picketing of liquor shop. 
He explained the reasons for accepting the terms of  
the agreement: "Whilst a satyagrahi  never yields to  
Walking in Noakhali 
(Bengal), 1946  
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41  panic...neither does he think of humiliating the ot her party.... He may not 
swerve from the path of justice and may not dictate  impossible terms. He may 
not pitch his demands too high, neither may be pitc h them too low. The 
present settlement, I submit, satisfied all these c onditions. 
"We are going to ask for nothing less than independ ence. Whether we will get it 
is another matter." 
The Indian National Congress elected Gandhiji to be  its representative at the 
Second Round Table Conference in London. 
He sailed for London on August 29, 1931, by the S.S . Rajputana. Before leaving, 
he warned that there was every chance of his return ing empty-handed. He 
said, "As the elephant is powerless to think in ter ms of the ant, in spite of the 
best intentions in the world, even so is the Englis hman powerless to think in 
terms of the Indian."  
 
(XII)  
Gandhiji did not sail alone for England. With him w ere Pandit Madan Mohan 
Malaviya, Sarojini Naidu, his youngest son, Devdas,  his British disciple, 
Madeline Slade, who on joining the Sabarmati ashram  had taken the name of 
Miraben, and his secretary. 
As always, Gandhiji wished to lead a 
simple life. He had given orders that 
he and his party were to travel by the 
lowest class, as deck passengers. When 
he discovered how much luggage his 
companions had brought with them, he 
insisted on seven trunks and suitcases 
being sent back from Aden, the first 
halt after Bombay. 
Gandhiji's followers had brought along his goat, be cause goat's milk was an 
essential part of his diet. On the ship, Gandhiji s pent most of the day and night  
Poking his grandson Kanaa during a walk 
at Juhu Beach (Bombay), 1937  
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42  on the deck spinning, writing, praying, talking to other passengers and playing 
with their children. 
He reached London on September 12. The British were  astonished to see the 
khadi -clad figure, leaning on a bamboo staff, with his d isciples and his goat, 
getting off the ship. They were even more astonishe d to think that such a man 
had come to hold talks with their Prime Minister. 
The newspapers were full of photographs and cartoon s of the "Mickey Mouse of 
India". Newspaper men followed him wherever he went . Never before had they 
seen such a leader, a man who did not need the powe r of the State to make 
him great. He had no official position, but people had willingly, almost blindly, 
followed him to prison. Suffering, and even death, had not deterred them. 
Gandhiji was the guest of Miss Muriel Lester, who h ad visited him in 1926, and 
he stayed in Kingsley Hall, in the East End, where the poor lived. 
It was eight kilometers from the centre of the city  and from St. James Palace, 
where the Round Table Conference was to be held. Hi s friends told him that he 
would save many hours for sleep and work if he live d in a hotel, but he did not 
want so much money to be spent on his comfort. Neit her would he live in the 
big houses of his English friends or wealthy Indian s. He said he loved living 
among his own kind, the poor. All that he would agr ee to was to have a small 
office at 88, Knightsbridge, so that those who want ed to meet him or interview 
him would not have to come all the way to the East End slums. 
In the mornings, Gandhiji walked through the slum s treets and men and women 
greeted him and smiled at him. He talked to them an d visited some of them in 
their houses. Children crowded round him. When one mischievously asked, 
"Hey, Gandhi, where are your trousers?", Gandhiji l aughed and the children 
laughed too! 
Lloyd George, Britain's wartime Prime Minister, inv ited Gandhiji to his farm. 
Charlie Chaplin, the comedian, wanted to meet him. Gandhiji had never seen a 
film and had no interest in actors, but on learning  that Chaplin had been born 
in a poor family in the East End, he was happy to m eet him. A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43  Among other famous persons who met him were General  Smuts, Maria 
Montessori, and George Bernard Shaw. Lord Irwin, wh o had been replaced by 
Lord Willington as Viceroy before Gandhiji left Ind ia, also met him. 
Gandhiji visited schools and also London University , Cambridge and Oxford. He 
went to Lancashire to meet the textile workers who were out of work because 
of the boycott of foreign cloth in India. He explai ned to them the reasons for 
the boycott and spoke with such conviction, kindnes s and directness that he 
got a wonderful welcome from the people he had put out of work. They told 
him that they would have done the same thing had th ey been in his place. It 
was a measure of the greatness of the English peopl e and their sense of fair 
play that they could see the point of view of the o ther party even when that 
meant suffering for them. 
King George V had misgivings about including Gandhi ji in the list of Round 
Table Conference delegates invited to a reception a t Buckingham Palace. 
When Sir Samuel Hoare, Secretary of State for India , told the King that 
Gandhiji could not be excluded, he asked, "What! Ha ve this rebel fakir in the 
palace after he has been behind all those attacks o n my loyal officers? 
"I am afraid so. It would be a mistake not to invit e him, Your Majesty," Sir 
Samuel replied. 
The King then said that he could not invite to the palace a man "with no proper 
clothes on and bare knees." 
Sir Samuel said, "Your Majesty, he, not you, will f eel the cold, so why worry?" 
So Mahatma Gandhi received his invitation and went to Buckingham Palace in 
his khadi dhoti  and shawl. Towards the end of the reception, the K ing said, 
"Remember, Mr. Gandhi, I won't have any attacks on my Empire." 
Gandhiji said politely, "I must not be drawn into p olitical arguments in your 
Majesty's Palace after receiving Your Majesty's hos pitality." A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44  Later, asked by a correspondent whether he had felt  the cold at Buckingham 
Palace, Gandhiji laughed and said, "No, His Majesty  had enough clothes on for 
both of us." 
Gandhiji concentrated more on convincing the Britis h people of the justness of 
India's cause than on the discussions at the Round Table Conference. He 
explained it by saying to an audience, "I find that  my work lies outside the 
conference. This to me is the real Round Table Conf erence. The seed which is 
being sown now may result in softening the British spirit..... and in preventing 
the brutalisation of human beings." 
Gandhiji gave lectures, speeches, press interviews,  went on trips, met people 
and answered innumerable letters addressed to him. All this kept him busy for 
twenty-one hours of the day, leaving him with barel y three hours for sleep. His 
aim was to convince the British people and the worl d that India had to be free. 
She needed independence just as any other nation di d. He gained many friends 
and sympathizers. 
 
During the Second Round Table Conference in London,  1931  
He said in a radio address to the United States tha t world attention was 
focused on India because "the means adopted by us f or attaining liberty are 
unique...Hitherto nations have fought in the manner  of the brute. They have 
wreaked vengeance upon those whom they have conside red to be their 
enemies...We in India have tried to reverse the pro cess... I personally would 
wait, if need be for ages, rather than seek to atta in freedom for my country 
through bloody means. I feel...that the world is si ck unto death of blood 
spilling. The world is seeking a way out and I flat ter myself with the belief that 
A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45  perhaps it will be the privilege of this ancient la nd of India to show the way out 
to the hungering world." 
He ended with the words, "May I not then, on behalf  of the semi-starved 
millions, appeal to the conscience of the world to come to the rescue of a 
people dying to regain its liberty?" 
However, the British were not willing to make India  free. As they saw it, the 
purpose of the Round Table Conference was "constitu tion-building" for India. 
Of the one hundred and twelve delegates few sided w ith Gandhiji to resist the 
forces that were working for the status quo. 
The Muslims were given separate electorates. The un touchables also demanded 
separate electorates. All this strengthened the feu dal and divisive forces. 
The Round Table Conference was a failure. Gandhiji left England on December 
5 disappointed that he had not succeeded in bridgin g the gulf between Hindus 
and Muslims and that India was being denied her fre edom. 
Gandhiji traveled across France, Switzerland and It aly and met many important 
people before he sailed from Brindesi in Italy for India. 
 
(XIII)  
Gandhiji reached Bombay on December 28. A large che ering crowd received 
him. He said sadly, "I have come back empty-handed,  but I have not 
compromised the honour of my country." 
Gandhiji found that Lord Willingdon, who had replac ed Lord Irwin, and the new 
Government in Britain were determined to destroy In dia's recently won sense of 
freedom. Lord Willingdon withdrew the concessions m ade earlier and imposed 
drastic restrictions on the Indian National Congres s. 
Jawaharlal Nehru was arrested while going to Bombay  to welcome Gandhiji. 
Emergency ordinances were introduced to deal with t he non-rent campaign in 
U. P., the North-West Frontier Province and Bengal and to arrest and detain 
without trial those suspected of being agitators. T he Government also imposed A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46  restrictions on the press and assumed powers to sei ze buildings, property and 
bank balances. 
Gandhiji remarked to a Bombay audience. "These are all Christmas gifts from 
Lord Willington, our Christian Viceroy." 
Speaking to the Welfare of India League, Gandhiji s aid, "I am not conscious of a 
single experience throughout my three months' stay in England and Europe that 
made me feel that after all East is East and West i s West. On the contrary, I 
have been convinced more than ever that human natur e is much the same, no 
matter under what clime it flourishes, and that if you approached people with 
trust and affection you would have ten-fold trust a nd thousand fold affection 
returned to you." 
The British government, he explained, was friendly to him and "we parted as 
the best of friends... But when I come here I find a different order of things 
altogether." 
Gandhiji sent a telegram to the Viceroy condemning the ordinances and the 
arrests and suggesting an interview. The Viceroy's secretary replied that 
Congress activities against the Government made the  ordinances necessary. 
Lord Willingdon refused to meet Gandhiji. 
On January 4, 1932, Gandhiji was arrested, again un der Regulation XXV of 
1827. As before, he was taken to the Yeravda Centra l Jail. 
A short time ago, he had been His Majesty's guest a t Buckingham Palace. Now 
he was His Majesty's guest in the Yeravda Central J ail. The Government again 
started a policy of repression and important leader s of the freedom movement 
were arrested and imprisoned. 
In January fourteen thousand and eight hundred peop le were sent to jail for 
political reasons. In February seventeen thousand a nd eight hundred. 
Were the Salt Satyagraha  and all the sacrifices made by thousands of men an d 
women in vain? 
Not, if one understands Gandhiji's reasons for star ting the Salt Satyagraha . He 
had said that the object of the civil disobedience movement was two-fold. The A Pinch of Salt 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47  repeal of the Salt Tax and the "repeal of the Briti sh bondage of which the Salt 
Tax is but an offshoot." 
The true purpose was even deeper. Civil disobedienc e, Gandhiji had said, "is 
the method whereby the nation is to generate the st rength to reach her 
formulated goal"―namely, independence. 
And that strength had been achieved. The Indian peo ple had realized their 
power and the British Empire its weakness. 
Though Britain continued to rule India for some mor e years, a great change had 
taken place. And that was to affect not only India,  but also Britain. 
Rabindranath Tagore described this change: "Europe has completely lost her 
former moral prestige in Asia...For Europe, this is  in actual fact, a great moral 
defeat that has happened. Even though Asia is still  physically weak and unable 
to protect herself...nevertheless she can now affor d to look down on Europe 
where before she looked up." 
The days of not only British but all European Colon ialism were numbered. 
Seventeen years after Gandhiji launched the Salt Satyagraha , India was free. 
And it was not long before most of the colonies rul ed by European countries in 
Asia and Africa were also free. 
Gandhiji had shown that even an unarmed people coul d win against the 
mightiest countries if their cause was just and the y were prepared to face their 
masters with courage and fortitude. 
The 'law-breakers' who stood on the sea shore at Da ndi that day in 1930 
achieved much more than Indian independence. 
 
 