 
Ramanama 
 
 
 
By:  M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
 
Rs. 5/-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: 079 – 27540635 
E-mail: jitnavjivanlO@gmail.com 
Website: www.navajivantrust.org 
 
Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
TO THE READER 
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wr itings and to others who are 
interested in them that I am not at all concerned w ith appearing to be 
consistent. In my search after Truth I have discard ed many ideas and learnt 
many new things. Old as I am in age, I have no feel ing that I have ceased to 
grow inwardly or that my growth will stop at the di ssolution of the flesh. What I 
am concerned with is my readiness to obey the call of Truth, my God, from 
moment to moment, and, therefore, when anybody find s any inconsistency 
between any two writings of mine, if he has still f aith in my sanity, he would do 
well to choose the later of the two on the same sub ject. 
M. K. GANDHI 
Harijan , 29-4-1933, p.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3   
PUBLISHER'S NOTE 
Readers of the  Harijan  are aware that in later years Gandhiji had come to  
believe that Ramanama was not only an effective aid  in controlling the mind 
but was also an infallible remedy for most of the i lls of the body. His writings 
about Ramanama therefore assumed a deeper significa nce during these years. 
While issuing this second edition we have taken the  opportunity to add some 
later writings on Ramanama by Gandhiji to the origi nal selection and have also 
added a chapter from Manubehn Gandhi's book —  Bapu — My Mother.  The 
chapter though forming part of Manubehn's diary is in fact a report of Gandhiji's 
devotion to Ramanama almost in his own words. We tr ust the additions will 
please all lovers of Gandhi ji's writings on Ramana ma. 
1949 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4   
EDITOR'S NOTE 
Gandhiji had been taught as a child to take Ramanam a, i.e., the Name of Rama 
or God, when in trouble. As a Satyagrahi, or one wh o holds fast to Truth or God 
all the twenty-four hours of the day. Gandhiji disc overed that God was his 
constant solace and support in every difficulty — p hysical, mental or spiritual. 
One of his earliest trials was in connection with t he practice of  brahmacharya  
or chastity. He tells us that Ramanama was his grea test help in resisting impure 
thought. Ramanama saw him through the agony of his fasts, and through all the 
lonely struggles of soul, which fell to his lot as a pioneer in the political, social, 
economic and religious spheres. But his last discov ery, as he threw himself 
more and more on God was that Ramanama was a remedy  also for physical 
ailments. 
In his quest for Truth and eagerness to relieve hum an suffering, Gandhiji had 
long discovered simple, inexpensive methods of trea ting disease through fresh 
air, massage, baths, fasts, diet, earth-bandages an d such like. These methods, 
he believed, were according to Nature, or in confor mity with the laws of God. 
rather than the innumerable drugs manufactured toda y on a commercial scale, 
which, he held, had in the end a harmful effect on the human system. 
But man being more than body, mere physical treatme nt of his ailments, 
Gandhiji was convinced, was not enough. The patient 's mind and soul required 
to be treated also. When these were whole, the body  of itself became whole. 
Gandhiji found that towards this end nothing was so  efficacious as Ramanama, 
or a devout faith in, and reliance on. the Great Ph ysician. When a man put 
himself completely in God's hands, lived according to God's laws in respect of 
food, personal hygiene, control of passions in part icular and of self in general, 
and in respect of his relationships with his fellow  men, Gandhiji was certain 
that he would be free from disease. It was ever tow ards such a state that he 
was himself striving, and to help others towards th e same end he established 
the last of his institutions, the Nature Cure Clini c at Uruli Kanchan, where 
besides Nature Cure as practised by himself, the pa tients would be taught the Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5  efficacy of Ramanama. This little book seeks to put  briefly before the reader 
Gandhiji's thoughts and experience in this regard i n his own words. 
 
Bombay       BHARATAN KUMARAPPA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6   
01. A GOOD SEED SOWN 
From my sixth or seventh year up to my sixteenth I was at school, being taught 
all sorts of things except religion. I may say that  I failed to get from the 
teachers what they could have given me without any effort on their part. And 
yet I kept on picking up things here and there from  my surroundings. The term  
religion  I am using in its broadest sense, meaning thereby self-realization or 
knowledge of self. 
Being born in the Vaishnava faith, I had often to g o to the  haveli.  But it never 
appealed to me. I did not like its glitter and pomp . Also I heard rumours of 
immorality being practised there, and lost all inte rest in it. Hence, I could gain 
nothing from the  haveli.  
But what I failed to get there I obtained from my n urse, an old servant of the 
family, whose affection for me I still recall. Ther e was in me a fear of ghosts 
and spirits. Rambha, for that was her name, suggest ed, as a remedy for this 
fear, the repetition of Ramanama. I had more faith in her than in her remedy, 
and so at a tender age I began repeating Ramanama t o cure my fear of ghosts 
and spirits. This was, of course, shortlived; but t he good seed sown in childhood 
was not sown in vain. I think it is due to the seed  sown by that good woman 
Rambha that today Ramanama is an infallible remedy for me. 
What left a deep impression on me was the reading o f the  Ramayana  before my 
father. During part of his illness my father was in  Porbandar. There every 
evening he used to listen to the  Ramayana.  The reader was a great devotee of 
Rama — Ladha Maharaj of Bileshwar. It was said of h im that he cured himself of 
his leprosy not by any medicine, but by applying to  the affected parts  bilva  
leaves which had been cast away after being offered  to the image of Mahadeva 
in Bileshwar Temple, and by the regular repetition of Ramanama. His faith, it 
was said, had made him whole. This may or may not b e true. We, at any rate, 
believed the story. And it is a fact that when Ladl ha Maharaj began his reading 
of the  Ramayana  his body was entirely free from leprosy. He had a melodious 
voice. He would sing the  dohas  (couplets) and  chopais (quatrains), and explain Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  them, losing himself in the discourse and carrying his listeners along with him. I 
must have been thirteen at that time but I quite re member being enraptured 
by his reading. That laid the foundation of my deep  devotion to the  Ramayana. 
Today I regard the  Ramayana  of Tulsidas as the greatest book in all devotional  
literature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8   
02. THE STAFF OF LIFE 
My thoughts of sin are scotched, but not killed. If  I had acquired perfect 
mastery over my thoughts, I should not have suffere d from pleurisy, dysentery 
and appendicitis as I have during the last ten year s. 1 I believe that when the 
soul is sinless, the body which she inhabits is hea lthy too. That is to say, as the 
soul progresses towards freedom from sin, the body also tends to become 
immune from disease. But a healthy body, in this ca se, does not mean a strong 
body. A powerful soul lives only in a weak body. As  the soul advances in 
strength, the body languishes. A perfectly healthy body might yet be quite 
emaciated. A strong body is often diseased. Even, i f there be no disease, such a 
body catches infection soon, while a perfectly heal thy body enjoys complete 
immunity from it. Pure blood has the power of expel ling all obnoxious germs.... 
Brahmacharya  in the popular or current acceptance of the term m eans control 
of animal passion in thought, word and deed. The sa me stress has not been laid 
upon the control of the palate, and hence the contr ol of passion has grown 
more difficult and almost impossible.... 
My experience is that one who has not mastered tast e cannot control animal 
passion either. It is no easy task to conquer the p alate. But conquest of passion 
is bound up with the conquest of the palate. One of  the means of controlling 
taste is to give up spices and condiments altogethe r or as far as possible. 
Another and a more effective means is always to cul tivate a feeling that we eat 
just in order to sustain the body and never for tas te. We take in air not for 
taste, but for life. Just as we take water to quenc h our thirst, in the same way 
we should take food only to satisfy hunger. Unfortu nately, parents make us 
contract a contrary habit from very childhood. They  corrupt us by giving us all 
manner of delicacies not for our sustenance, but ou t of mistaken affection. We 
have got to fight against this unfavourable home at mosphere. 
But our most powerful ally in conquering animal pas sion is Ramanama or some 
similar  mantra. The Dwadasha Mantra 2 will also serve the same purpose. One 
may repeat any  mantra  one pleases. I have suggested Ramanama as I have b een Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  familiar with it since childhood, and as it is my c onstant support in my 
struggles. One must be completely absorbed in whate ver  mantra  one selects. 
One should not mind if other thoughts disturb one d uring the  jap a  (recitation). 
I am confident that one who still goes on with the  japa in faith will conquer in 
the end. The  mantra  becomes one's staff of life and carries one throug h every 
ordeal. 3 
One should not seek wordly profit from such sacred mantras.  The characteristic 
power of these  mantras lies in their standing guard over personal purity, and 
every diligent seeker will realize this at once. It  should, however, be 
remembered that the  mantra  is not to be repeated parrot-like. One should pour  
one's soul into it. The parrot repeats such  mantras mechanically, we must 
repeat them intelligently in the hope of driving ou t undesirable thoughts and 
with full faith in the power of the  mantras  to assist us to do so. 
Navajivan, 5-6-1924 
 
1 I am a humble aspirant for perfection. I know my way to it also. But knowing the way is 
not reaching its end. If 1 was perfect, if I had ac quired full control over all my passions 
even in thought, I should be perfect in body. I am free to confess that daily I am obliged to 
expend a great amount of mental energy in acquiring  control over my thoughts. When 1 
have succeeded, if I ever do. think what a store-ho use of energy would be set free for 
service! As 1 hold that appendicitis was a result o f infirmity of thought or mind, so do I 
concede that my submission to the surgical operatio n was an additional infirmity of mind. 
If I was absolutely free of egoism. I would have re signed myself to the inevitable; but 1 
wanted to live in the present body. Complete detach ment is not a mechanical process. 
One has to grow into it by patient toil and prayer.  — Young India  3-4-1924 
2 ॐ नमो  भगवते वासुदेवाय  । 
3 Suggesting to a  bralimachari  the means to the attainment of brahmacharya.  Gandhiji 
wrote: 
"The last and not the least is prayer. Let him repe at Ramanama with all his heart regularly 
everyday, and ask for divine grace." —  Young India.  l9-4-'26. 
To a struggling soul, Gandhiji wrote: Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  "With the help of Rama we have got to overcome the ten-headed Ravana of passions 
within us. Success is bound to be ours if we have f aith in Rama and surrender ourselves to 
His grace. Above all, do not lose self-confidence. Avoid indulgence of the palate." —  Young 
India. 20-12-28 
"When your passions threaten to get the better of y ou, go down on your knees and cry out 
to God for help. Ramanama is my Infallible Help. As  an extraneous aid, take a hip-bath."- 
From Preface to the Second Edition (1928) of  Self-Restraint  v.  Self-indulgence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11   
03. OUR ONLY HELP 
Rama, Allah and God are to me convertible terms. I had discovered that simple 
people deluded themselves into the belief that I ap peared to them in their 
distress. I wanted to remove the superstition. I kn ew that I appeared to 
nobody. It was pure hallucination for them to rely upon a frail mortal. I, 
therefore, presented them with a simple and well tr ied formula that has never 
failed, namely, to invoke the assistance of God eve ry morning before sunrise 
and every evening before bed-time for the fulfillme nt of the vows. Millions of 
Hindus know Him under the name of Rama. As a child,  I was taught to call upon 
Rama when I was seized with fear. I know many of my  companions to whom 
Ramanama has been the great solace in the hour of t heir need. I presented it to 
the Dharalas and to the 'untouchables'. I present i t also to the reader whose 
vision is not blurred and whose faith is not damped  by over-much learning. 
Learning takes us through many stages in life, but it fails us utterly in the hour 
of danger and temptation. Then, faith alone saves. Ramanama is not for those 
who tempt God in every way possible and ever expect  it to save. It is for those 
who walk in the fear of God, who want to restrain t hemselves and cannot in 
spite of themselves. 
Young India , 22-1-1925 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12   
04. RAMANAMA AND NATIONAL SERVICE 
Q.  Can a man or woman attain self-realization by mere  recitation of Ramanama 
and without taking part in national service? I ask this question because some of 
my sisters say that they do not need to do anything  beyond attending to family 
requirements, and occasionally showing kindness to the poor. 
A.  This question has puzzled not only women, but many  men, and has taxed me 
to the utmost. I know that there is a school of phi losophy which teaches 
complete inaction and futility of all effort. I hav e not been able to appreciate 
that teaching, unless in order to secure verbal agr eement I were to put my own 
interpretation on it. In my humble opinion, effort is necessary for one's own 
growth. It has to be irrespective of results. Raman ama or some equivalent is 
necessary, not for the sake of repetition, but for the sake of purification, as an 
aid to effort, for direct guidance from above. It i s, therefore, never a 
substitute for effort. It is meant for intensifying  and guiding it in proper 
channel. If all effort is vain, why family cares or  an occasional help to the poor? 
In this very effort is contained the germ of nation al service. And national 
service, to me, means service of humanity, even as disinterested service of the 
family means the same thing. Disinterested service of the family, necessarily, 
leads one to national service. Ramanama gives one d etachment and ballast, 
and never throws one off one's balance at critical moments. Self-realization I 
hold to be impossible without service of, and ident ification with, the poorest. 
Young India,  21-10-1926 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13   
05. SEEK HIS HELP 
I know from correspondence with the students all ov er India, what wrecks they 
have become by having stuffed their brains with inf ormation derived from a 
cartload of books. Some have become unhinged, other s have become lunatics, 
some have been leading a life of helpless impurity.  My heart goes out to them 
when, they say that try as much as they might, they  are what they are, because 
they cannot overpower the devil. 'Tell us," they pl aintively ask, "how to get rid 
of the devil, how to get rid of the impurity that h as seized us." When I ask them 
to take Ramanama and kneel before God and seek His help, they come to me 
and say: "We do not know where God is. We do not kn ow what it is to pray." 
That is the state to which they have been reduced.. .. 
A Tamil saying has always remained in my memory, an d it means: "God is the 
Help of the helpless." If you would ask Him to help  you, you would go to Him in 
all your nakedness, approach Him without reservatio ns, also without fear of 
doubts as to how He can help a fallen being like yo u. He who has helped 
millions who have approached Him, is He going to de sert you? He makes no 
exception whatsoever, and you will find that everyo ne of your prayers will be 
answered. The prayer of even the most impure will b e answered. 1 I am telling 
this out of my personal experience. I have gone thr ough the purgatory. Seek 
first the Kingdom of Heaven and everything will be added unto you. 
*But prayer is no mere exercise of words or of the ears, it is no mere repetition 
of empty formula. Any amount of repetition of Raman ama is futile, if it fails to 
stir the soul. It is better in prayer to have a hea rt without words, than words 
without a heart. It must be in clear response to th e spirit which hungers for it. 
And even as a hungry man relishes a hearty meal, a hungry soul will relish a 
heartfelt prayer. And I am giving you a bit of my e xperience, and that of my 
companions, when I say that he who has experienced the magic of prayer may 
do without food for days together, but not a single  moment without prayer. For 
without prayer there is no inward peace. —  Young India,  23-1-1930 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14   
06. BEAUTY OF REPETITION 
"This repetition of one and the same thing over and  over again jars on me. It 
may be the defect of my rationalist mathematical te mperament. But somehow I 
cannot like the repetition. For instance, even Bach 's wonderful music fails to 
appeal to me when the text 'Father, forgive them, t hey know not what they do,' 
is repeated over and over again." 
"But even in mathematics, you have your recurring d ecimals," said Gandhiji 
smiling. 
"But each recurs with a definite new fact," said th e mathematician. 
"Even so," said Gandhiji, "each repetition, or  japa as it is called, has a new 
meaning, each repetition carries you nearer and nea rer to God. This is a 
concrete fact, and I may tell you that you are here  talking to no theorist, but to 
one who has experienced what he says every minute o f his life, so much so that 
it is easier for the life to stop than for this inc essant process to stop. It is a 
definite need of the soul." 
"I quite see it, but for the average man it becomes  an empty formula." 
"I agree, but the best thing is liable to be abused . There is room for any amount 
of hypocrisy, but even hypocrisy is an ode to virtu e. And I know that for ten 
thousand hypocrites, you would find millions of sim ple souls who find their 
solace from it. It is like scaffolding quite essent ial to a building." 
"But," said Pierre Ceresole, "if I may carry the si mile a little further, you agree 
that the scaffolding has to be removed when the bui lding is complete?" 
"Yes, it would be removed when this body is removed ." 
"Why?" 
"Because," said Wilkinson who was closely following  the discourse, "we are 
eternally building." 
"Because," said Gandhiji, "we are eternally strivin g after perfection. God alone 
is perfect, man is never perfect." 
Harijan,  25-5-1935 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15   
07. SPIRITUAL PRACTICES 
To a question by a Missionary friend whether he fol lowed any spiritual 
practices, Gandhiji said: 
"I am a stranger to yogic practices. The practice I  follow is a practice I learnt in 
my childhood from my nurse. I was afraid of ghosts.  She used to say to me: 
'There are no ghosts, but if you are afraid, repeat  Ramanama.' What I learnt in 
my childhood has become a huge thing in my mental f irmament. It is a sun that 
has brightened my darkest hour. A Christian may fin d the same solace from the 
repetition of the name of Jesus, and a Muslim from the name of Allah. 1 All 
these things have the same implications and they pr oduce identical results 
under identical circumstances. Only the repetition must not be a lip expression, 
but part of your very being." 
Hcirijan,  5-12-1936 
 
1 The Allah of Islam is the same as the God of Chri stians and Ishwara of Hindus. Even as 
there are numerous names of God in Hinduism, there are many names of God in Islam. The 
names do not indicate individuality but attributes;  and little man has tried in his humble 
way to describe mighty God by giving Him attributes , though He is above all attributes, 
Indescribable, Immeasurable. -  Harijan,  12-8-1938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16   
08. A SURE AID 
There is no doubt that Ramanama is the surest aid. If recited from the heart, it 
charms away every evil thought; and evil thought go ne, no corresponding action 
is possible. The outward helps are all useless if, the mind is weak. They are 
superfluous if the mind is pure. This must not be t aken to mean that a pure- 
minded man can take all the liberties and still kee p safe. Such a man simply 
will not take any liberties with himself. His whole  life will be an infallible 
testimony to the inward purity. The  Gita  truly says that mind makes the man 
and unmakes him. Milton paraphrases the same though t when he says: "The 
mind is its own place, and in itself can make a Hea ven of Hell, a Hell of 
Heaven." 
Harijan,  12-5-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17   
09. RIDICULING RAMANAMA 
Q.  The Ramanama Bank in Banaras and wearing clothes p rinted with 
Ramanama, is in my opinion, a caricature and even i nsult to Ramanama. Don't 
you think that under these circumstances your telli ng the people to take to 
Ramanama as a sovereign remedy for all ailments is likely to encourage 
ignorance and hypocrisy? Ramanama repeated from the  heart can be a 
sovereign remedy, but, in my opinion, religious edu cation of the right type 
alone can lead to that state. 
A.  You are right. There is so much superstition and h ypocrisy around that one is 
afraid even to do the right thing. But if one gives  way to fear, even truth will 
have to be suppressed. The golden rule is to act fe arlessly upon what one 
believes to be right. Hypocrisy and untruth will go  on in the world. Our doing 
the right thing will result in their decrease, if a ny, never in their increase. The 
danger is that when we are surrounded by falsehood on all sides, we might be 
caught in it and begin to deceive ourselves. We sho uld be careful not to make a 
mistake out of our laziness and ignorance. Constant  vigilance under all 
circumstances is essential. A votary of truth canno t act otherwise. Even an all-
powerful remedy like Ramanama can become useless fo r lack of wakefulness 
and care, and become one more addition to the numer ous current 
superstitions. 
Harijan,  2-6-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18   
10. RAMANAMA AND CHARMS 
There is no connection between Ramanama of my conce ption and  jantar 
mantar  '(charms). I have said that to take Ramanama from the heart means 
deriving help from an incomparable power. The atom bomb is as nothing 
compared with it. This power is capable of removing  all pain. It must, however, 
be admitted that it is easy to say that Ramanama mu st come from the heart, 
but to attain the reality is very difficult. Nevert heless, it is the biggest thing 
man can possess. 
Harijan,  13-10-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19   
11. MY RAMA 
To the question how non-Hindus could take part in R amadhun Gandhiji replied: 
"I laugh within myself when someone objects that Ra ma or the chanting of 
Ramanama is for Hindus only, how can Mussulmans, th erefore, take part in it? Is 
there one God for the Mussulmans and another for th e Hindus, Parsis, or 
Christians? No, there is only one omnipotent, and o mnipresent God. He is 
named variously and we remember Him by the name whi ch is most familiar to 
us. 
"My Rama, the Rama of our prayers, is not the histo rical Rama, the son of 
Dasharatha — the King of Ayodhya. He is the eternal , the unborn, the one 
without a second. Him alone I worship, His aid alon e I seek, and so should you. 1 
He belongs equally to all. I, therefore, see no rea son why a Mussulman or 
anybody should object to taking his name. But he is  in no way bound to 
recognize God as Rama. He may utter to himself Alla h or Khuda so as not to 
mar the harmony of the sound. 
Harijan,  28-4-1946 
 
1 You may say you do not believe in Him. You do not  know that but for His will you could 
not draw a single breath. Call Him Ishwara, Allah, God, Ahura Mazda. His names are as 
innumerable as there are men. He is one without a s econd. He alone is great. There is 
none greater than He. He is timeless, formless, sta inless. Such is my Rama. He alone is my 
Lord and Master. —  Harijan,  24-11-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20   
12. WHO IS RAMA? 
Q.  You have often said that when you talk of Rama you  refer to the Ruler of the 
Universe and not to Rama, the son of Dasharatha. Bu t we find that your 
Ramadhun calls on 'Sita-Rama', 'Raja Rama' and it e nds with 'Victory to Rama, 
the Lord of Sita'. Who is this Rama if not the son of the King Dasharatha? 
A. In Ramadhun 'Raja Rama', 'Sita-Rama' are undoubt edly repealed. But more 
potent than Rama is the Name. Hindu  dharma  is like a boundless ocean teeming 
with priceless gems. The deeper you dive the more t reasures you find. In Hindu 
religion, God is known by various names. Thousands of people look doubtless 
upon Rama and Krishna as historical figures and lit erally believe that God came 
down in person on earth in the form of Rama, the so n of Dasharatha and by 
worshipping him one can attain salvation. The same thing holds good about 
Krishna. History, imagination and truth have got so  inextricably mixed up. It is 
next to impossible to disentangle them. I have acce pted all the names and 
forms attributed to God as symbols connoting one fo rmless, omnipresent Rama. 
To me, therefore, Rama described as the Lord of Sit a, son of Dasharatha, is the 
all-powerful essence whose name inscribed in the he art removes all suffering — 
mental, moral and physical. 
Harijan , 2-6-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21   
13. RAMA — THE SON OF DASHARATHA 
An Arya Samajist writes: 
"How can the Rama whom you believe to be immortal, be Rama, the son of 
Dasharatha and the husband of Sita? 1 often attend your prayer gathering with 
this dilemma always confronting me and because of i t. I am unable to join in 
the Ramadhun. This hurts me. for you are right when  you say that all should 
take part in it. Cannot you make the Ramadhun such that all can join in the 
recital ?" 
I have already explained what I mean by  all.  It applies to all those who can join 
in it from the heart and recite it in tune. The oth ers should remain silent. But 
this is a small matter. The important question is a s to how Rama, the son of 
Dasharatha, can be deemed immortal. This question w as raised by Saint 
Tulsidas himself and answered by him. The answer ca nnot in reality be 
reasoned out. It does not lend itself to intellectu al satisfaction. It is a matter of 
heart speaking to heart. I worshipped Rama as Sita' s husband in the first 
instance, but as my knowledge and experience of Him  grew, my Rama became 
immortal and omnipresent. This does not mean that R ama ceased to be Sita's 
husband. But the meaning of Sita's husband expanded  with the vision of Rama. 
This is how the world evolves. Rama cannot become o mnipresent for the man 
who regards him merely as the son of Dasharatha. Bu t for the believer in Rama 
as God, the father of the omnipresent, Rama also be comes omnipresent—the 
father and son become one. It may be said that this  is all a matter of 
imagination. "To each man according to his faith," is all that I can say. If all 
religions are one at source, we have to synthesize them. Today, they are 
looked upon as separate and that is why we kill eac h other. When we are tired 
of religion, we become atheists and then, apart fro m the little self, nothing, 
not even God, exists. But when we acquire true unde rstanding, the little self 
perishes and God becomes all in all. Rama, then, is  and is not the son of 
Dasharatha, the husband of Sita, the brother of Bha rata and Lakshmana and yet 
is God, the unborn and eternal. All honour, then, t o those who not believing in Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22  Rama as the son of Dasharatha still come to join in  the collective prayers. This 
matter of Rama is one which transcends reason. I ha ve merely tried to give to 
the reader my belief for what it is worth. 
Harijan,  22-9-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23   
14. WHO AND WHERE IS GOD? 
God is not a person. To affirm that he descends to earth every now and again in 
the form of a human being is a partial truth which merely signifies that such a 
person lives near to God. Inasmuch as God is omnipr esent, He dwells within 
every human being and all may, therefore, be said t o be incarnations of Him. 
But this leads us nowhere. Rama. Krishna, etc. are called incarnations of God 
because we attribute divine qualities to them. In t ruth they are creations of 
man's imagination. Whether they actually lived or n ot does not affect the 
picture of them in men's minds. The Rama and Krishn a of history often present 
difficulties which have to be overcome by all manne r of arguments. 
The truth is that God is the force. He is the essen ce of life. He is pure and 
undefiled consciousness. He is eternal. And yet. st rangely enough, all are not 
able to derive either benefit from or shelter in th e all- pervading living 
presence. 
Electricity is a powerful force. Not all can benefi t from it. It can only be 
produced by following certain laws. It is a lifeles s force. Man can utilize it if he 
labours hard enough to acquire the knowledge of its  laws. 
The living force which we call God can similarly be  found if we know and follow 
His law leading to the discovery of Him in us. But it is self-evident that to find 
out God's law requires far harder labour. The law m ay, in one word, be termed  
brahmacharya.  The straight way to cultivate  brahmacharya  is Ramanama. I can 
say this from experience. Devotees and sages like T ulsidas have shown us this 
royal path. No one need give undue importance to my  own experience. Perhaps 
1 am right in saying that the potency of Ramanama w as brought vividly home to 
me in Uruli Kanchan. It was there that I asserted t hat the surest remedy for all 
our ills was Ramanama. He who can make full use of it can show powerful 
results with very little outside effort. 
Following this line of thought I can say with convi ction that the orthodox aids to  
brahmacharya pale into insignificance before Ramanama, when this  name is Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  enthroned in the heart. Then and then only do we re alize its transcendent 
beauty and power. 
Harijan,  22-6-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25   
15. RAMANAMA AND NATURE CURE 
My conception of Nature Cure, like everything else,  has undergone a 
progressive evolution. And for years I have believe d that if a person is filled 
with the presence of God and has thus attained the stale of dispassion, he can 
surmount handicaps against long life. I have come t o the conclusion, based on 
observation and scriptural reading, that when a man  comes to that complete 
living faith in the Unseen Power and has become fre e from passion, the body 
undergoes internal transformation. This does not co me about by mere wish. It 
needs constant vigilance and practice. In spite of both, unless God's grace 
descends upon one, human effort comes to naught. 
Press Report,  12-6-1945 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26   
16. NATURE CURE TREATMENT 
Nature Cure treatment means that treatment which be fits man. By "man" is 
meant not merely man as animal, but as a creature p ossessing, in addition to 
his body, both mind and soul. For such a being Rama nama is the truest Nature 
Cure treatment. It is an unfailing remedy. The expr ession Ramabana or 
infallible cure is derived from it. Nature, too, in dicates that for man it is the 
worthy remedy. No matter what the ailment from whic h a man may be 
suffering, recitation of Ramanama from the heart is  the sure cure. God has 
many names. Each person can choose the name that ap peals most to him. 
Ishwara, Allah, Khuda, God mean the same. But the r ecitation must not be 
parrotlike, it must be born of faith of which endea vour will be some evidence. 
What should the endeavour consist of? Man should se ek out and be content to 
confine the means of cure to the five elements of w hich the body is composed, 
i.e., earth, water,  akash,  sun and air. Of course, Ramanama must be the 
invariable accompaniment. If in spite of this, deat h supervenes, we may not 
mind. On the contrary, it should be welcomed. Scien ce has not so far 
discovered any recipe for making the body immortal.  Immortality is an 
attribute of the soul. That is certainly imperishab le, but it is man's duty to try 
to express its purity. 
If we accept the above reasoning, it will automatic ally limit the means 
permissible under Nature Cure. And man is thereby s aved from all the 
paraphernalia of big hospitals and eminent doctors,  etc. The large majority of 
persons in the world can never afford these. Why, t hen, should the few desire 
what the many cannot have? 
Harijatu  3-3-1946 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27   
17. RAMANAMA—THE INFALLIBLE REMEDY  
Shri Ganeshshastri Joshi,  Vaidya,  tells me after reading my article on Nature 
Cure in the  Harijan  of 3rd March, 1946, that in  Ayurveda,  too, there is ample 
testimony to the efficacy of Ramanama as a cure for  all disease. Nature Cure 
occupies the place of honour and in it Ramanama is the most important. When 
Charaka, Vagbhata and other giants of medicine in a ncient India wrote, the 
popular name for God was not Rama but Vishnu. I mys elf have been a devotee 
of Tulsidas from my childhood and have, therefore, always worshipped God as 
Rama. But I know that if beginning with  Omkar,  one goes through the entire 
gamut of God's names current in all climes, all cou ntries and all languages, the 
result is the same. He and His Law are one. To obse rve His Law is, therefore, 
the best form of worship. A man who becomes one wit h the Law does not stand 
in need of vocal recitation of the name. In other w ords, an individual with 
whom contemplation on God has become as natural as breathing is so filled 
with God's spirit that knowledge or observance of t he Law becomes second 
nature, as it were, with him. Such an one needs no other treatment. 
The question, then, arises as to why, in spite of h aving this prince of remedies 
at hand, we know so little about it; and why even t hose who know, do not 
remember Him or remember Him only by lip service, n ot from the heart. 
Parrot-like repetition of God's name signifies fail ure to recognize Him as the 
panacea for all ills. 
How can they? This sovereign remedy is not administ ered by doctors,  vaidyas, 
hakims  or any other medicinal practitioners. These have n o faith in it. If they 
were to admit that the spring of the Holy Ganges co uld be found in every home, 
their very occupation or means of livelihood would go. Therefore, they must 
perforce rely on their powders and potions as infal lible remedies. Not only do 
these provide bread for the doctor, but the patient , too, seems to feel 
immediate relief. If a medical practitioner can get  a few persons to say: "So 
and so gave me a powder and I was cured," his busin ess is established. Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  Nor, it must be borne in mind, would it really be o f any use for doctors to 
prescribe God's name to patients unless they themse lves were conscious of its 
miraculous powers. Ramanama is no copybook maxim. I t is something, that has 
to be realized through experience. One who has had personal experience alone 
can prescribe it, not any other. 
The  Vaidyaraj  has copied out for me four verses. Out of these, C haraka's is the 
simplest and most apt. 
It means that if one were to obtain mastery over ev en one out of the thousand 
names of Vishnu, all ailments would vanish: 
िव᭬णु सहᳫमूधाᭅनं चराचरपᳲत िवभुम्। 
᭭तुवन् नामसहᳫेण ᭔वरान् सवाᭅन् ᳞पोहित॥ 
 
Harijan,  24-3-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29   
18. RAMANAMA IN NATURE CURE 
In the armoury of the nature curist, Ramanama is th e most potent weapon. Let 
no one wonder at it. A noted  ayurvedic  physician told me the other day : 'All 
my life I have been administering drugs. But since you have prescribed 
Ramanama as a cure for physical ailments, it has oc curred to me that what you 
say has, too, the authority of Vagbhata and Charaka .' The recitation of 
Ramanama as a remedy for spiritual ailments is as o ld as the hills. But the 
greater includes the less. And my claim is that the  recitation of Ramanama is a 
sovereign remedy for our physical ailments also. A Nature-Cure man won't tell 
the patient: 'Invite me and I shall cure you of you r ailment.' He will only tell 
about the all healing principle that is in every be ing and how one can cure 
oneself by evoking it and making it an active force  in his life. If India could 
realize the power of that principle, not only would  we be free but we would be 
a land of healthy individuals, too—not the land of epidemics and ill-health that 
we are today. 
The potency of Ramanama is, however, subject to cer tain conditions and 
limitations. Ramanama is not like black magic. If s omeone suffers from surfeit 
and wants to be cured of its after-effects so that he can again indulge himself 
at the table, Ramanama is not for him. Ramanama can  he used only for a good, 
never for an evil end, or else thieves and robbers would be the greatest 
devotees. Ramanama is for the pure in heart and for  those who want to attain 
purity, and remain pure. It can never be a means fo r self- indulgence. The 
remedy for surfeit is fasting, not prayer. Prayer c an come in only when fasting 
has done its work. It can make fasting easy and bea rable. Similarly, the taking 
of Ramanama will be a meaningless farce when at the  same time you are 
drugging your system with medicines. A doctor who u ses his talent to pander to 
the vices of his patient degrades himself and his p atient. 1 What worse 
degradation can there be for man than that instead of regarding his body as an 
instrument of worshipping his Maker, he should make  it the object of adoration 
and waste money like water to keep it going anyhow?  Ramanama, on the other Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  hand, purifies while it cures, and, therefore, it e levates. Therein lies its use as 
well as its limitation. 
Harijan,  7-4-1946 
 
1 We want healers of souls rather than of bodies. T he multiplicity of hospitals and medical 
men is no sign of civilization. The less we and oth ers pamper our body the better for us 
and the world. —  Young India, 29-9-1927 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31   
19. SOVEREIGN REMEDY 
"Inter alia  you have said the following: 
" 'No matter what the ailment from which a man may be suffering, 
recitation of Ramanama from the heart is the sure c ure.' (Harijan,  3- 3-
1946) 
" 'Man should seek out and be content to confine th e means of cure to the 
five elements of which the body is composed, i.e.. earth, water,  akash.  
sun and air.' ( Harijan , 3-3-1946) 
" 'And my claim is that the recitation of Ramanama is a sovereign remedy 
for our physical ailments also.' ( Harijan , 7-4-1946) 
"At first, when you introduced this new note in the  system of nature cure, 
I thought you were merely putting in other words a kind of psycho-
therapy, or 'Christian Science' based on faith. The se have their place in 
every system of medicine. I interpreted my first qu otation above in that 
light. The second sentence quoted above is difficul t to grasp. After all, it 
is physically impossible for medicines to be compos ed of anything but the 
five elements to which you refer, and which you say  must be the sole 
means of cure. 
"If faith is what you insist on, I have no quarrel;  it is necessary for the 
patient to co-operate in getting well also by faith . But it is, difficult to 
accept that faith alone would cure our physical ail ments also. Two years 
ago, my little daughter was struck by infantile par alysis: it was the most 
modern treatment that saved the child from becoming  a cripple for life. 
You would agree that it would not avail to ask a tw o and a half year old 
child to recite Ramanama to be rid of infantile par alysis: and I would like 
to see you persuade any mother to do the recitation  (and recitation alone) 
on her child's behalf. 
"The authority from Charaka that you have quoted in  the issue of March 
24th. leaves me cold; you have taught me not to acc ept anything, 
however ancient and however authoritative it may be , if it does not 
appeal to my heart." Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32  Thus writes a teacher of youth. Ramanama has the fl avour of faith-healing and 
Christian Science; 1 yet, it is quite distinct from them. Recitation of  Ramanama 
is a mere symbol of the reality for which it stands . If one is knowingly filled 
with the presence of God within, one is that moment  free from all ailment—
physical, mental or moral. That we do not see the t ype in life is not to disprove 
the truth of the statement. My argument is admitted ly useless for those who 
have no faith in God. 
Christian Scientists, faith-healers and psychothera pists may, if they will, bear 
witness somewhat to the truth underlying Ramanama. I cannot take the reader 
a long way with me through reason. How is one to pr ove to a person who has 
never tasted sugar, that sugar is sweet, except by asking him to taste it? 
I must not reiterate here the conditions attendant upon the heart recitation of 
the sacred syllable. 
The authority of Charaka is good for those who have  some belief in Ramanama. 
Others may dismiss the authority from their conside ration. 
Children are irresponsible. Ramanama is undoubtedly  not for them. They are 
helpless beings at the mercy of their parents. They  show what tremendous 
responsibility parents bear to them and society. I have known parents who have 
trifled with their children's diseases even to the extent of trusting them to their 
(the parents') recitation of Ramanama. 
Lastly, the argument about everything, even medicin es, being from  pancha 
mahabhutas  betrays a hasty confusion of thought. I have only to point it out to 
remove it. 
Harijan.  28-4-1946 
 
1 During Lord Lothian's talk on the last day he men tioned Christian Science and asked for 
Gandhiji's opinion thereon. "Since man is inseparab ly related to God," he said, "in 
proportion as he recognizes the indissoluble relati onship to God, he is free from sin and 
from disease. That is how faith heals. God is Truth  and Health and Love." Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  "And He is Physician, too." said Gandhiji. "I have no quarrel with Christian Science. I 
accept the doctrine in toto; but I do not believe i n many Christian Scientists. It is one 
thing to have an intellectual belief and another th ing to have a heart-grasp of the truth. I 
can quite endorse the statement that all illness is  sin, that when a man has even a cough 
it is due to sin. My blood pressure is the result o f strain and overwork. But why should 1 
have overworked myself? All overwork and hurry is s in. And I know only too well that it 
was perfectly possible for me to avoid all doctors.  What I do not understand about 
Christian Scientists is that they make altogether t oo much of physical health and disease." 
 
"So long as one recoonizcs that disease is sin. it is all right," said Lord Lothian. "Even the 
Gita says that one has to renounce the fruit of the  five senses which is Life and Love and 
Health." 
"I have put it somewhat differently," said Gandhiji . "God is Truth, which is the same thing 
as God is Life. And, then, I have said that Truth a nd Love are faces of the same coin, and 
Love is the means to find Truth which is the end." — Harijan, 29-1-1938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34   
20. AYURVEDA  AND NATURE CURE 
I have no doubt whatsoever that the spread of Raman ama and pure living are 
the best and cheapest preventives of disease. The t ragedy is that doctors, 
hakims  and  vaidyas  do not make use of Ramanama as the sovereign of cu res. 
There is no place given to it in current  ayurvedic  literature, except it be in the 
shape of a charm which will drive people further in to the well of superstition. 
Ramanama has, in fact, no connection with superstit ion. It is Nature's supreme 
law. Whoever observes it, is free from disease and vice versa. The same law 
which keeps one free from disease, applies also to its cure. An apt question is 
as to why a man who recites Ramanama regularly and leads a pure life should 
ever fall ill. Man is by nature imperfect. A though tful man strives after 
perfection, but never attains it. He stumbles on th e way, however, unwittingly. 
The whole of God's law is embodied in a pure life. The first thing is to realize 
one's limitations. It should be obvious that the mo ment one transgresses those 
limits, one falls ill. Thus, a balanced diet eaten in accordance with needs gives 
one freedom from disease. How is one to know what i s the proper diet for one? 
Many such enigmas can be imagined. The purport of i t all is that everyone 
should be his own doctor and find out his limitatio ns. The man who does so will 
surely live up to 125. 
Doctor friends claim that they do nothing more than  investigating the laws and 
act accordingly and that, therefore, they are the b est Nature Cure men. 
Everything can be explained away in this manner. Al l I want to say is that 
anything more than Ramanama is really contrary to t rue Nature Cure. The more 
one recedes from this central principle, the farthe r away one goes from Nature 
Cure. Following this line of thought, I limit Natur e Cure to the use of the five 
elements. But a  vaidya  who goes beyond this and uses such herbs, as grow or 
can be grown in his neighbourhood, purely for servi ce of the sick and not for 
money, may claim to be a Nature Cure man. But where  are such  vaidyas  to be 
found? Today most of them are engaged in making mon ey. They do no research Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35  work and it is because of their greed and mental la ziness that the science of  
ayurveda  is at a low ebb. 
Harijan,  19-5-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36   
21. AT URULI KANCHAN 
Gandhiji presented Ramanama to the village folk ass embled at Uruli Kanchan as 
a natural Therapeutic No. I for the cure of bodily ailments: "In the song that we 
have just sung the devotee says, 'O Hari, You are t he reliever of the people's 
distress.' The promise here is universal. It is not  qualified or restricted to any 
particular kind of ailment." He told them of the co nditions of success. The 
efficacy of Ramanama would depend on whether it was  or was not backed by a 
living faith. "If you are subject to anger, eat and  sleep for indulgence, not 
solely for sustenance, you do not know the meaning of Ramanama. Your 
recitation of it is mere lip service. Ramanama, to be efficacious, must absorb 
your entire being during its recitation and express  itself in your whole life." 
 
First Patients 
Patients began to come in from the next morning. Th ere were about thirty of 
them. Gandhiji examined five or six of them and pre scribed to them all, more 
or less, the same treatment with slight variations,  according to the nature of 
each case, i.e., recitation of Ramanama, sun bath, friction and hip baths, a 
simple eliminative diet of milk, buttermilk, fruit and fruit juices with plenty of 
clean fresh water to drink. "It has truly been obse rved," he explained, at the 
evening prayer gathering, "that all mental and phys ical ailments are due to one 
common cause. It is, therefore, but natural that th ere should be a common 
remedy for them, too. There is a unity of cure, as ther is in disease. The  
Shastras  say so. Therefore, I prescribed Ramanama and almos t the same 
treatment to all the patients who came to me this m orning. But we have a 
knack of explaining away the  Shcistras  in life, when they do not suit our 
convenience. We have deluded ourselves into the bel ief that the  Shastras  arc 
meant only for the benefit of the soul in the life to come, that the end of  
dharma  is to acquire merit after death. I do not share th at view. If  dharma  has 
no practical use in this life, it has none for me i n the next. Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37  "There is hardly anyone in this world who is comple tely free from ailment 
whether bodily or mental. For some of these, there is no earthly cure. For 
instance, Ramanama cannot perform the miracle of re storing to you a lost limb. 
But it can perform the still greater miracle of hel ping you to enjoy an ineffable 
peace 1 in spite of the loss while you live, and rob death  of its sting and the 
grave its victory at the journey's end. Since death  must come soon or late to 
everyone, why should one worry over the time?" 
He then proceeded to give them his first discourse on Nature Cure principles. 
The following is its gist: 
 
Nature Cure Expounded 
"Man's physical body is composed of five natural el ements, i.e., air, water, 
earth, fire or  tejas  (the energizing principle) and ether (space). The soul 
quickens it. 
"The most essential of these is air. Man can live w ithout food for several weeks, 
without water for sometime, but without air he cann ot live for more than a few 
minutes. God has, therefore, made air universally a vailable. Shortages of food 
or water there be at times, but of air never. In sp ite of it, we foolishly deprive 
ourselves of God's blessing of fresh and pure air b y sleeping, within doors, with 
doors and windows shut. One may shut the doors and windows if he is afraid of 
thieves at night. But why should one shut oneself u p? 
"To get fresh air, one must sleep in the open. But it is no good sleeping in open 
only to breathe dust and dirt-laden air. The place where you sleep must be free 
from both. Some people cover their faces as a prote ction against dust and coal. 
It is a remedy worse than the disease. Then, there is the evil habit of breathing 
through the mouth. Mouth is the organ of ingestion.  It is not the organ of 
breathing. The air passing through the nasal passag es is filtered and purified 
and at the same time warmed up before it enters the  lungs. 
"Anyone who fouls the air by spitting about careles sly, throwing refuse and 
rubbish or otherwise dirtying the ground, sins agai nst man and Nature. Man's Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  body is the temple of God. Anyone who fouls the air  that is to enter that 
temple desecrates it. He takes the name of Rama in vain." 
Harijan,  7-1-1946 
 
1 There is no greater spell-binder of peace than th e name of God.  
- Press Report,  10-1-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39   
22. NATURE CURE IN KANCHANGAON 
Nature Cure consists of two parts. Firstly, to cure  diseases by taking the name 
of God or Ramanama and secondly, to prevent illness  by the inculcation of right 
and hygienic living. The report from the village sa ys that the inhabitants are co-
operating with them in keeping the village clean. I  hold that where the rules of 
personal, domestic and public sanitation are strict ly observed and due care is 
taken in the matter of diet and exercise, there sho uld be no occasion for illness 
or disease. Where there is absolute purity, inner a nd outer, illness becomes 
impossible. If the village people could but underst and this, they would not need 
doctors,  hakims  or  vaidyas.  
In Kanchangaon, there are hardly any cows. That is unfortunate. There are 
some she-buffaloes. But all the evidence that has c ome to me so far shows that 
buffalo's milk is no match for cow's in the health-  giving quality. The  vaidyas  
specially recommend cow's milk for patients. Milk i s an absolute necessity for 
health. 
Nature Cure implies an ideal mode of life and that,  in its turn, presupposes 
ideal living conditions in towns and villages. The name of God is, of course, the 
hub round which the Nature Cure system revolves. 
Harijan,  26-5-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40   
23. NATURE CURE FOR THE POOR 
Nature Cure means a change for the better in one's outlook on life itself. It 
means regulation of one's life in accordance with t he laws of health. It is not a 
matter of taking free medicine from the hospital or  for fees. 
A man who takes free treatment from the hospital ac cepts charity. The man 
who accepts Nature Cure never begs. Self-help enhan ces self-respect. He takes 
steps to cure himself by eliminating poisons from t he system and takes 
precautions against falling ill in the future. 
The central feature of Nature Cure treatment is Ram anama. But it must come 
from the heart, if it is to be a remedy for all one 's ailments. 
Right diet and balanced diet are necessary. Today o ur villages are as bankrupt 
as we are ourselves. To produce enough vegetables, fruits and milk in the 
villages, is an essential part of the Nature Cure s cheme. Time spent on this 
should not be considered a waste. It is bound to be nefit all the villagers and 
ultimately the whole of India. 
Harijan,  2-6-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41   
24. NATURE CURE AND MODERN TREATMENT 
My Nature Cure is designed solely for villagers and  villages. Therefore, there is 
no place in it for the microscope, X-rays and simil ar things. Nor is there room in 
Nature Cure for medicines, such as quinine, emetine  and penicillin. Personal 
hygiene and healthy living are of primary importanc e. And these should suffice. 
If everyone could achieve perfection in this art, t here could be no disease. And, 
while obeying all the laws of Nature in order to cu re illness, if it does come, 
the sovereign remedy ever lies in Ramanama. But thi s cure through Ramanama 
cannot become universal in the twinkling of an eye.  To carry conviction to the 
patient, the physician has to be a living embodimen t of the power of 
Ramanama. Meantime, all that can possibly be had fr om the five agencies of 
Nature must be taken and used. They are earth, wate r, ether, fire and wind. 
This, to my mind, is the limit of Nature Cure. Ther efore, my experiment in 
Uruli Kanchan consists in teaching the villagers, h ow to live clean and healthy 
lives and in trying to cure the sick through the pr oper use of the five agencies. 
If necessary, curative herbs that grow locally, may  be used. Wholesome and 
balanced diet is, of course, an indispensable part of Nature Cure. 
Harijan , 11-8-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42   
25. LEARNING FROM EUROPE 
The tendency of looking to the West in order to mak e progress in whatever we 
do should be checked. If we have to go to the West to learn Nature Cure, it 
cannot be of much use to India. Nature Cure is a th ing which everyone can 
practise in the home. The advice of Nature Cure exp erts should not be 
necessary for all time. It is such a simple thing t hat everyone can learn it. If we 
have to go to Europe to learn to recite Ramanama, i t simply will not do. 
Ramanama is the very foundation of Nature Cure of m y conception. Nor should 
it be necessary to go across the seas in order to l earn the use of earth, water, 
ether, sun and air. This is self-evident. Whatever other knowledge is required 
in this direction can be had in our villages. For i nstance, if herbs are used, they 
must be village herbs.  Ayurveda teachers know all about them. If some  
ayurvedic physicians are scoundrels, they cannot become good men and 
servants of the people by going abroad. The knowled ge of anatomy and 
physiology has come from the West. It is very usefu l and necessary for all 
physicians. But there are plenty of means of learni ng it in our own country. In 
short, whatever useful contribution to knowledge ha s been made by the West, 
it has reached everywhere and can be learnt everywh ere. I might add here that 
the knowledge of anatomy and physiology is not esse ntial for learning Nature 
Cure. 
The writings of Kuhne, Just and Father Kneip, are s imple, popular and useful 
for all. It is our duty to read them. Practically e very Nature Cure physician 
knows something about them. Nature Cure has not bee n taken to the villages so 
far. We have not thought deeply and no one has thou ght of it in terms of the 
millions. This is just the beginning. No one can sa y where we shall stand in the 
end. As in all great and good enterprises, sacrific e and dedication are required 
to make this successful. Instead of looking up to t he West, we should turn the 
searchlight inwards. 
Harijan , 2-6-1946 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43   
26. LAWS OF NATURE 
Q.  I have been repeating Ramanama according to your a dvice and I am getting 
better. I must add that the medical treatment for t uberculosis is also being 
followed. You have said that eating little and eati ng the right food enables a 
man to be healthy and promotes longevity. I have ob served the rule about 
eating sparely for the last twenty-five years. Why should I have fallen a prey to 
tuberculosis? Would you say, I should attribute thi s ill luck to some evil deed in 
this life or in the previous one? 
You say a man can live up to 125 years. Then, why s hould God have carried 
away Mahadevbhai, who was so useful to you? He obse rved the rule of eating 
moderately and having a balanced diet and he served  you as his God. Why did 
he fall a prey to high blood- pressure? Why did Ram akrishna Paramahamsa, who 
is looked upon as an incarnation of God, fall a pre y to cancer, as deadly a 
disease as tuberculosis? Why was he not able to fig ht it successfully? 
A.  I have been expounding the rules of maintaining he alth as I know them. 
Spare and balanced diet may not be the same for eve rybody. It can be best 
worked out by the individual for himself through pr oper reading and careful 
thought. But that does not mean that the individual  cannot make mistakes or 
that his or her knowledge is complete. That is why life has been called a 
laboratory. One should learn from the experience of  others and go forward and, 
if he is not successful he should not blame others or even himself. One should 
not be too ready to find fault with the rule, but i f after careful thought, one 
comes to the conclusion that a certain rule is wron g, he should be able to tell 
the right one and declare it. 
So far as your own case is concerned, there may be several causes leading to 
your illness. Who can say whether you have made the  right use of the five 
'powers'1 in your own case? So long as I believe in the laws  of Nature as 1 know 
them, I have to say that you must have erred somewh ere. As for Mahadev and 
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, to feel that even they mus t have erred somehow is 
fitter than to say that the laws are wrong. These r ules are not my creation. Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44  They are the laws of Nature according to experience d men. I believe in them 
and try to live up to my belief. Man is after all a n imperfect creature. How can 
he know the whole truth? That the allopathic doctor s do not believe them or, if 
they do, they do so in a different sense, does not impress me. What I have said, 
does not and should not in any way, detract from th e greatness of the 
individuals mentioned. 
Harijan , 4-8-1946 
 
1 Earth, water, ether, fire and wind 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45   
27. FAITH CURE v. RAMANAMA 
Here is fine banter from a friend: 
"I wonder whether this Nature Cure has any close re lation to what is 
being called Faith Cure. Of course, one should have  faith in treatment. 
But there are some exclusive Faith Cures, for examp le, smallpox, 
stomach pain, etc. For smallpox, as you might know,  especially in the 
South, no treatment is given but it is considered D ivine Play. We do  
poojas  to Goddess Mariamma and it is almost miraculous to  see most of 
the cases come out successful. For stomach pain, ev en chronic cases, 
many make vows before the deity at Thirupathi; and finding themselves 
cured, fulfil their ablutions and other obligations . To give you a fitting 
example, my mother had the same pain and after her visit to Thirupathi, 
she is now free from that disease. 
"Will you kindly enlighten me on this and may I ask  why people should not 
have such faith in Nature Cure also and save the re curring expenditure to 
the doctors who, as Chaucer said, maintain a fine c onspiracy with the 
apothecary to keep a patient always a patient, whic h is part of the 
natural order of things." 
The examples that have been quoted are neither Natu re Cure, nor yet 
Ramanama which I have included in it. But they do s how how Nature cures 
without any treatment in many cases. They are undou btedly cases which show 
the part superstition plays in Indian life. Ramanam a, which is the centre of 
Nature Cure, is the enemy of superstition. Unscrupu lous men will abuse 
Ramanama as they will any other thing or system. Me re lip recitation of 
Ramanama has nothing to do with cure. Faith Cure, i f I know it correctly, is 
blind cure such as the friend describes and thereby  ridicules the living name of 
the living God. The latter is not a figment of one' s imagination. It has to come 
from the heart. It is conscious belief in God and a  knowledge of His Law that 
make perfect cure possible without any further aid.  That Law is that a perfect 
mind is responsible for perfect health of the body.  A perfect mind comes from 
a perfect heart, not the heart known by a doctor's stethoscope, but the heart Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46  which is the seat of God. It is claimed that realiz ation of God in the heart 
makes it impossible for an impure or an idle though t to cross the mind. Disease 
is impossible where there is purity of thought. Suc h a state may be difficult to 
attain. But the first step in the ascent to health is taken with its recognition. 
The next is taken when the corresponding attempt is  made. This radical 
alteration in one's life is naturally accompanied b y the observance of all other 
Nature's laws hitherto discovered by man. One canno t play with them and claim 
to have a pure heart. It can be said with justice t hat possession of a pure heart 
should do equally well without Ramanama. Only, I kn ow no other way of 
attaining purity. And it is the way trodden by the sages of old all over the 
world. They were men of God, not superstitious men or charlatans. 
If this is Christian Science, I have no quarrel wit h it. The way of Ramanama is 
not my discovery. It is probably much older than th e Christian era. 
A correspondent questions whether Ramanama avoids b ona fide surgical 
operations. Of course, it does not. It cannot resto re a leg that is cut off in an 
accident. In many cases surgical operations are unn ecessary. Where they are 
required, they should be performed. But a man of Go d will not worry if a limb 
is lost. Recitation of Ramanama is neither an empir ical method nor a make-
shift. 
Harijan , 9-6-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47   
28. CONFUSION ABOUT RAMANAMA  
A friend writes: 
"Regarding your suggested cure of malaria by Ramana ma, my problem is that I 
do not understand how to rely on a spiritual force for my physical ailments. I 
am also not sure if I deserve to be cured and if I am justified in praying for my 
salvation, when there is so much misery amongst my countrymen. The day I 
understand Ramanama, I shall pray for their salvati on. Otherwise, 1 would feel 
more selfish than I do today." 
This is from a friend whom I believe to be an earne st seeker of truth. I take 
public notice of his difficulty, as it is typical o f that of many like him. 
Spiritual force is like any other force at the serv ice of man. Apart from the fact 
that, it has been used for physical ailments for ag es, with more or less success, 
it would be intrinsically wrong' not to use it, if it can be successfully used for 
the cure of physical ailments. For, man is both mat ter and spirit, each acting 
on and affecting the other. If you get rid of malar ia by taking quinine, without 
thinking of the millions who do not get it, why sho uld you refuse to use the 
remedy which is within you, because millions will n ot use it through their 
ignorance? May you not be clean and well because mi llions of others will not be 
so, ignorantly or, maybe even cussedly ? If you wil l not be clean out of false 
notions of philanthropy, you will deny yourself the  duty of serving the very 
millions by remaining dirty and ill. Surely refusal  to be spiritually well or clean 
is worse than the refusal to be physically clean an d well. 
Salvation is nothing more and nothing less than bei ng well in every way. Why 
should you deny it for yourself, if thereby you sho w the way to others and 
beyond showing it, actually serve them in addition by reason of your fitness? 
But you are wholly selfish, when you take penicilli n in order to get well, 
although you have the certain knowledge that the ot hers cannot get it. 
The confusion lying behind my correspondent's argum ent is obvious. Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48  What, however, is true is that the taking of a pill  or pills of quinine is much 
easier than gaining the knowledge of the use of Ram anama. It involves much 
effort as against the mere cost of buying quinine p ills. 
The effort is worth making for the sake of the mill ions, in whose name and on 
whose behalf my correspondent will shut Rama out of  his heart. 
Harijan , 1-9-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49   
29. A HARD CASE 
With reference to an Ashram worker who got mentally  deranged and became 
violent, and so had to be put in confinement, Gandh iji said: 
"He is a fine worker. After his recovery last year,  he looked after the garden 
and kept the hospital accounts. He worked diligentl y and was happy in his 
work. Then, he got malaria and was given a quinine injection because injection 
works quicker. He says the injection has gone to hi s head and is responsible for 
his mental affection. While I was working in my roo m this morning, I found him 
wandering to and fro outside, shouting and gesticul ating. I went out to him and 
walked with him. He was quieted. But the moment I l eft him, he became 
uncontrollable again. He gets violent, too, and lis tens to no one. So, he had to 
be sent to jail. 
"It has naturally hurt me to think that one of our workers should be sent to jail. 
I may be asked: 'What about your Ramanama which you  have claimed to be a 
cure-all?' Even in the face of this failure, let me  reiterate that my faith remains 
intact. Ramanama can never fail. The failure only m eans a lack in us. We must 
seek the cause of failure within us." 
Harijan , 1-9-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50   
30. TOWARDS REALIZATION 
What is the mark of him who has Rama enthroned in h is heart? If we do not 
know this, there is danger of Ramanama being much m isinterpreted. Some 
misinterpretation is already in existence. Many spo rt rosaries and put the 
sacred mark on the forehead and vainly babble His n ame. It may well be asked 
whether I am not adding to the current hypocrisy by  continued insistence on 
Ramanama. I must not be deterred by such foreboding s. Silence thus brought 
about is harmful. The living voice of silence needs  to be backed by prolonged 
heartfelt practice. In the absence of such natural silence, we must try to know 
the marks of him who has Rama in his heart. 
A devotee of Rama may be said to be the same as the  steadfast one 
(sthitapragnya ) of the Gita. If one goes a little deeper it will be seen that a 
true devotee of God faithfully obeys the five eleme ntal forces of Nature. If he 
so obeys, he will not fall ill. If perchance he doe s, he will cure himself with the 
aid of the elements. It is not for the dweller in t he body to get the body cured 
anyhow — he who believes that he is nothing but bod y will naturally wander to 
the ends of the earth in order to cure the body of its ills. But he who realizes 
that the soul is something apart from, though in th e body, that it is 
imperishable in contrast to the perishable body, wi ll not be perturbed nor 
mourn if the elements fail. On the contrary he will  welcome death as a friend. 
He will become his own heaier instead of seeking fo r medical men. He will live 
in the consciousness of the soul within and look to  the care, first and last, of 
the indweller. 
Such a man will take God's name with every breath. His Rama will be awake 
even whilst the body is asleep. Rama will always be  with him in whatever he 
does. The real death for such a devoted man will be  the loss of this sacred 
companionship. 
As an aid to keeping his Rama with him, he will tak e what the five elements 
have to give him. That is to say he will employ the  simplest and easiest way of 
deriving all the benefit he can from earth, air, wa ter, sunlight and ether. This Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51  aid is not complementary to Ramanama. It is but a m eans of its realization. 
Ramanama does not in fact require any aid. But to c laim belief in Ramanama 
and at the same time to run to doctors do not go ha nd in hand. 
A friend versed in religious lore who read my remar ks on Ramanama some time 
ago wrote to say that Ramanama is an alchemy such a s can transform the body. 
The conservation of the vital energy has been liken ed to accumulated wealth, 
but it is in the power of Ramanama alone to make it  a running stream of ever-
increasing spiritual strength ultimately making a f all impossible. 
Just as the body cannot exist without blood, so the  soul needs the matchless 
and pure strength of faith. This strength can renov ate the weakness of all man's 
physical organs. That is why it is said that when R amanama is enshrined in the 
heart, it means the rebirth of man. This law applie s to the young, the old, man 
and woman alike. 
This belief is to be found in the West too. Christi an Sciences give a glimpse of 
it. But India needs no outside support for a belief  which has been handed down 
to her people from time immemorial. 
Hardwar. 21-6-'47 
Harijan , 29-8-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52   
31 FROM AFTER-PRAYER DISCOURSES 
Ramanama — Its Laws and Its Discipline 
Ramanama, said Gandhiji, could help a man in ill he alth, but it had its laws and 
its discipline. No one could gourmandize, say "Rama  Rama" and blame Gandhi if 
he got stomach-ache. Ramanama had its proper uses. No man could utter 
Ramanama, indulge in looting and hope to attain sal vation. It was only for 
those who were prepared to observe proper disciplin e for the sake of self-
purification. 
— Bombay : 15-3-'46 
 
Most Effective Remedy 
Addressing the prayer meeting at Uruli Kanchan, Gan dhiji said that Ramadhun 
was the most effective remedy for physical and ment al ailments, and that no 
doctor or  vaidya  could promise cure by medicine. "But," he added, " God will 
certainly relieve you of your pains and worries if you pray to Him." But for the 
prayer to be effective, one must participate in Ram adhun whole-heartedly and 
then only one would feel peace and happiness. 
There were other conditions also which one had to f ulfill. One must take proper 
food, have sufficient sleep and not give vent to on e's anger. Above all, one 
must live in harmony with Nature and follow its pri nciples. 
— Poona : 22-3-'46 
 
Preparation Needed 
Addressing the gathering after prayers, Gandhiji re lated that honest men and 
women had said to him that with all their efforts t hey could not say that 
Ramanama came to them from the heart. His reply to them was that they must 
go on and have infinite patience. A boy required at  least 16 years' hard study in Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53  order to become a doctor. How much more time must b e necessary to establish 
Ramanama in the heart! 
- New Delhi : 20-4-'46 
 
Purity Inner and Outer 
A man who repeated Ramanama and thereby cleansed hi s inner being could not 
tolerate the filth outside. If millions took to Ram anama in real earnest, there 
would be no riots, which were a social malady, and there would be no illness. 
The Kingdom of Heaven would come on earth. 
- New Delhi : 21-4-'46 
 
Misuse of Ramanama 
In his, after-prayer discourse, Gandhiji again dwel t on the subject of Nature 
Cure or the cure of ailments spiritual, mental and physical, by the application 
principally of Ramanama. A correspondent had writte n to him, pointing out how 
some people superstitiously wrote Ramanama on their  clothes so as to wear it 
'next to the heart'! Others wrote Ramanama millions  of times minutely on a 
piece of paper which they afterwards cut up into sm all bits and swallowed so 
that they could claim that Ramanama had entered int o them! There were 
people who thought that he was self-deluded and was  trying to delude others 
by adding one more to the thousands of superstition s which filled this 
superstition-ridden land. He had no answer to such criticism He only said to 
himself, what did it matter if truth was abused and  fraud practised in its name 
by others? So long as he was sure of his truth, he could not help proclaiming it 
for fear of its being misunderstood or abused. "Nob ody in this world possesses 
absolute truth. This is God's attribute alone. Rela tive truth is all we know. 
Therefore, we can only follow the truth as we see i t. Such pursuit of truth 
cannot lead anyone astray." 
— New Delhi : 24-5-'46 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54  How to Recite Ramanama 
Gandhiji in today's discourse explained the conditi ons under which alone 
Ramanama could become an effective remedy. The firs t condition was that it 
should come from the heart. What did that mean? Peo ple did not mind going to 
the ends of the earth to find a cure for the physic al ailments which were much 
less important than the mental or spiritual. "Man's , physical being is after all 
perishable. It, cannot, by its very nature, last fo rever. And yet men make a 
fetish of it while neglecting the immortal spirit w ithin." A man who believed in 
Ramanama would not make a fetish of the body, but w ould regard it only as a 
means of serving God. And for making it into a fit instrument for that purpose, 
Ramanama was the sovereign means. 
To install Ramanama in the heart required infinite patience. It might even take 
ages. But the effort was worthwhile. Even so, succe ss depended solely on the 
grace of God. 
Ramanama could not come from the heart unless one h ad cultivated the virtues 
of truth, honesty and purity within and without. Ev ery day at the evening 
prayers, they repeated the  shlokas  describing the man with a steadfast 
intellect. Everyone of them, said Gandhiji, could b ecome a  sthitapragnya  — 
man with steadfast intellect — if he kept his sense s under discipline, ate and 
drank and allowed himself enjoyment and recreation only to sustain life for 
service. If one had no control over one's thoughts,  if one did not mind, for 
instance, sleeping in a hole of a room with all doo rs and windows shut, and 
breathing foul air or drinking dirty water, his rec itation of Ramanama was in 
vain. 
That, however, did not mean that one should give up  reciting Ramanama on the 
ground that one had not the requisite purity. For, recitation of Ramanama was 
also a means for acquiring purity. "In the case of a man who repeats Ramanama 
from the heart, discipline and self-control will co me easy. Observance of the 
rules of health and hygiene will become his second nature. His life will run an 
even course. He will never want to hurt anyone. To suffer in order to relieve 
other's suffering will become a part of his being a nd fill him with an ineffable Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55  and perennial joy." Let them, therefore, said Gandh iji, persevere and 
ceaselessly repeat Ramanama during all their waking  hours. Ultimately, it 
would remain with them even during their sleep and God's grace would then fill 
them with perfect health of body, mind and spirit. 
— New Delhi : 25-5-'46 
 
Potency of Silent Thought 
In his discourse after the prayer today, Gandhiji s aid that they had been coming 
to the prayer gathering daily in order to join him in chanting Ramanama or 
rather in learning how to do so. Ramanama, however,  could not be taught by 
word of mouth. But he held that even more potent th an the spoken word was 
the silent thought. A single right thought could en velop the world. It was never 
wasted. The very attempt to clothe thought in word or action limited it. No 
man in this world could express a thought in word o r action fully. 
"That does not mean," proceeded Gandhiji, "that one  should go into perpetual 
silence." In theory, that was possible. But it was very difficult to fulfil the 
condition by which, silent thought could be made ef fective. He for one could 
not claim to have attained the requisite intensity or control over thought. He 
could not altogether keep out useless or irrelevant  thoughts from his mind. It 
required infinite patience and  tapasya  to attain that state. 
He was not indulging in a figure of speech, but he meant it literally when he 
told them on the previous day that there was no lim it to the potency of 
Ramanama. But in order to experience that, Ramanama  had to come from a 
heart that was absolutely pure. He himself was stri ving to attain that state. He 
had envisaged it in the mind, but had not fully rea lized it in practice. When 
that stage was reached, even the recitation of Rama nama would become 
unnecessary. 1 
He hoped they would continue to recite Ramanama in their homes severally and 
in company during his absence. The secret of collec tive prayers was that the Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56  emanation of silent influence from one another woul d help them in the 
realization of their goal. 
— New Delhi : 26-5-'46 
 
No Charm like Ramanama 
Speaking at the prayer meeting today, Gandhiji gave  the healing message of 
Ramanama and said: "Ramanama is not for the few; it  is for all lie who takes 
this name lays by a rich store for himself, and it is inexhaustible. The more you 
draw upon it, the more it increases. It is infinite . As the  Upanishad  says, you 
take out infinite out of infinite and infinite rema ins behind. It is the unfailing 
panacea for all ills. 
"But the condition is that it must come from the he art. Do evil thoughts possess 
you, or are you tormented by lust or greed? Then, t here is no charm against it 
like Ramanama." And he illustrated his meaning by a  parable. "Supposing you 
are tempted to amass a big fortune by some easy and  dishonest means. If you 
have faith in Ramanama, you will say to yourself: ' Why should I amass for my 
wife and children riches which they might squander away—why not leave them 
a legacy in the shape of sound character and sound education and training that 
will enable them to earn their living by honest ind ustry and body labour'?' 
Ceaseless repetition of Ramanama will dispel your d elusion and false 
attachment and the living realization will dawn on you that you were a fool to 
hanker after millions for the sake of your dear one s, instead of offering them 
the priceless treasure of His name which frees one from all bondage and 
wandering. Filled with the joy of that realization,  such a person will tell his 
wife and children: '1 have not brought for you the treasure I had set out for, 
but something infinitely richer.' 'Where is it, sho w it to us?' they will say 
incredulously, it is the Name which is richer than all treasures,' he will reply, 
'because It quenches the thirst for all riches. It is enshrined in my heart.' " 
- Mussoorie : 2-6-'46 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57  Essence of All Prayers 
In his speech after the evening prayers, Gandhiji s aid that he expected them to 
offer prayers in their own homes regularly morning and evening. There was no 
need for them to learn Sanskrit  shlokas,  if they did not wish to. Ramadhun was 
enough. The essence of all prayers was to establish  God in their hearts. If they 
succeeded in doing that, all world be well with the m, with society and the 
world. 
Mussoorie : 8-6-'46 
 
Sheer Hypocrisy 
To repeat Ramanama and to follow the way of Ravana in actual practice was 
worse than useless. It was sheer hypocrisy. One mig ht deceive oneself or the 
world, but one could not deceive the Almighty. 
— New Delhi : 18-6-'46 
 
Ambrosia of God's Name 
Commenting upon Mirabai's song which was sung at th e prayer, Gandhiji said 
that in that song the devotee asks the soul to drin k deep of the nectar of God's 
name. Physical food and drink result in satiety, an d, if over-indulged, in illness. 
But the ambrosia of God's name knows no such limit.  The deeper one drinks of 
it, the more the thirst for it grows, but it must s ink deep into the heart. When 
that happens, all delusion and attachment, lust and  envy, fall off from us. Only 
one must persevere and have patience. Success is th e inevitable result of such 
effort. 
— New Delhi : 18-6- 46 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58  Miracles That Faith Works 
A man of prayer must know no disappointment because  he knows that the times 
are in His hands who is the Arch Planner, and does everything in His good time. 
A man of prayer, therefore, waits in faith and pati ence always. 
In the allegory of  Gajendra  and  Graha,  Gandhiji went on to explain, the 
elephant king was seized unawares by the crocodile as he went to have a drink 
of water in the river and was dragged down. The mor e he struggled, the deeper 
he sank. A stage was, however, reached when despair ing of his physical 
prowess, he threw himself on God's grace entirely a nd invoked His aid, and the 
Lord of Dwaraka came in the twinkling of an eye and  rescued him. 
"The moral of the story," said Gandhiji, "is that G od never fails His devotees in 
the hour of trial. The condition is that there must  be a living faith and the 
uttermost reliance on Him. The test of faith is tha t having done our duty we 
must be prepared to welcome whatever He may send—jo y as well as sorrow, 
good luck as well as bad luck. He will be like King  Janaka who. when informed 
that his capital was ablaze, only remarked that it was no concern of his." 
The secret of his resignation and equanimity, remar ked Gandhiji, was that he 
was ever awake, never remiss in the performance of his duty. Having done his 
duty, he would leave the rest to God. 
"And so a man of prayer will in the first place be spared mishaps by the ever 
merciful providence, but if the mishaps do come, he  will not bewail his fate nor 
lay the blame on God, but bear them with an undistu rbed peace of mind and 
joyous resignation to His will.” 
- New Delhi : 20-6-‘46 
 
Significance of Ramanama 
Explaining (he significance of Ramanama lo the pray er gathering this evening, 
Gandhiji said: "God is not a person. He is the all- pervading, all-powerful spirit. 
Anyone who bears Him in his or her heart has access ion of a marvellous force or 
energy as objective in its results as, say electric ity, but much subtler." Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59  "Was he propagating a species of superstition?" he asked. "No." was his reply. 
"Mere repetition of Ramanama possessed no mysteriou s virtue as such. 
Ramanama was not like black magic. It had to be tak en with all that it 
symbolized. Rather, it was like a mathematical form ula which summed up in 
brief the result of endless research. Mere mechanic al repetition of Ramanama 
could not give strength. For that, one had to under stand and live up to the 
conditions attaching to its recitation. To lake God 's name, one had to live a 
godly life." 
— Poona :  2-1-46 
 
Inner and Outer Cleanliness  
In the course of his discourse to the prayer gather ing today, Gandhiji referred, 
among other things, to the filthy surroundings in w hich the Harijan quarters 
were located and in which he had taken his abode. H e had been wondering why 
those in charge of sanitation, that is the Municipa lity and the P.W.D., should 
put up with that filth. What was the use of his goi ng and staying there, if it 
could not induce them to make the place healthy and  hygienic? 
What was the connection between all that and the pr ayer? A man who did not 
observe the rules of external cleanliness could not  pray for internal cleanliness. 
If the object of their attending prayer was idle cu riosity, they had committed a 
sin by coming. If they had come to join in the pray er, they must pray for inner 
and outer cleanliness. To say one thing and to do s omething different would be 
deception. No one could deceive God, because He was  omnipresent and 
omniscient. 
There was so much dirt and filth about the place. D r. Dinshah had told him that 
the lavatories were so dirty that he could not use them. There were so many 
flies about the place that he was anxious that he ( Gandhiji) might catch some 
infection and get killed. He himself was not worrie d about that. Although the 
two doctors with him looked after him. he did not d epend on anyone except Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60  God. The Almighty would take care of his health. Bu t his companions did not 
have that faith in God. 
— Bombay : 6-7-'46 
 
The Sovereign Remedy 
In his after-prayer speech Gandhiji referred to sev eral letters and messages 
from friends expressing concern over his persistent  cough. His speech was 
broadcast and so was the cough which was often trou blesome in the evening 
and in the open. For the last four days, however, t he cough had been on the 
whole less troublesome and he hoped it would soon d isappear completely. The 
reason for the persistence of the cough had been th at he had refused all 
medical treatment. Dr. Sushila had said that if at the outset he had taken 
penicillin he would have been all right in three da y>. Otherwise, it would take 
him three weeks to get over it. He did not doubt th e efficacy of penicillin but 
he believed too that Ramanama was the sovereign rem edy for all ills and, 
therefore, superseded all other remedies. In the mi dst of the flames that 
surrounded him on all sides, there was all the grea ter need for a burning faith 
in God. God alone could enable people to put down t he fire. If He had to take 
work from Gandhiji, He would keep him alive; otherw ise He would carry him 
away. 
They had just heard the  bhajan  in which the poet had exhorted man to stick to 
Ramanama. He alone was the refuge of man. Therefore , in the present crisis he 
wished to throw himself entirely on God and not acc ept medical aid for a 
physical ailment. 
— New Delhi : 18-10-47 
 
1 I do look forward to a time when even repealing t he name of Rama will become a 
hindrance. When I have realized that Rama transcend s even speech, I shall have no need 
to repeat the name. —  Young India, 1 4-8-'24 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61   
32. A THOUGHT FOR THE DAY 
To fall ill should be a matter of shame for anyone.  Illness implies some error to 
other. He whose body and mind are perfectly sound, should never suffer from 
illness. 
- Sevagram : 26-12-'44 
 
An evil thought is also an indication of illness. T herefore, we should guard 
ourselves against evil thoughts. 
- Sevagram : 27-12-'44 
 
An infallible remedy for evil thoughts is Ramanama.  The name should proceed 
not merely from the lips, but from the heart. 
- Sevagram : 28-12-'44 
 
Diseases are numerous, so also are the physicians a nd their treatments. If we 
regard all disease as one and consider Rama as the one and only physician, we 
are freed from most of our troubles. 
Sevagram : 29-12-'44 
 
How strange that we should be running after vaidyas  and doctors who 
themselves die, but quietly forget Rama who is eter nal and is an unfailing  
vaidyal.  
Sevagram : 30-12-'44 
 
But more strange than this is the fact that though we know that we too have to 
die one day, and that as a result of doctors' treat ment we can at best prolong 
our existence by a few days more, we put ourselves to no end of trouble. Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62  - Sevagram : 31-12-'44 
 
The young and the old the rich and the poor—all die  before our very eyes; still 
we will not sit at restbuit do all that we can, exc ept relying on Rama, just to 
live a few days longer. 
Sevagram : 1-1-'45 
 
What a fine thing would it be if we understood this  and placing our reliance on 
Rama patiently put up with whatever ailment came ou r way lived in real peace. 
Sevagram : 2-1-'45 
 
If a man regarded as religious is suffering from il lness, it means that something 
or other is lacking in him. 
Sevagram : 22-4-'45 
 
If a man's mind remains impure in spite of himself,  Ramanama should be his 
sole support. 
On Nearing Madras : 21-1-'46 
 
The more I think the more I realize that Ramanama r ecited from heart and with 
knowledge is a cure-all for every kind of disease. 
Uruli : 22-3-'46  
 
Attachment, hatred, etc. are also diseases and wors e than the physical ones. 
But for Ramanama, there is no cure for them. 
Uruli : 23-3-'46 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63   
Uncleanliness of mind is more dangerous than that o f the body: the outer 
uncleanliness is, however, but an indication of the  inner one. 
Uruli : 24-3-'46 
 
Who can describe the joy and happiness that one exp eriences by taking shelter 
in God? 
Uruli : 25-3-'46 
 
Ramanama is helpful to those who fulfill the condit ions of its recitation. 
New Delhi : 8-4-'46 
 
Repetition of Ramanama becomes in vain if no corres ponding service worthy of 
Rama is rendered. 
New Delhi : 21-4-'46 
 
The fear of illness accounts for more deaths than t he illness itself. 
Simla : 7-5-'46 
 
For the cure of threefold malady, Ramanama is a sur e remedy. 
New Delhi : 24-5-'46 
 
He who seeks refuge in Ramanama obtains the satisfa ction of all his desires. 
New Delhi : 25-5-'46 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64  If one wants to drink the nectar of Ramanama, it is  but necessary that one 
should drive out lust, anger, etc. 
New Delhi : 20-6-'46 
 
When all is well, then, of course, everyone takes t he name of God; but a true 
devotee is he who remembers God when all goes awry.  
Bombay : 6-7-'46 
 
The elixir of Ramanama imparts joy to the soul and rids the body of its ailment. 
Poona : 9-7-'46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65   
33. TWO LETTERS 
I 
Yeravda Mandir, 
Nov. 12, 1930 
Dear .........  
For the health of your body you should take sitz an d sun baths, and for the 
peace of mind, Ramanama is the best balm. Restrain yourself when any passion 
troubles you. There is only one way of walking in t he light of God and that is to 
serve His creation. Indeed there is no other meanin g of God's grace of light. 
BAPU'S BLESSINGS 
 
II 
Sevagram, 
Jan. 9, 1945 
Dear ..........  
Your letter. Whether you get well or not — what doe s it matter? The more 
reliance we place on God, the more peace of mind sh all we have.  Vaidyas  and 
doctors are there, of course; but they take us fart her away from God. That's 
why I preferred to send you there. Nature Cure trea tment brings us nearer to 
God. I will have no objection whatever if we could do even without it. But why 
be afraid of fast or avoid pure air? The meaning of  Nature Cure is to go nearer 
Nature— God. Let us see how far I succeed in this. I will certainly not overstrain 
myself. 
BAPU'S BLESSINGS 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66   
34. QUESTION BOX 
Vocal Recitation 
Q.  While in conversation or doing brain work or when one is suddenly worried, 
can one recite Ramanama (the name of God) in one's heart? Do people do so at 
such times, and if so, how? 
A.  Experience shows that man can do so at any time, e ven in sleep, provided 
Ramanama is enshrined in his heart. If the taking o f the name has become a 
habit, its recitation through the heart becomes as natural as the heart beat. 
Otherwise, Ramanama is a mere mechanical performanc e, or, at best, has 
touched the heart only on the surface. When Ramanam a has established its 
dominion over the heart, the question of vocal reci tation does not arise. 
Because, then it transcends speech. But it may well  be held that persons who 
have attained this state are few and far between. 
There is no doubt whatsoever that Ramanama contains  all the power that is 
attributed to it. No one can, by mere wishing, ensh rine Ramanama in his heart. 
Untiring effort is required as also patience. What an amount of labour and 
patience have been lavished by men to acquire the n on-existent philosopher's 
stone? Surely, God's name is of infinitely richer v alue and always existent. 
 
Service or the Rosary? 
Q.  Is it harmful if, owing to stress or exigencies of  work, one is unable to carry 
out daily devotions in the prescribed manner? Which  of the two should be given 
preference—service or the rosary? 
A.  Whatever the exigencies of service or adverse circ umstances may be, 
Ramanama must not cease. The outward form will vary  according to the 
occasion. The absence of the rosary does not interr upt Ramanama which has 
found an abiding place in the heart. 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67  Ramanama 
Q.  Is it not enough to have Ramanama in one's heart, or is there something 
special in its recitation? 
A.  I believe there is special merit in the recitation  of Ramanama. If anyone 
knows that God is in truth residing in his heart, I  admit that for him there is no 
need for recitation. But I have not known such a pe rson. On the contrary, my 
personal experience tells me that there is somethin g quite extraordinary in the 
recitation of Ramanama. Why or how is not necessary  to know. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68   
ADDENDUM 
I 
WHO IS THIS RAMA? 
Gandhiji reiterated that Rama whose name he prescri bed as the infallible 
remedy for all ills was neither the historical Rama  nor the Rama of those who 
used the name as a charm or black magic. Rama whose  name he prescribed as a 
cure-all was God, by taking whose name devotees att ained purity and peace, 
and he claimed that it was the one infallible remed y for all ailments whether 
mental, spiritual or physical. It was, of course, p ossible to cure physical 
ailments by going to doctors and  vaidyas.  But Ramanama enabled one to 
become one's own doctor or  vaidya  and to find the elixir of healing within 
oneself. Even when the ailment could not be cured, because physically it was 
incurable, it enabled one to endure it with equanim ity and peace of mind. "A 
person who has faith in Ramanama would not run from  pillar to post and dance 
attendance at the doors of celebrated doctors and  vaidyas  in order to prolong 
existence anyhow. Nor is Ramanama meant to be taken  only when the doctors 
and  vaidyas  have failed. It is meant to enable one to do witho ut them 
altogether. For a believer in Ramanama it is the fi rst as well as the last 
remedy." 
Harijan,  2-6-1946 
 
II 
THE ALL-HEALING BALM 
"The greatest help you can give me is to banish fea r from your hearts," Gandhiji 
told them. And what was the talisman that could do that for them? It was his 
unfailing  mantra of  Ramanama. "You may say you do not believe in Him. You do 
not know that but for His will you could not draw a  single breath. Call Him 
Ishwara, Allah, God, Ahura Mazda. His names are as innumerable as there are 
men. He is one without a second. He alone is great.  There is none greater than Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69  He. He is timeless, formless, stainless. Such is my  Rama. He alone is my Lord 
and Master." 
He touchingly described to them how as a little boy  he used to be usually timid 
and afraid of even shadows and how his nurse Rambha  had taught him the 
secret of Ramanama as an antidote to fear. "When in  fear take Ramanama. He 
will protect you," she used to tell him. Ever since  then Ramanama has been his 
unfailing refuge and shelter from all kinds of fear . 
"He resided in the heart of the pure always. Tulsid as, that prince of devotees, 
whose name has become a household word among the Hi ndus from Kashmir to 
Cape Comorin as Shri Chaitanya's and Shri Ramakrish na Paramahnnsa's in 
Bengal, has presented the message of that name to u s in his immortal  
Ramayana.  If you walk in fear of that name, you need fear no  man on earth, be 
he a prince or a pauper." Why should they be afraid  of the cry of 'Allaho Akbar'? 
The Allah of Islam was the protector of innocence. What had been done in East 
Bengal had not the sanction of Islam as preached by  its Prophet. 
Who could dare to dishonour their wives or daughter s, if they had faith in God? 
He, therefore, expected them to cease to be afraid of Mussulmans. If they 
believed in Ramanama they must not think of leaving  East Bengal. They must 
live where they were born and brought up and die th ere if necessary, defending 
their honour as brave men and women. "To run away f rom danger, instead of 
facing it, is to deny one's faith in man and God an d even one's own self. It were 
better for one to drown oneself than to live to dec lare such bankruptcy of 
faith." 
Harijan,  24-11-1946 
 
III 
ACCEPT SLAVERY OF ONE GOD 
Gandhiji asked them to accept the slavery of the on e omnipotent God no 
matter by what name they addressed Him. Then they w ould bend the knee to 
no man or men. It was ignorance to say that he coup led Rama, a mere man, Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70  with God. He had repeatedly made it clear that his Rama was the same as God. 
His Rama was before, is present now and would be fo r all time. He was Unborn 
and Uncreated. Therefore let them tolerate and resp ect the different faiths. 
He was himself an iconoclast but he had equal regar d for the so-called 
idolaters. Those who worshipped idols also worshipp ed the same God who was 
everywhere, even in a clod of earth, even in a nail  that was pared off. He had 
Muslim friends whose names were Rahim, Rahman, Kari m. Would he, therefore, 
join on to the name of God when he addressed them a s Rahim, Karim or 
Rahman? 
Harijan,  23-2-1947 
 
IV 
TOLERATION 
Questions poured in as did angry letters. Why did h e call himself a Muslim? Why 
did he consider that there was no difference betwee n Rama and Rahim? Why 
had he gone so far as to say that he had no objecti on to reciting the  Kalma?  
Why did he not go to the Punjab? Was he not a bad H indu? Was he not a fifth- 
columnist? Was not his non-violence making cowards of Hindus? One envelope 
came to him addressed as Mahomed Gandhi!  
Quietly and patiently, Gandhiji reasoned with them.  Why should and how could 
Islam be condemned for the sins of a few? He claime d to be a  sanatani  Hindu 
and because the essence of Hinduism, and indeed of all religions, was 
toleration, he claimed that if he was a good Hindu,  he was also a good Muslim 
and a good Christian. It was against the spirit of religion to claim superiority. 
Humility was essential to non-violence, Had not the  Hindu scriptures said that 
God had a thousand names? Why may not Rahim be one of them? The  Kalma  
merely praised God and acknowledged Mohamed as His Prophet. He had no 
hesitation in praising God and acknowledging Mohame d as a Prophet in the 
same way as he acknowledged Buddha and Zoroaster an d Jesus. Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71  Harijan,  27-4-1947 
 
V 
MEDICINE FOR THE MASSES 
You will be pleased to know that I became a confirm ed convert to Nature Cure, 
when I read Kuhne's  New Science of Healing  and Just's  Return to Nature  over 
forty years ago. I must confess that I have not bee n able fully to follow the 
meaning of  Return to Nature  not because of want of will but because of my 
ignorance. I am now trying to evolve a system of Na ture Cure suited to the 
millions of India's poor. I try to confine myself t o the propagation of such cure 
as is derivable from the use of earth, water, light , air and the great void. This 
naturally leads man to know that the sovereign cure  of all ills is the recitation 
from the heart of the name of God whom some million s here know by the name 
of Rama and the other millions by the name of Allah . Such recitation from the 
heart carries with it the obligation to recognize a nd follow the laws which 
Nature has ordained for man. This train of reasonin g leads one to the 
conclusion that prevention is better than cure. The refore, one is irresistibly 
driven to inculcating the laws of hygiene, i.e. of cleanliness of the mind, of the 
body and of its surroundings. 
Harijan,  15-6-1947 
 
VI 
RAMADHUN 
Gandhiji said that those who had some experience kn ew the power what the 
Ramadhun, meaning recital of God's name from the he art, meant. He knew the 
power what lakhs of soldiers marching in step to th e tune of their band meant. 
The desolation that the military prowess had wrough t in the world, be who ran 
could see. Though the war was said to have ended, t he aftermath was worse 
than actual warfare. Such was the bankruptcy of mil itary power.  Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72  Without the slightest hesitation he was there to co ntend that the power 
exerted by the Ramadhun recited by millions of mank ind with true beat of 
time, was different in kind from and infinitely sup erior to the display of 
military strength. And this recital of God's name f rom the heart, would produce 
lasting peace and happiness in the place of the pre sent desolation, they 
witnessed. 
Harijan, 31-8-1947 
 
VII 
REAL ILLUMINATION 
Today alas! there was no  Rarnarajya  in India; therefore, how could they 
celebrate Diwali? He alone could celebrate victory who had Rama in his heart 
for it was God alone who could illumine their souls  and such illumination alone 
was worthwhile. The  bhajan emphasized the writer's desire to see God. Crowds 
went to see manmade illuminations but the light the y needed today was the 
light of love in their hearts. Then alone would the y be worthy of receiving 
congratulations. Today thousands were in the most d ire suffering. Could 
everyone in the audience lay his hand on his heart and say that everyone of 
these sufferers, whether Hindu, Muslim or Sikh, was  as his own brother or 
sister? That was the test for them. 
Rama and Ravana represented the eternal duel going on between the forces of 
good and evil. The real illumination came from with in. 
Harijan , 23-11-1947 
 
VIII 
THE DAY BEFORE 
[Shri K. G. Mashruwala received on the 2nd instant a post-card written by Gandhiji himself 
on the 29th January, that is, the day before his de ath. It refers to a letter written by Shri 
Mashruwala to one of Gandhiji's assistants to ackno wledge receipt of a communication 
from him. The reply, therefore, by Gandhiji himself  has come to him as an agreeable Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73  surprise and a precious memento. The following is a  free translation of the post-card.—
Editor,  Harijan. ] 
"29-1-'48, N. D. 
"My Dear Kishorlal, 
"I have been devoting today my time after the praye r in writing letters. You did 
well in sending here the news of the death of Shank aranji's daughter. I have 
sent him a letter. The report of my going there (i. e., Sevagram) must be 
regarded still as indefinite. I have suggested that  I should stay there from the 
3rd to the 12th. If it could be said that I "did" i n Delhi, it might not be 
necessary to be here for keeping my pledge. This de pends upon what view my 
colleagues here take. Perhaps it may be possible to  decide tomorrow. 
The purpose of my visit is to consider whether it i s possible to unite together all 
the separate institutions of the Constructive Progr amme and to observe the 
anniversary day of Jamnalal. I have been gaining st rength satisfactorily. Both 
the kidney and the liver got involved this time. Ac cording to my view, it showed 
weakness of faith in Ramanama. 
"Blessings to both of you." 
[Notes: Shri Shankaranji is a teacher in the Hindus tani Talimi Sangh. Sevagram. 
The verb "did" is in reference to the pledge "Do or  Die", which he took on reaching Delhi. 
The other person referred to in "blessings to both"  is Shrimati Gomatibehn Mashruwala.] 
Harijan, 8-2-1948 
 
IX 
"RAMA! RAMA!"  
As Gandhiji passed through the cordoned lane throug h the prayer congregation, 
he took his hands off the shoulders of the two girl s to answer the  namaskars of 
the prayer congregation. All of a sudden someone fr om the crowd roughly 
elbowed his way into the cordon from the right. Lit tle Manu thinking that he 
was coming forward to touch his feet, remonstrated saying something about it Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74  being already late for the prayer and tried to stop  the intruder by holding his 
hand. He violently jerked her off, causing the  Ashram Bhajanavali  and Bapu's 
spittoon and  mala,  which she was carrying in her hands, to fall down.  As she 
stooped down to pick up the scattered things, he pl anted himself in front of 
Bapu at less than point blank range—so close, indee d, that one of the ejected 
shells was afterwards found caught among the folds of Bapu's clothes. Three 
shots rang out in quick succession from the seven-c hambered automatic pistol, 
the first shot entering the abdomen on the right si de two and a half inches 
above the umbilicus and three and a half inches to the right of the mid line, the 
second penetrating the seventh intercostal space on e inch to the right of the 
mid line and the third on the right side of the che st one inch above the nipple 
and four inches from the mid line. The first and th e second shots passed right 
through and came out at the back. The third remaine d embedded in the lung. 
At the first shot the foot that was in motion, when  he was hit, came down. He 
still stood on his legs when the second shot rang o ut and then collapsed. The 
last words he uttered were "Rama Rama". 
Harijan,  15-2-1948 
 
X 
RAMANAMA 
At Amki I could not get goat's milk for Bapu. I tri ed my best to procure it but 
failed. So I had to inform Bapu who said to me, "Wh at does it matter? For goat's 
milk the white juice of the coconut will do as well  and fresh coconut oil will 
serve the purpose of ghee." 
Bapu showed me how to prepare them and accordingly I gave them to him. As 
he usually took eight ounces of goat's milk he took  the same quantity of 
coconut milk too. But he could not digest it and so  had an attack of diarrhoea. 
The frequent motions made him weaker and weaker til l in the evening when he 
was coming back to the hut he felt a reeling sensat ion and was about to fall. 
Generally symptoms like yawning, perspiration, cold ness of hands and feet, Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75  etc. would precede such a reeling sensation in his case. I thought from his 
yawns that he was about to feel giddy but I was mis taken. Bapu who was 
walking with my support was already collapsing. I h eld his head with care and 
shouted for Nirmalbabu. He came and we both helped Bapuji to bed. Then it 
struck me that I should call for Dr. Sushilabehn wh o was in a village nearby. I 
feared that I would be taken for a fool if Bapuji's  illness suddenly took a serious 
turn and if I did not call for her in time. I wrote  a chit and just as 1 was giving 
it to Nirmalbabu for despatching, Bapu woke up from  his trance and called out, 
"Manudi" (that was Bapu's term of endearment for me ), "I do not like your 
calling Nirmalbabu. As you are still young, however , I can excuse you. But at 
such a time I expect you to do nothing else but tak e Ramanama with all your 
heart. As for myself I was already engrossed in tak ing His name. 1 would have 
liked it immensely had you started taking Ramanama instead of shouting for 
Nirmalbabu. Now don't inform Sushila or call her. T he real doctor is Rama. As 
long as Rama needs service from me, He will keep me  alive. When he does not, 
He will call me back to Himself." 
A shiver passed through my body when the words "don 't inform Sushila or call 
her" struck my ears. I snatched the chit from Nirma lbabu and tore it to pieces. 
Bapu saw this and remarked, "So you had already wri tten to her." I had to admit 
the fact. Then he said, "Today the Lord has saved u s both. On reading the chit 
Sushila would have left her work and immediately ru n to us. I would not have 
liked it at all. That would have made me angry with  myself and you. Thank God 
I was tested today. I am convinced that I shall not  die of sickness if Ramanama 
has penetrated deep down into my heart. This rule i s for everybody. One has to 
suffer for one's mistakes and in that spirit I pass ed through the pain. One should 
have Ramanama on one's lips till one's last breath but it should not be repeated 
parrot-like; it should spring from the heart as was  the case with Hanuman. 
When Sitaji presented a pearl necklace to him he br oke the pearls to see if the 
name of Rama was written in them. We need not care to find out whether the 
incident actually happened or not. We may not be ab le to make our bodies as 
strong as that of Hanuman but we can certainly make  our souls as great. One 
can realize the devotion of Hanuman if one is inten t on it. If one cannot reach Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76  that height it is enough if one makes a sincere att empt. Has not Mother Gita 
taught us to make every effort and leave the result  in the hands of God? We 
should try our very best to follow that teaching. 
"Now you have understood what my attitude is toward s the sickness of anybody, 
be it you, me or anyone else." And that very day he  wrote to an ailing sister: 
"There is only one panacea in the whole world and t hat is Ramanama. But His 
name could only prove effective if the rules pertai ning to it are strictly adhered 
to. But who cares to do so?" 
Strangely enough the above incident occurred on the  30th January 1947, 
exactly a year before his death. 
That unshakable faith in Ramanama remained with him  till his last breath. I did 
not then imagine that on the same day a year later I should have the heart-
rending experience of hearing  Rama, Ra.... ma  as the last audible words of the 
great departing soul. Mysterious indeed are the way s of the Lord! 
From Bapu – My Mother 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77   
NON-ENGLISH WORDS WITH MEANINGS 
Akash (aakaasha) : sky; ether 
Ayurveda (aayurveda) : the science of Hindu medicin e 
Bhajan (bhajana) : a religious song 
Brahmacharya : continence 
Chopai (chopai) : a quatrain 
Dharalas (dhaaraalaas) : a criminal tribe of Gujara t 
Diwali (divaalee) : a Hindu festival of illuminatio ns 
Doha (dohaa) : a couplet 
Dwadasha Mantra (dwaadasha mantra) : a sacred incan tation of twelve letters  
Gajendra : a master elephant 
Graha (graaha) : an alligator  
Hakim (hakeema) : a physician  
Haveli (havelee) : a Vaishnava temple  
Jantar Mantar : charms 
Japa : repetition of a sacred name 
Kalma (kalamaa) : a Muslim formula of prayer or inc antation 
Krishna : a Hindu man-god 
Mahadeva (mahaadeva) : a Hindu god 
Mantra : a sacred incantation for repetition or med itation 
Pancha Mahabhutas (pancha mahaabhootas) : five elem ents 
Pooja (poojaa) : worship 
Rama (raama) : the hero of the Ramayana : God 
Ramabana (raamabaana) : an arrow of Rama; an infall ible cure Ramanama 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78  Shloka : a verse 
Sthitapragnya : a steadfast man 
Tejas : energizing principle 
Upanishad : a Hindu philosophical book of old 
Vaidya : a physician 
Vaishnava : a worshipper of Vishnu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 