Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 1  
Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
 
B
y M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
 
THE SELECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI 
VOLUME TWO  
 
TRANSLATED FROM THE GUJARATI BY 
VALJI GOVINDJI DESAI 
 
GENERAL ELDITOR 
SHRIMAN NARAYAN 
 
Rupees One Hundred Fifty for set of five volumes  
© Navajivan Trust, 1968 
Price of this set of Selected Works of Mahatma Gandhi is subsidised by Navajivan 
Trust 
ISBN 81-7229-278-3 (set) 
Printed and Published by Jitendra T. Desai Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad-380 014 (INDIA ) 
Phone : 079 - 27540635. 27542634 Fax : 079 - 27541329 
E-mail : jitnavjivan10@gmail.com Website : www.navajivantrust.org Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2  
FOREWARD  
We
 have included Gandhiji’s book entitled Satyagraha in South Africa  in the 
Selected Works  because of the great significance that ‘passive resistance’ or 
Satyagraha  has assumed in recent years in different parts of the world. Dr. 
Martin Luther King, the great American Negro leader, was an ardent follower of 
Mahatma Gandhi, and his movement for civil liberties in the United States was 
largely modeled on the Satyagraha  pattern. Recent events in Czechoslovakia 
also indicate that non-violent non-co-operation and ‘passive resistance’ could 
be a potent instrument in facing even external aggression. Satyagraha  is now 
being regarded by several thinkers in Western countries as ‘a moral equivalent 
of war’. 
Gandhiji originally wrote his experiences of Satyagraha  in South Africa in great 
detail in Gujarati, and the first English edition of the book was published in 
1928. It has gone into several editions since then. It is hoped that the book will 
prove to be of absorbing interest to all those who are deeply interested in the 
Gandhian technique of Satyagraha  as a powerful ‘weapon’ for counteracting 
social, economic and political injustice and violent suppression of individual 
and national freedom. As Gandhiji himself observed in the concluding chapter 
of this publication, “ Satyagraha  is a priceless and matchless weapon, and that 
those who wield it are strangers to disappointment or defeat.” 
SHRIMAN NARAYAN 
Raj Bhavan,  
Ahmedabad, 
October 24, 1968 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3  
PUBLISHER’S NOTE 
A deluxe edition of Se lected Works of Mahatma Gandhi  was released in 1969. 
It went out of print in about six months. To meet the popular demand for it and 
to make it available to individual readers at a reasonable price a new soft-
cover edition was soon released. It, too, was enthusiastically received and the 
entire stock of the publication was sold out in less than three years. 
We are very happy to say that the set was reprinted and was offered at a 
subsidized price to commemorate the Diamond Jubilee year of Navjivan Trust 
during 1993-94. Looking to its continuous demand and so also to fulfill 
Navjivan’s object of propagating Gandhian Literature, its fifth reprint is being 
published with new type-setting in five volumes. We are sure, this new revised 
edition, too, would be well-received by individual readers, in order to enrich 
their personal library. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TO 
MA
GANLAL K. GANDHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5  
TRANSLATOR’S NOTE 
(Second edition) 
This is a reprint of the first edition except for som e verbal alterations 
suggested by my friend Shri Verrier Elwin who was good enough to go through 
the translation at my request. 
V.G.D. 
St. 2006 Bhadrapad Krishna 6 
 
(Third impression) 
I take this opportunity to place on record my indebt e dness to Shri C.F. 
Andrews, Shri Dattatraya Balkrishna Kalelkar and Shri Abhechand Govindji Desai 
who made helpful suggestions when I was doing the first few chapters. 
V.G.D. 
St 2017 Ashadha Krishna 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6  
INTRODUCTION 
Shri Valji Desai’s translation has been revised by me , and I can assure the 
reader that the spirit of the original in Gujarati has been very faithfully kept by 
the translator. The original chapters were all written by me from memory. 
They were written partly in the Yeravda Jail and partly outside after my 
premature release. As the translator knew of this fact, he made a diligent study 
of the file of Indian Opinion  and wherever he discovered slips of memory, he 
has not hesitated to make the necessary corrections. The reader will share my 
pleasure that in no relevant material has there been any slip. I need hardly 
mention that those who are following the weekly chapters of My Experiments 
with Truth  cannot afford to miss these chapters on Satyagraha, if they would 
follow in all its detail the working out of the search after truth.  
M.K. Gandhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  
PREFACE  
Th
e Satyagraha struggle of the Indians in South Africa lasted eight years. The 
term Satyagraha  was invented and employed in connection therewith. I had 
long entertained a desire to write a history of that struggle myself. Some things 
only I could write. Only the general who conducts a campaign can know the 
objective of each particular move. And as this was the first attempt to apply 
the principle of Satyagraha to politics on a large scale, it is necessary any day 
that the public should have an idea of its development. 
But today Satyagraha has had ample scope in India. Here there has been an 
inevitable series of struggles beginning with the rather local question of the 
Viramgam customs. 
It was through the instrumentality of Bhai Motilal, the public-spirited good 
tailor of Vadhvan, that I became interested in the Viramgam question. I had 
just arrived from England and was proceeding to Saurashtra in the year 1915. I 
was travelling third class. At Vadhvan station Motilal came up to me with a 
small party. He gave me some account of the hardships inflicted on the people 
at Viramgam, and said: 
“Please do something to end this trouble. It will be doing an immense service 
to Saurashtra, the land of your birth”. 
 There was an expression of both compassion and firmness in his eyes. 
“Are you ready to go to jail?’’ I asked. 
 “We are ready to march to the gallows,” was the quick reply. 
 “Jail will do for me, “I said. “ But see that you do not leave me in the lurch.” 
“That only time can show,” said Motilal. 
I reached Rajkot, obtained detailed information and commenced 
correspondence with Government. In speeches at Bagasra and elsewhere, I 
dropped a hint that the people should be ready to offer Satyagraha at 
Viramgam if necessary. The loyal C.I.D brought these speeches to the notice of Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8 Government. In this they served Government and unintentionally, served the 
people also. Finally, I had a talk with Lord Chelmsford on the matter. He 
promised abolition of the customs line and was as good as his word. I know 
others also tried for this. But I am strongly of opinion that the imminent 
possibility of Satyagraha was the chief factor in obtaining the desired redress. 
Then came the Indian Emigration Act. Great efforts were put forth to get 
indenture repealed. There was a considerable public agitation. The Bombay 
meeting fixed May 31, 1917 as the date from which onwards indentured labour 
should be stopped. This is not the place for narrating how that particular date 
came to be selected. A deputation of ladies first waited upon the viceroy in 
connection with this. I cannot help mentioning here the name of the high – 
souled sister, Mrs. Jaiji Petit. It was she, who may be said, to have organized 
this deputation. Here, too, success came merely through preparedness for 
Satyagraha. But it is important to remember the distinction that in this case 
public agitation was also necessary. The stopping of indentured labour was very 
much more important than the abolition of the Viramgam customs. Lord 
Chelmsford committed a series of blunders beginning with the passing of the 
Rowlatt Act. Still, I think, he was a wise ruler. But what viceroy can escape for 
long the influences of the permanent officials of the Civil Service? 
 The third in order came the Champaran struggle, of which Rajendra Babu has 
written a detailed history. Here Satyagraha had actually to be offered. Mere 
preparedness for it did not suffice, as powerful vested interests were arrayed in 
opposition. The peace maintained by the people of Champaran deserves to be 
placed on record. I can bear witness to the perfect non – violence of the 
leaders in thought, word and deed. Hence it was that this age – long abuse 
came to an end in six months. 
The fourth struggle was that of the mill-hands of Ahmedabad. Gujrat is 
perfectly familiar with its history. How peaceful the labourers were! As for the 
leaders, there can hardly be anything for me to say. Still I hold the victory in 
this case was not quite pure, as the fast I had to observe in order to sustain the 
labourers in their determination exercised indirect pressure upon the mill-Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9 owners. The fast was bound to influence them, as I enjoyed friendly relations 
with them. Still the moral of the fight is clear. If the labourers carry on their 
struggle peacefully, they must succeed and also win the hearts of their 
masters. They have not won their master’s hearts, as they were not innocent in 
thought, word and deed. They were non – violent in deed, which is certainly to 
their credit. 
The fifth was the Kheda struggle. I cannot say that in this case all the local 
leaders of Satyagraha parties adhered to the pure truth. Peace was certainly 
maintained. The non – violence of the peasantry, however, was only superficial, 
like that of the millhands. So we came out of the struggle with bare honour. 
However, there was a great awakening among the people. But Kheda had not 
fully grasped the lesson of non – violence; the millhands had not understood the 
true meaning of peace. The people had therefore to suffer. At the time of the 
Rowlatt Act Satyagraha, I had to confess my Himalayan blunder, to fast myself 
and invite others to do so.  
The sixth was in connection with the Rowlatt Act. Therein our inherent 
shortcomings came to the surface. But the original foundation was well and 
truly laid. We admitted all our shortcomings and did penance for them. The 
Rowlatt Act was a dead letter even when it was promulgated, and that black 
act was finally even repealed. This struggle taught us a great lesson. 
The seventh was the struggle to right the Khilafat and the Punjab wrongs and to 
win Swaraj. It is still going on. And my confidence is unshaken, that if a single 
Satyagrahi holds out to the end, victory is absolutely certain. 
But the present fight is epic in character. I have already described our course 
of unconscious preparation for it. When I took up the Viramgam question, little 
did I know that other fights were in store. And even about Viramgam I knew 
nothing when I was in South Africa. That is the beauty of Satyagraha. It comes 
up to oneself; one has not to go out in search for it. This is a virtue inherent in 
the principle itself. A dharma – yuddha , in which there are no secrets to be 
guarded, no scope for cunning and no place for untruth, comes unsought, and a 
man of religion is ever ready for it. A struggle which has to be previously Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10 planned is not a righteous struggle. In a righteous struggle God Himself plans 
campaigns and conducts battles. A dharma – yuddha  can be waged only in the 
name of God, and it is only when the Satyagrahi feels quite helpless, is 
apparently on his last legs and finds utter darkness all around him, that God 
comes to the rescue. God helps when one feels oneself humbler than the very 
dust under one’s feet. Only to the weak and helpless is divine succor 
vouchsafed. 
 We are yet to realize this truth, and so I think the history of Satyagraha in 
South Africa will be helpful to us.  
The reader will note South African parallels for all our experiences in the 
present struggle to date. He will also see from this history that there is so far 
no ground whatever for despair in the fight that is going on. The only condition 
of victory is a tenacious adherence to our programme. 
I am writing this preface at Juhu. I wrote the first thirty chapters of the history 
in Yeravda jail. Shri Indulal Yajnik was good enough to write to my dictation. 
The subsequent chapters I hope to write hereafter. I had no books of reference 
in jail. Nor do I propose to get them here. I have neither the time nor the 
inclination to write a regular detailed history. My only object in writing this 
book is that it may be helpful in our present struggle, and serve as a guide to 
any regular historian who may arise in the future. Although I am writing without 
books of reference at hand, I must ask the reader not to imagine that any single 
item in this volume is inaccurate or that there is the least exaggeration at any 
point. 
M. K. Gandhi 
Juhu 
St 1980 Phalgun Vadi 13 
2nd April, 1924 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11  
01. GEOGRAPHY 
Africa is one of the biggest continents in the world.  India is said to be not a 
country but a continent, but considering area alone, four or five Indias could be 
carved out of Africa. Africa is a peninsula like India; South Africa is thus mainly 
surrounded by the sea. There is a general impression that Africa is the hottest 
part of the earth, and in a sense this is true. The equator passes through the 
middle of Africa, and people in India cannot have any idea of the heat in 
countries situated along this line. The heat which we feel in the extreme south 
of India gives us some nation of it. But in South Africa there is nothing of that 
kind, as it is far away from the equator. The climate of many parts is so healthy 
and temperate that Europeans can settle there in comfort, while it is nearly 
impossible for them to settle is India. Moreover, there are lands of great 
elevation in South Africa like Tibet or Kashmir, but these do not attain a height 
of ten to fourteen thousand feet as in Tibet. Consequently, the climate is dry 
and cold enough to be endured, and some places in South Africa are highly 
recommended as sanatoria for consumptives. One of these is Johannesburg the 
golden city of South Africa. Only fifty years ago, the site on which it now stands 
was desolate and covered with dry grass. But when gold mines were discovered, 
houses began to be built one after another as if by magic, and today there are 
many handsome and substantial buildings. The wealthy people of the place 
have got trees from the more fertile tracts of South Africa and from Europe, 
paying as much as a guinea for a tree, and have planted them there. A traveler 
ignorant of this previous history would imagine that these trees had been there 
for all time. 
I do not propose to describe all the parts of South Africa, but will confine 
myself only to those which are connected with oursubject-matter. One part of 
South Africa is under the Portuguese, and the rest under the British. The 
territory under the Portuguese is called Delagoa Bay, and this is the first South 
African port for steamers from India. As we proceed further south, we come to 
Natal, the first British Colony. Its chief sea-port is called Port Natal, but we Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12 know it as Durban, under which name it is generally known all over South 
Africa. Durban is the largest city in Natal. The capital is Pietermaritzburg, 
situated inland at a distance of about sixty miles from Durban and at a height 
of about two thousand feet abovesea-level. The climate of Durban is somewhat 
like that of Bombay, although rather colder. If we proceed further inland 
beyond Natal we reach the Transvaal, whose mines supply the world with the 
largest amount of gold. Some years ago diamond mines were also discovered in 
one of which was the world’s largest diamond. The Cullinan , so called after the 
name of the proprietor of the mine, weighed over 3,000 carats, or over 1 ⅓ lb. 
avoirdupois, while the Kohinoor  now weighs about 100 carats and the Orloff, 
one of the Russian crown jewels, about 200 carats. 
But though Johannesburg is the centre of the goldmining industry and has 
diamond mines in the neighbourhood, it is not the official capital of the 
Transvaal. The capital is Pretoria, at a distance of about thirty-six miles from 
Johannesburg. In Pretoria one chiefly finds officials and politicians and the 
population drawn by them. It is therefore a comparatively quiet place, while 
Johannesburg is full of bustle. As a visitor from a quiet village, or for that 
matter  a small town in India, to Bombay, would be confounded with the din 
and roar of the city, even so would a visitor from Pretoria be affected with 
Johannesburg. It would be no exaggeration to say that the citizens of 
Johannesburg do not walk but seem as if they run. No one has the leisure to 
look at anyone else, and everyone is apparently engrossed in thinking how to 
amass the maximum wealth in the minimum of time! Leaving the Transvaal we 
travel further inland towards the west, we come to Orange Free State or 
Orangia. Its capital is Bloemfontein, a very quiet and small town. There are no 
mines in Orangia like those in the Transvaal. A few hours’ railway journey from 
here takes us to the boundary of the Cape Colony, the biggest of all the South 
African colonies. It capital, which is also its largest sea-port, is known as Cape 
Town and is situated on the Cape of Good Hope, so called by King John of 
Portugal, as after its discovery he hoped his people would be able to find a new 
and easier way of reaching India, the supreme object of the maritime 
expeditions of that age. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13 Over and above these four principal British colonies, there are several 
territories under British ‘protection’, inhabited by races which had migrated 
there before the appearance of Europeans on the scene. 
 The chief industry of South Africa is agriculture and for this it is pre-eminently 
fitted. Some parts of it are delightful and fertile. The principal grain is maize, 
which is grown without much labour and forms the staple food of the Negro 
inhabitants of South Africa. Wheat also is grown in some parts. South Africa is 
famous for its fruits. Natal Cultivates many varieties of excellent bananas, and 
pineapples, and that too in such abundance that they are available to the 
poorest of the poor. In Natal as well as other colonies, oranges, peaches and 
apricots grow in such plenty that thousands get them in the country for the 
labour of gathering them. The Cape Colony is the land of grapes and plums. 
Hardly any other place grows such fine grapes, and during the season they can 
be had so cheap that even a poor man can have his fill. It is impossible that 
there should be no mangoes in places inhabited by Indians. Indians planted 
mango trees in South Africa and consequently mangoes also are available in 
considerable quantities. Some varieties of these can certainly complete with 
the best mangoes of Bombay. Vegetables also are extensively grown in that 
fertile country, and it may be said that almost all the vegetables of India are 
grown there by Indians with a palate for home delicacies. 
Cattle also are bred in considerable numbers. Cows and oxen are better built 
and stronger than in India. I have been ashamed, and my heart has often bled, 
to find many cows and oxen in India, which claims to protect the cow as 
emaciated as the people themselves. Although I have moved about all parts of 
South Africa with open eyes, I do not remember to have seen a single 
emaciated cow or bull. 
Not only has nature showered her other gifts upon this country, but she has not 
been stingy in beautifying it with a fine landscape. 
The scenery of Durban is considered very beautiful, but that of Cape Town 
surpasses it. Cape Town is situated at the foot of the Table Mountain which is 
neither too high nor too low. A gifted lady who dotes on South Africa says in her Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14 poem about this mountain that no other gave her such a sense of the Unique. 
There may be exaggeration in this. I think there is. But one of her points struck 
me as true. She says the Table Mountain stands in the position of a friend to the 
citizens of Cape Town. Not being too high, it does not inspire awe. People are 
not compelled to worship it from far, but build their houses upon it and live 
there. And as it is just on the seashore, the sea always washes its foot with its 
dear waters. Young and old, men and women, fearlessly move about the whole 
mountain, which resounds every day with the voices of thousands. Its tall trees 
and flowers of fine fragrance and variegated hues impart such a charm to the 
mountain that one can never see too much of it, or move too much about it. 
South Africa cannot boast of such mighty rivers as the Ganga or the Indus. The 
few that are there are comparatively small. The water of rivers cannot reach 
many places. No canals can be taken to the highlands. And how can there be 
canals in the absence of large rivers? Wherever there is a deficiency of surface 
water in South Africa, artesian wells are sunk, and water needed for irrigating 
fields is pumped up by windmills andsteam-engines. Agriculture receives much 
encouragement from Government. Government sends out agricultural experts 
to advise the cultivators, maintains model farms where experiments are carried 
on for their benefit, provides them with good cattle and seed, bores artesian 
wells for them at very little cost and permits them to repay this amount by 
installments. Similarly, Government erects barbed wire fences to protect their 
fields. 
As South Africa is to the south, and India to the north, of the equator, climatic 
conditions there are just the reverse of what they are here. The seasons occur 
in a reverse order. For example, while we have summer here, South Africa is 
passing through winter. Rainfall is uncertain and capricious. It may occur any 
time. The average annual rainfall rarely exceeds twenty inches. 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  
02. HISTORY 
The geographical divisions briefly noticed in the fir st chapter are not at all 
ancient. It has not been possible definitely to ascertain who were the 
inhabitants of South Africa in remote times. When the Europeans settled in 
South Africa, they found the Negroes there. These Negroes are supposed to 
have been the descendants of some of the slaves in America who managed to 
escape from their cruel bondage and migrated to Africa. They are divided into 
various tribes such as the Zulus, the Swazis, the Basutos, the Bechuanas, etc. 
They have a number of different languages. These Negroes must be regarded as 
the original inhabitants of South Africa. But South Africa is such a vast country 
that it can easily support twenty or thirty times its present population of 
Negroes. The distance between Cape Town and Durban is about eighteen 
hundred miles by rail; the distance by sea also is not less than one thousand 
miles. The combined area of these four colonies is 473,000 square miles. In 
1914 the Negro population in this vast region was about five million, while the 
Europeans numbered about a million and a quarter. 
Among the Negroes, the tallest and the most handsome are the Zulus. I have 
deliberately used the epithet ‘handsome’ in connection with Negroes. A fair 
complexion and a pointed nose represent our ideal of beauty. If we discard this 
superstition for a moment, we feel that the Creator did not spare Himself in 
fashioning the Zulu to perfection. Men and women are both tall and broad-
chested in proportion to their height. Their muscles are strong andwell-set. The 
calves of the legs and the arms are muscular and always well rounded. You will 
rarely find a man or woman walking with a stoop or with a hump back. The lips 
are certainly large and thick, but as they are in perfect symmetry with the 
entire physique, I for one would not say that they are unshapely. The eyes are 
round and bright. The nose is flat and large, such as becomes a large face, and 
the curled hair on the head sets off to advantage the Zulu’s skin which is black 
and shinning like ebony. If we ask a Zulu to which of the various races 
inhabiting South Africa he will award the palm for beauty, he will Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16 unhesitatingly decide in favour of his own people, and in this I would not see 
any want of judgment on his part. The physique of the Zulu is powerfully built 
and finely shaped by nature without any such effort as is made by Sandow and 
others in Europe in order to develop the muscles. It is a law of nature that the 
skin of races living near the equator should be black. And if we believe that 
there must be beauty in everything fashioned by nature, we would not only 
steer clear of all narrow and one-sided conceptions of beauty, but we in India 
would be free from the improper sense of shame and dislike which we feel for 
our own complexion if it is anything but fair. 
The Negroes live in round huts built of wattle and daub. The huts have a single 
round wall and are thatched with hay. A pillar inside supports the roof. A low 
entrance through which one can pass only by bending oneself is the only 
aperture for the passage of air. The entrance is rarely provided with a door. 
Like ourselves, the Negroes plaster the walls and the floor with earth and 
animal dung. It is said the Negroes cannot make anything square in shape. They 
have trained their eyes to see and make only round things. We never find 
nature drawing straight lines or rectilinear figures, and these innocent children 
of nature derive all their knowledge from their experience of her.  
The furniture in the hut is in keeping with the simplicity of the place. There 
would be no room for tables, chairs, boxes and such other things, and even now 
these things are rarely seen in a hut. 
Before the advent of European civilization, the Negroes used to wear animal 
skins, which also served them a carpets, bed sheets and quilts. Now-a-days they 
use blankets. Before British rule men as well as women moved about almost in 
a state of nudity. Even now many do the same in the country. They cover the 
private parts with a piece of skin. Some dispense even with this. But let not 
anyone infer from this that these people cannot control their senses. Where a 
large society follows a particular custom, it is quite possible that the custom is 
harmless even if it seems highly improper to the members of another society. 
These Negroes have no time to be starting at one another. When Shukadeva 
passed by the side of women bathing in a state of nudity, so the author of the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17 Bhagavata  tells us, his own mind was quite unruffled; nor were the women at 
all agitated or affected by a sense of shame. I do not think there is anything 
supernatural in this account. If in India today, there should be none who would 
be equally pure on a similar occasion, that does not set a limit to our striving 
after purity, but only argues our own degradation. It is only vanity which makes 
us look upon the Negroes as savages. They are not the barbarians we imagine 
them to be. 
The law requires Negro women to cover themselves from the chest to the knees 
when they go to a town. They are thus obliged to wrap a piece of cloth round 
their body. Consequently pieces of that size command a large sale in South 
Africa, and thousands of such blankets or sheets are imported from Europe 
every year. The men are similarly required to cover themselves from the waist 
to the knees. Many, therefore, have taken to the practice of wearing second-
hand clothing from Europe. Others wear a sort of knickers with a fastening 
tape. All these clothes are imported from Europe. 
The staple food of the Negroes is maize, and meat when available. Fortunately, 
they know nothing about spices or condiments. If they find spices in their food, 
or even if it iscoloured by turmeric, they turn up their noses at it, and those 
among them who are looked upon as quite uncivilized will not so much as touch 
it. It is no uncommon thing for a Zulu to take at a time one pound of boiled 
maize with a little salt. He is quite content to live upon porridge made from 
crushed mealies boiled in water. Whenever he can get meat, he eats it, raw or 
cooked, boiled or roasted, with only salt. He does not mind taking the flesh of 
any animal. 
The Negro languages are named after the various tribes. The art of writing was 
recently introduced by Europeans. There is nothing like a Negro alphabet. The 
Bible and other books have now been printed in the Negro languages in Roman 
character. The Zulu language is very sweet. Most words end with the sound of 
broad ‘a,’ so the language sounds soft and pleasing to the ear. I have heard and 
read that there is both meaning and poetry in the words. Judging from the few 
words which I happened to pick up, I think this statement is just. There are for Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18 most of the places sweet and poetical Negro names whose European 
equivalents I have mentioned. I am sorry I do not remember them and so 
cannot present them here to the reader. 
According to the Christian missionaries, the Negroes previously had not, and 
have not now, any religion at all. But taking the word religion in a wide sense, 
we can say that the Negroes do believe in and worship a Supreme Being beyond 
human comprehension. They fear this Power too. They are dimly conscious of 
the fact that the dissolution of the body does not mean the utter annihilation 
of a person. If we acknowledge morality as the basis of religion, the Negroes 
being moral may be held even to be religious. They have a perfect grasp of the 
distinction between truth and falsehood. It is doubtful whether Europeans or 
ourselves practice truthfulness to the same extent as the Negroes in their 
primitive state do. They have no temples or anything else of that kind. There 
are many superstitions among them as among other races. 
The reader will be surprised to learn, that this race, which is second to none in 
the world in point of physical strength, is so timid that a Negro is afraid at the 
sight even of a European child. If someone aims a revolver at him, he will 
either flee or will be too stupefied to have the power even to move. There is 
certainly reason for this. The notion is firmly impressed on the Negro mind, 
that it is only by some magic that a handful of Europeans have been able to 
subdue such a numerous and savage race as themselves. The Negro was well 
acquainted with the use of the spear, and bow and arrows. Of these he has 
been deprived. He had never seen, never fired, a gun. No match is needed, 
nothing more has to be done beyond moving a finger and yet a small tube all at 
once emits a sound, a flash is seen, and a bullet wounds and causes the death 
of a person in an instant. This is something the Negro cannot understand. So he 
stands in mortal terror of those who wield such a weapon. He and his 
forefathers before him have seen that such bullets have taken the lives of many 
helpless and innocent Negroes. Many do not know even now how this weapons. 
‘Civilization’ is gradually making headway among the Negroes. Pious 
missionaries deliver to them the message of Christ as they have understood it, Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19 open schools for them, and teach them how to read and write. But many who, 
being illiterate and therefore strangers to civilization, were so far free from 
many vices, have now become corrupt. Hardly any Negro who has come in 
contact with civilization has escaped the evil of drink. And when his powerful 
physique is under the influence of liquor, he becomes perfectly insane and 
commits all manner of crimes. That civilization must lead to the multiplication 
of wants is as certain as that two and two make four. In order to increase the 
Negro’s wants or to teach him the value of labour, a poll-tax and a hut-tax have 
been imposed upon him. If these imposts were not levied, this race of 
agriculturists living on their farms would not enter mines hundreds of feet deep 
in order to extract gold or diamonds, and if their labour were not available for 
the mines, gold as well as diamonds, would remain in the bowels of the earth. 
Likewise, the Europeans would find it difficult to get any servants, if no such 
tax was imposed. The result has been that thousands of Negro miners suffer, 
along with other diseases, from a kind of phthisis called ‘miners’ phthisis’. This 
is a fatal disease. Hardly any of those who fall in its clutches recover. The 
reader can easily imagine what self-restraint thousands of men living in mines 
away from their families can possibly exercise. They consequently fall easy 
victim to venereal disease. Not that thoughtful European of South Africa are 
not alive to this serious question. Some of them definitely hold it can hardly be 
claimed that civilization has, all things considered, exercised a wholesome 
influence on this race. As for the evil effects, he who runs may read them. 
About four hundred years ago the Dutch founded a settlement in this great 
country, then inhabited by such a simple and unsophisticated race. They kept 
slaves. Some Dutchmen from Java with their Malay slaves entered the country 
which we now know as Cape Colony. These Malays are Musalmans. They have 
Dutch blood in their veins and inherit some of the qualities of the Dutch. They 
are found scattered throughout South Africa, but Cape Town is their 
stronghold. Some of them today are in the service of Europeans, while others 
follow independent avocations. Malay women are very industrious and 
intelligent. They are generally cleanly in their ways of living. They are experts 
in laundry work and sewing. The men carry on some petty trade. Many drive Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20 hackney carriages. Some have received higher English education. One of them 
is the well-known doctor Abdul Rahman of Cape Town. He was a member of the 
old colonial legislature at Cape Town. Under the new constitution this right of 
entering the Parliament has been taken away. 
While giving a description of the Dutch, I incidentally said something about the 
Malays. But let us now see how the Dutch progressed. The Dutch have been as 
skilful cultivators as they have been brave soldiers. They saw that the country 
around them was highly suited for agriculture. They also saw that the ‘natives’ 
easily maintained themselves by working for only a short time during the year. 
Why should they not force these people to labour for them? The Dutch had 
guns. They were clever strategists. They knew how to tame human beings like 
other animals and they believed that their religion did not object to thier doing 
so. In this way they commenced agriculture with the labour of the South 
African ‘natives’ with not a single doubt as to the morality of their action. 
As the Dutch were in search of good lands for their own expansion, so were the 
English who also gradually arrived on the scene. The English and the Dutch 
were of course cousins. Their characters and ambitions were similar. Pots from 
the same pottery are often likely to clash against each other. So these two 
nations, while gradually advancing their respective interests and subduing the 
Negroes, came into collision. There were disputes and then battles between 
them. The English suffered a defeat at Majuba Hills. Majuba left a soreness 
which assumed a serious form and came to a head in the Boer War which lasted 
from 1899 to 1902.And when General Cronje surrendered, Lord Roberts was 
able to cable to Queen Victoria that Majuba had been avenged. But when this 
first collision occurred between the two nations previous to the Boer War, 
many of the Dutch were unwilling to remain under even the nominal authority 
of the British and ‘trekked’ into the unknown interior of South Africa. This was 
the genesis of the Transvaal and the Orange Free State. 
These Dutch came to be known in South Africa as Boers. They have preserved 
their language by clinging to it as a child clings to its mother. They have an 
intense realization of the close relation between their language and their Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21 liberty. In spite of many attacks, they have preserved their mother tongue 
intact. The language assumed a new form suited to their genius. As they could 
not maintain very close relations with Holland, they began to speak a patois 
derived from the Dutch as the Prakrits are derived from Sanskrit. And not 
wishing to impose an unnecessary burden upon their children, they have given a 
permanent shape to this patois. It is called Taal. Their books are written in 
Taal, their children are educated through it, and Boer members of the Union 
Parliament make it a point to deliver their speeches in it. Since the formation 
of the Union, Taal or Dutch and English have been officially treated on a 
footing of equality throughout South Africa, so much so that the Government 
Gazettes and records of Parliament must be in both languages.  
The Boers are simple, frank and religious. They settle in the midst of extensive 
farms. We can have no idea of the extent of these farms. A farm with us means 
generally an acre or two, and sometimes even less. In South Africa a single 
farmer has hundreds or thousands of acres of land in his possession. He is not 
anxious to put all this under cultivation at once, and if anyone argues with him, 
he will say, ‘Let it lie fellow. Lands which now lie fallow will be cultivated by 
our children.’ 
Every Boer is a good fighter. However much the Boers may quarrel among 
themselves, their liberty is so dear to them that when it is in danger, all get 
ready and fight as one man. They do not need elaborate drilling for fighting is a 
characteristic of the whole nation. General Smuts, General De Wet, and 
General Hertzog are all of them great lawyers, great farmers and equality great 
soldiers. General Botha had one farm of nine thousand acres. When he went to 
Europe in connection with negotiations for peace, it was said of him that there 
was hardly anyone in Europe who was as good a judge of sheep as he was. 
General Botha had succeeded the late President Kruger. His knowledge of 
English was excellent; yet when he met the King and ministers in England, he 
always preferred to talk in his own mother tongue. Who can say that this was 
not the proper thing to do? Why should he run the risk of committing a mistake 
in order to display his knowledge of English? Why should he allow his train of Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22 thought to be disturbed in the search for the right word? The British ministers 
might quite unintentionally employ some unfamiliar English idiom, he might not 
understand what they meant, be led into giving the wrong reply and get 
confused; and thus his cause would suffer. Why should he commit such a serious 
blunder? 
Boer women are as brave and simple as the men. If the Boers shed their blood 
in the Boer War, they were able to offer this sacrifice owing to the courage of 
their womenfolk and the inspiration they received from them. The women were 
not afraid of widowhood and refused to waste a thought upon the future.  
I have stated above that the Boers are religiously- minded Christians. But it 
cannot be said that they believe in the New Testament. As a matter of fact 
Europe does not believe in it; in Europe, however, they do claim to respect It, 
although only a few know and observe Christ’s religion of peace. But as to the 
Boers it may be said that they know the New Testament only by name. They 
read the Old Testament with devotion and know by heart the descriptions of 
battles it contains. They fully accept Moses’ doctrine of an ‘eye for an eye and 
a tooth for a tooth.’ And they act accordingly. 
Boer women understood that their religion required them to suffer in order to 
preserve their independence, and therefore patiently and cheerfully endured 
all hardships. Lord Kitchener left no stone unturned in order to break their 
spirit. He confined them in separate concentration camps, where they 
underwent indescribable sufferings. They starved, they suffered biting cold and 
scorching heat. Sometimes a soldier intoxicated with liquor or maddened by 
passion might even assault these unprotected women. Still the brave Boer 
women did not flinch. And at last King Edward wrote to Lord Kitchener, saying 
that he could not tolerate it, and if it was the only means of reducing the Boers 
to submission, he would prefer any sort of peace to continuing the war in that 
fashion, and asking the General to bring the war to a speedy end. 
When this cry of anguish reached England, the English people were deeply 
pained. They were full of admiration for the bravery of the Boers. The fact that 
such a small nationality should sustain a conflict with their world-wide empire Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23 was rankling in their minds. But when the cry of agony raised by the women in 
the concentration camps reached England not through themselves, not through 
their men,― they were fighting valiantly on the battlefield, ― but through a 
few high-souled Englishmen and women who were then in South Africa, the 
English people began to relent. The Late Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman read 
the mind of the English nation and raised his voice against the war. The Late 
Mr. Stead publicly prayed and invited others to pray, that God might decree the 
English a defeat in the war. This was a wonderful sight. Real suffering bravely 
borne melts even a heart of stone. Such is the potency of suffering or tapas. 
And there lies the key to Satyagraha. 
The result was that the peace of Vereeniging was concluded, and eventually all 
the four colonies of South Africa were united under one Government. Although 
every Indian who reads newspapers knows about this peace, there are a few 
facts connected with it, which perhaps are not within the knowledge of many. 
The Union did not immediately follow the peace, but each colony had its own 
legislature. The ministry was not fully responsible to the legislature. The 
Transvaal and the Free State were governed on Crown Colony lines. Generals 
Botha and Smuts were not the men to be satisfied with such restricted 
freedom. They kept aloof from the Legislative council. Theynon-co-operated. 
They flatly refused to have anything to do with the Government. Lord Milner 
made a pungent speech, in the course of which he said that General Botha need 
not have attached so much importance to himself. The country’s Government 
could well be carried on without him. Lord Milner thus decided to stage Hamlet 
without the Prince of Denmark. 
I have written in unstinted praise of the bravery, the love of liberty and the 
self-sacrifice of the Boers. But I did not intend to convey the impression that 
there were no differences of opinion among them during their days of trial, or 
that there were no weak-kneed persons among them. Lord Milner succeeded in 
setting up a party among the Boers who were easy to satisfy, and persuaded 
himself to believe that he could make a success of the legislature with their 
assistance. Even a stage play cannot be managed without the hero: and an Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24 administrator in this matter-of-fact world who ignores the central figure in the 
situation he has to deal with and still expects to succeed can only be described 
as insane. Such indeed was the case of Lord Milner. It was said that though he 
indulged in bluff, he found it so difficult to govern the Transvaal and the Free 
State without the assistance of General Botha, that he was often seen in his 
garden in an anxious and excited state of mind. General Botha distinctly stated 
that by the treaty of Vereeniging, as he understood it, the Boers were 
immediately entitled to complete internal autonomy. He added that, had that 
not been the case, he would never have signed the treaty. Lord Kitchener 
declared in reply that he had given no such pledge to General Botha. The 
Boers, he said, would be gradually granted full self-government as they proved 
their loyalty! Now who was to judge between these two? How could one expect 
General Botha to agree if arbitration was suggested? The decision arrived at in 
the matter by the Imperial Government of the time was very creditable to 
them. They conceded that the stronger party should accept the interpretation 
of the agreement put upon it by the other and weaker party. According to the 
principles of justice and truth, that is the correct canon of interpretation. I 
may have meant to say anything, but I must concede that my speech or writing 
was intended to convey the meaning ascribed to it by my hearer or reader in so 
far as he is concerned. We often break this golden rule in our lives. Hence arise 
many of our disputes, andhalf-truth, which is worse than untruth, is made to do 
duty for truth. 
Thus when truth ―in the present case General Botha ―fully triumphed, he set to 
work. All the Colonies were eventually united, and South Africa obtained 
fullself-government. Its flag is the Union Jack, it is shown in red on maps, and 
yet it is no exaggeration to say that South Africa is completely independent. 
The British Empire cannot receive a single farthing from South Africa without 
the consent of its Government. Not only that, but British ministers have 
conceded that if South Africa wishes to remove the Union Jack and to be 
independent even in name, there is nothing to prevent it from doing so. And if 
the Boers have so far not taken this step, there are strong reasons for it. For 
one thing, the Boer leaders are shrewd and sagacious men. They see nothing Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25 improper in maintaining with the British Empire a partnership in which they 
have nothing to lose. But there is another practical reason. In Natal the English 
preponderate, in Cape Colony there is a large population of Englishmen though 
they do not outnumber the Boers; in Johannesburg the English element is 
predominant. This being the case, if the Boers seek to establish an independent 
republic in South Africa, the result would be internecine strife and possibly a 
civil war. South Africa, therefore, continues to rank as a dominion of the British 
Empire. 
The way in which the constitution of the Union was framed is worthy of note. A 
National Convention, composed of delegates representative of all parties 
appointed by the Colonial legislatures, unanimously prepared a draft 
Constitution and the British Parliament had to approve it in its entirely. A 
member of the House of Commons drew the attention of the House to a 
grammatical mistake and suggested that it should be rectified. The late Sir 
Henry Campbell- Bannerman, while rejecting the suggestion, observed that 
faultless grammar was not essential to carrying on a government, that the 
Constitution was framed as a result of negotiations between the British Cabinet 
and the ministers of South Africa and that they did not reserve even the right of 
correcting a grammatical error to the British Parliament. Consequently, the 
Constitution recast in the form of an Imperial Bill passed through both Houses 
of Parliament, just as it was, without the slightest alteration. 
There is one more circumstance worthy of notice in this connection. There are 
some provisions in the Act of Union, which may appear meaningless to the lay 
reader. They have led to a great increase in expenditure. This had not escaped 
the notice of the framers of the Constitution; but their object was not to attain 
perfection, but by compromise to arrive at an understanding and to make the 
Constitution a success. That is why the Union has four capitals, no colony being 
prepared to part with its own capital. Similarly, although the old colonial 
legislatures were abolished, provincial councils with subordinate and delegated 
functions were set up. And though Governorships were abolished, officers 
corresponding to the rank of Governor and styled Provincial Administrators Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26 were appointed. Everyone knows that four local legislatures, four capitals and 
four Governors are unnecessary and serve for mere show. But the shrewd 
statesmen of South Africa did not object. The arrangement is showy and entails 
additional expenditure, but union was desirable and therefore the statesmen 
did what they thought fit, regardless of outside criticism and got their policy 
approved by the British Parliament. 
I have endeavored to sketch very briefly the history of South Africa, as without 
it, it appeared to me difficult to explain the inner meaning of the great 
Satyagraha struggle. It now remains to be seen how the Indians came to this 
country and struggled against their adversities before the inauguration of 
Satyagraha. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27  
03. INDIANS ENTER SOUTH AFRICA 
We saw in the preceding chapter how the English arrive d. They settled in Natal, 
where they obtained some concessions from the Zulus. They observed that 
excellent sugarcane, tea and coffee could be grown in Natal. Thousands of 
labourers would be needed in order to grow such crops on a large scale, which 
was clearly beyond the capacity of a handful of colonists. They offered 
inducements and then threats to the Negroes in order to make them work but 
in vain, as slavery had been then abolished. The Negro is not used to hard 
work. He can easily maintain himself by working for six months in the year. 
Why then should be bind himself to an employer for a long term? The English 
settlers could make no progress at all with their plantations in the absence of a 
stable labour force. They therefore opened negotiations with the Government 
of India and requested their help for the supply of labour. That Government 
complied with their request, and the first batch of indentured labourers from 
India reached Natal on November 16, 1860, truly a fateful date for this history; 
had it not been for this, there would have been no Indians and therefore no 
Satyagraha in South Africa, and this book would have remained unwritten. 
In my opinion, the Government of India were not well advised in taking the 
action they did. The British officials in India consciously or unconsciously were 
partial to their brethren in Natal. It is true that as many terms as possible, 
purporting to safeguard the labourers’ interests were entered in the 
indentures. Fairly good arrangements were made for their board. But adequate 
consideration was not given to the question as to how these illiterate labourers 
who had gone to a distant land were to seek redress if they had any grievances. 
No thought was given to their religious needs or to the preservation of their 
morality. The British officials in India did not consider that although slavery had 
been abolished by law, employers could not be free from a desire to make 
slaves of their employees. They did not realize, as they ought to have realized, 
that the labourers who had gone to Natal would in fact become temporary 
slaves. The late Sir W.W. Hunter, who had deeply studied these labour Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28 conditions, used a remarkable phrase about them. Writing about the Indian 
labourers in Natal, he said that theirs  was a state of semi-slavery. On another 
occasion, in the course of a letter, he described their condition as bordering on 
slavery. And tendering evidence before a commission in Natal, the most 
prominent European in that Colony, the late Mr. Harry Escombe, admitted as 
much. Testimony to the same effect can be readily gathered from the 
statements of leading Europeans in Natal. Most of these were incorporated in 
the memorials on the subject submitted to the Government of India. But the 
fates would have their course. And the steamer which carried those labourers 
to Natal carried with them the seed of the great Satyagraha movement. 
I have not the space here in the present volume to narrate how the labourers 
were deluded by Indian recruiting agents connected with Natal; how under the 
influence of such delusion they left the mother country; how their eyes were 
opened on reaching Natal; how still they continued to stay there; how others 
followed them; how they broke through all the restraints which religion or 
morality imposes, or to be more accurate, how these restraints gave way, and 
how the very distinction between a married woman and a concubine ceased to 
exist among these unfortunate people.  
When the news that indentured labourers had gone to Natal reached Mauritius, 
Indian traders having connection with such labourers were induced to follow 
then there. Thousands of Indians, labourers as well as traders, have settled in 
Mauritius which is on the way to Natal from India. An Indian trader in Mauritius, 
the late Sheth Abubakar Amad, thought of opening a shop in Natal. The English 
in Natal had then no idea of what Indian traders were capable of, nor did they 
care. They had been able to raise very profitable crops of sugarcane, tea and 
coffee, with the assistance of indentured labour. They manufactured sugar, and 
in a surprisingly short time supplied South Africa with a modest quantity of 
sugar, tea, and coffee. They made so much money that they built palatial 
mansions for themselves and turned a wilderness into a veritable garden. In 
such circumstances the naturally did not mind an honest and plucky trader like 
Abubakar Sheth settling in their midst. Add to this that an Englishman actually 
joined him as partner. Abubakar Sheth carried on trade and purchased land, Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29 and the story of his prosperity reached Porbandar, his native place, and the 
country around. Other Memans consequently reached Natal. Borahs from Surat 
followed them. These traders needed accountants, and Hindu accountants from 
Gujarat and Saurashtra accompanied them. 
Two classes of Indians thus settled in Natal, first free traders and their free 
servants, and secondly indentured labourers. In course of time the indentured 
labourers had children. Although not bound to labour, these children were 
affected by several stringent provisions of the colonial law. How can the 
children of slaves escape the brand of slavery? The labourers went to Natal 
under indenture for a period of five years. They were under no obligation to 
labour after the expiry of that period, and were entitled to work as freed 
labourers or trade in Natal, and settle there if they wished. Some elected to do 
so while others returned home. Those who remained in Natal came to be known 
as ‘Free Indians’. It is necessary to understand the peculiar position of this 
class. They were not admitted to all the rights enjoyed by the entirely free 
Indians of whom I have first spoken. For instance, they were required to obtain 
a pass if they wanted to go from one place to another, and if they married and 
desired the marriage to be recognized as valid in law, they were required to 
register it with an official known as Protector of Indian Immigrants. They were 
also subject to other severe restrictions. 
The Indians traders saw that they could trade not only with indentured labouers 
and ‘Free Indians’, but with the Negroes as well. Indian merchants were a 
source of great convenience to the Negroes, who very much feared the 
European traders. The European trader wanted to trade with the Negro, but it 
would be too much for Negro customers to expect courtesy at his hands. They 
might think it a great good fortune if he gave them full consideration for their 
money. Some of them had bitter experiences. A man might purchase an article 
worth four shillings, place a sovereign on the counter, and receive four shillings 
as balance instead of sixteen, and sometimes even nothing whatever. If the 
poor Negro asked for the balance or showed how the amount paid him was less 
than his due, the reply would be gross abuse. He might thank his stars if things 
stopped there; otherwise the abuse would be reinforced by a blow or a kick. I Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30 do not mean to suggest that all English traders behaved like this. But it can 
safely be asserted that the number of such cases was fairly large. On the other 
hand, Indian traders had a good word for the Negroes and even joked with 
them. The simple Negro would like to enter the shop and handle and examine 
the goods he wanted to purchase. Indian traders permitted all this. It is true 
that in this they were not actuated by altruistic motives, it may have had 
something to do with their self-interest. The Indian might not miss the 
opportunity, if it offered, of cheating his Negro customer, but his courtesy 
made him popular with the Negroes. Moreover, the Negro never feared the 
Indian traders. On the other hand, cases have occurred in which an Indian tried 
to cheat Negroes, but on being detected, was roughly handled by them. And 
more often Negro customers have been heard to abuse Indian traders. Thus, so 
far as Indians and Negroes were concerned, it is the former who feared the 
latter. The result was that trade with Negroes proved very profitable to Indian 
traders. And the Negroes were to be found throughout South Africa. 
There were Boer republics in the Transvaal and the Orange Free State during 
the eighties of the last century. I need scarcely say that in these republics the 
Negro had no power, it was all a white men’s affair. Indian traders had heard 
that they could also trade with the Boers, who, being simple, frank and 
unassuming, would not think it below their dignity to deal with Indian traders. 
Several Indian traders therefore proceeded to the Transvaal and the Free State 
and opened shops there. As there were no railways there at the time, they 
earned large profits. The expectations of the Indian traders were fulfilled and 
they carried on considerable trade with the Boers and the Negroes as 
customers. Similarly, several Indian traders went to the Cape Colony and began 
to earn fairly well. The Indians were thus distributed in small numbers in all the 
four colonies.  
Absolutely free Indians now number between forty to fifty thousand, while the 
‘Free Indians’ so called, that is, the labourers who are freed from their 
indentures and their descendants, number about a hundred thousand. 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31  
04. A REVIEW OF THE GRIEVANCES 
Na
tal 
Th
e European planters of Natal wanted only slaves. They could not afford to 
have labourers who, after serving their term, would be free to compete with 
them to however small an extent. No doubt the indentured labouers had gone 
to Natal, as they had not been very successful in agriculture or other pursuits in 
India. But it is not to be supposed that they had no knowledge of agriculture or 
that they did not understand the value of land. They found that if they grew 
only vegetables in Natal, they could earn good incomes, and that their earnings 
would be still better if they owned a small piece of land. Many, therefore, on 
the termination of their indentures, began to pursue some trade or other on a 
small scale. This was, on the whole, advantageous to the settlers in Natal. 
Various kinds of vegetables, which had not been grown before for want of a 
competent class of cultivators, now became available. Other kinds, which had 
been grown in small quantities, could now be had in abundances. The result 
was a fall in the price of vegetables. But the European planters did not relish 
this new development. They felt they now had competitors in a field in which 
they believed they had a monopoly. A movement was, therefore, set on foot 
against these poor time-expired labourers. The reader will be surprised to 
learn, that while on the one hand the Europeans demanded more and more 
labourers and easily took in as many of them as went from India, on the other 
hand they started an agitation to harass ex-indentured labourers in a variety of 
ways. This was the reward for their skill and hard toil! 
The movement assumed many forms. One set of agitators demanded that the 
labourers who completed their indentures should be sent back in India, and 
that therefore fresh labourers arriving in Natal from that time forward should 
have a new clause entered in their indentures, providing for their compulsory 
return to India at the expiration of their term of service unless they renewed 
their indentures. A second set advocated the imposition of a heavy annual 
capitation tax on the labourers who did not re-indenture themselves at the end Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32 of the first period of five years. Both, however, had the same object in view, 
namely, by hook or crook to make it impossible for ex-indentured labourers to 
live as free men in Natal in any circumstances. This agitation attained such 
serious dimensions, that the Government of Natal appointed a commission. As 
the demands of both these classes of agitators were quite unfair, and as the 
presence of the ex-indentured labourers was clearly beneficial to the entire 
population from an economic standpoint, the independent evidence recorded 
by the commission was against the agitators, who thus failed to achieve any 
tangible result for the time being. But as fire, although extinguished, leaves a 
trail behind it, the agitation created some impression on the Government of 
Natal. How could it be otherwise? The Government of Natal was friendly to the 
planters. It therefore communicated with the Government of India and laid 
before it the proposals of both the sets of agitators. But the Government of 
India could not all at once accept proposals which would reduce indentured 
labourers to perpetual slavery. One justification or excuse for sending labourers 
to such a far-off land under indenture was that the labourers, after completing 
the indentures, would become free to develop their powers fully and 
consequently improve their economic condition. As Natal then was still a Crown 
Colony, the Colonial Office was fully responsible for its government. Natal, 
therefore, could not look for help from that quarter too in satisfying its unjust 
demands. For this and similar reasons a movement was set on foot to attain 
responsible government, which was eventually conferred on Natal in 1893. 
Natal now began to feel its strength. The Colonial Office too did not any longer 
find it difficult to accept whatever demands Natal might choose to make. 
Delegates from the new responsible Government of Natal came to India to 
confer with the Government of India. They proposed the imposition of an 
annual poll-tax of twenty-five pounds, or three hundred and seventy-five 
rupees, on every Indian who had been freed from indenture. It was evident that 
no Indian labourer could pay such an exhorbitant tax and live in Natal as a free 
man. Lord Elgin, the Governor-General of India, considered that the amount 
was excessive, and ultimately he accepted an annual poll-tax of three pounds. 
This was equivalent to nearly six months’ earnings on the indenture scale. The Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33 tax was levied, not only in the labourer himself but also upon his wife, his 
daughters aged thirteen years or upwards and his sons aged sixteen years or 
upwards. There was hardly any labourer who had not a wife and a couple of 
children. Thus, as a general rule, every labouer was required to pay an annual 
tax of twelve pounds. It is impossible to describe the hardships that this tax 
entailed. Only those, who actually underwent the hardships, could realize 
them, and only those who witnessed their sufferings could have some idea of 
them. The Indians carried on a powerful agitation against this action of the 
Government of Natal. Memorials were submitted to the Imperial Government 
and the Government of India, but to no purpose except for the reduction in the 
amount of the tax. What could the poor labourers do or understand in this 
matter? The agitation on their behalf was carried on by the Indian traders, 
actuated by motives of patriotism or of philanthropy.  
Free Indians fared no better. The European traders of natal carried on a similar 
agitation against them for mainly the same reasons. Indian traders were well 
established. They acquired lands in good localities. As the number of freed 
labourers began to increase, there was a larger and larger demand for the class 
of goods required by them. Bags of rice were imported from India in their 
thousands and sold at a good profit. Naturally this trade was largely in the 
hands of Indians who had besides a fair share of the trade with Zulus. They thus 
became an eyesore to petty European traders. Again, some Englishmen pointed 
out to the Indians traders, that according to law they were entitled to vote in 
the elections for the Legislative Assembly of Natal, and to stand as candidates 
for the same. Some Indians therefore got their names entered on the electoral 
roll. This made the European politicians of Natal join the ranks of anti-Indians. 
They doubted whether the Europeans could stand in competition with Indians if 
the Indians’ prestige increased, and if their position was consolidated in Natal. 
The first step, therefore, taken by the responsible Government of Natal in 
connection with free Indians was that they decided to enact a law, 
disfranchising all Asiatics save those who were then rightly contained in any 
voters’ list. A bill to that effect was first introduced in the Legislative Assembly 
of Natal in 1894. This was based on the principle of excluding Indians as Indians Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34 from the franchise, and was, in Natal, the first piece of legislation affecting 
them in which racial distinction was made. Indians resisted this measure. A 
memorial was prepared during one night and four hundred signatures were 
appended to it. When the memorial was submitted to the Legislative Assembly 
of Natal, that body was started. But the Bill was passed all the same. A 
memorial bearing ten thousand signatures was submitted to Lord Ripon who 
was then Secretary of State for the Colonies. Ten thousand signatures meant 
almost the total population at the time of free Indians in Natal. Lord Ripon 
disallowed the bill and declared that the British Empire could not agree to the 
establishment of a colour bar in legislation. The reader will be in a position 
later on to appreciate how great this victory was for Indians. The Natal 
Government, therefore, brought forward another bill, removing racial 
distinction but indirectly disqualifying Indians. Indians protested against this as 
well but without success. This new Bill was ambiguous in meaning. Indians were 
in a position to carry it finally to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council 
with a view to its interpretation; but they did not think it advisable to do so. I 
still think that they did the right thing in avoiding this endless litigation. It was 
no small thing that the colour bar was not allowed to be set up.  
But the planters and the Government of Natal were not likely to stop there. To 
nip the political power of Indians in the bud was for them the indispensable 
first step; but the real point of their attack was Indian trade and free Indian 
immigration. They were uneasy at the thought of the Europeans in Natal being 
swamped if India with its teeming millions invaded Natal. The approximate 
population of Natal at that time was 400,000 Zulus and 40,000 Europeans as 
against 60,000 indentured, 10,000 ex-indentured and 10,000 free Indians. The 
Europeans had no solid grounds for their apprehensions, but it is impossible to 
convince by argument men who have been seized with vague terrors. As they 
were ignorant of the helpless condition of India and of the manners and 
customs of the Indian people, they were under the impression that the Indians 
were as adventurous and resourceful as themselves. They could scarcely be 
blamed if they thus created a bugbear of the vast population of India in 
comparison with their own small numbers. However that may be, the result of Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35 the successful opposition to the disfranchising bill was, that in two other laws 
passed by the Natal Legislature it had to avoid racial distinction and to attain 
its end in an indirect manner. The position, therefore, was not as bad as it 
might have been. On this occasion, too Indians offered a strenuous resistance, 
but in spite of this the laws were enacted. One of these imposed severe 
restrictions on Indian trade and the other on Indian immigration in Natal. The 
substance of the first Act was than no one could trade without a license issued 
by an official appointed in accordance with its provisions. In practice any 
European could get a licence while the Indian had to face no end of difficulty in 
the matter. He had to engage a lawyer and incur other expenditure. Those who 
could not afford it had to go without a licence. The chief provision of the other 
Act was that only such immigrants as were able to pass the education test in a 
European language could enter the Colony. This closed the doors of Natal 
against crores of Indians. Lest I should in advertently do the Government of 
Natal an injustice, I must state that the Act further provided that an Indian 
resident in Natal for three years before the passing of that Act might obtain a 
certificate of domicile enabling him to leave the Colony and return at any time 
with his wife and minor children without being required to pass the education 
test. 
The indentured and free Indians in Natal were and still are subject to other 
disabilities, both legal and extra-legal, in addition to those described above. 
But I do not think it necessary to tax the reader with a recital of them. I 
propose to give such details only as are essential to a clear understanding of 
the subject. A history of the condition of Indians in different parts of South 
Africa would take up much space. But that is beyond the scope of the present 
volume. 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36  
05. A REVIEW OF THE GRIEVANCES 
Th
e Transvaal and other Colonies 
As in Natal, so in the other Colonies anti-Indian pre judice had more or less 
begun to grow even before 1880. Except in the Cape Colony, the general 
opinion held was that as labourers the Indians were all right, but it had become 
an axiom with many Europeans that the immigration of free Indians was purely 
a disadvantage to South Africa. The Transvaal was a republic. For Indians to 
declare their British citizenship before its President was only to invite ridicule. 
If they had any grievance, all they could do was to bring it to the notice of the 
British Agent at Pretoria. Still the wonder is that when the Transvaal came 
under the British flag, there was none from whom Indians could expect even 
such assistance as the Agent rendered when the Transvaal was independent. 
When during Lord Morley’s tenure of the office of the Secretary of State for 
India, a deputation on behalf of the Indians waited upon him, he declared in so 
many words that as the members of the deputation were aware, the Imperial 
Government could exercise but little control over self-governing dominions. 
They could not dictate to them; they could plead, they could argue, they could 
press for the application of their principles. Indeed in some instances they 
could more effectively remonstrate with foreign Powers, as they remonstrated 
with the Boer Republic, than with their own people in the Colonies. The 
relations of the mother country with the Colonies were in the nature of a silken 
tie, which would snap with the slightest tension. As force was out of the 
question, he assured the deputation that he would do all he could by 
negotiations. When war was declared on the Transvaal, Lord Lansdowne, Lord 
Selborne and other British Statesmen declared that the scandalous treatment 
accorded to the Indians by the South African Republic was one of the causes of 
the war. 
Let us now see what sort of treatment this was. Indians first entered the 
Transvaal in 1881. The late Sheth Abubakar opened a shop in Pretoria and 
purchased land in one of its principle streets. Other traders followed in his Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37 wake. Their great success excited the jealousy of European traders who 
commenced an anti-Indian campaign in the newspapers, and submitted 
petitions to the Volksraad or Parliament, praying that Indians should be 
expelled and their trade stopped. The Europeans in this newly opened up 
country had a boundless hunger for riches. They were almost strangers to the 
dictates of morality. Here are some statements they made in their petitions: 
“These Indians have no sense of human decency. They suffer from loathsome 
diseases. They consider every woman as their prey. They believe that women 
have no souls.” These four sentences contain four lies. It would be easy to 
multiply such specimens. As were the Europeans, so were their representatives. 
Little did the Indian traders know what a sinister and unjust movement was 
being carried on against them. They did not read newspapers. The newspaper 
campaign and the petitions had the desired effect, and a bill was introduced 
into the Volksraad. The newspaper campaign and the petitions had the desired 
effect, and a bill was introduced into the Volksraad. The leading Indians were 
taken aback when they came to know how events had shaped themselves. They 
went to see President Kruger who did not so much as admit them into his house 
but made them stand in the courtyard. After hearing them for a while, he said, 
“You are the descendants of Ishmael and therefore from your very birth bound 
to slave for the descendants of Esau. As the descendants of Esau we cannot 
admit you to rights placing you on an equality with ourselves. You must rest 
content with what rights we grant to you.” It cannot be said that this reply 
from the President was inspired by malice or anger. President Kruger had been 
taught from his childhood the stories of the Old Testament, and he believed 
them to be true. How can we blame a man who gives candid expression to his 
opinions such as they are? Ignorance, however, is bound to do harm even when 
associated with candour, and the result was that in1885 a very drastic law was 
rushed through the Volksraad, as if thousands of Indians were on the point of 
flooding the Transvaal. The British Agent was obliged to move in the matter at 
the instance of Indian leaders. The question was finally carried to the Secretary 
of State for the Colonies. In terms of this Law 3 of 1885 every Indian settling in 
the Republic for the purpose of carrying on trade was required to register at a Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38 cost of twenty-five pounds subject to heavy penalties, and no Indian could hold 
an inch of land or enjoy the rights of citizenship. All this was so manifestly 
unjust that the Transvaal Government could not defend it in argument. There 
was a treaty subsisting between the Boers and the British known as the London 
Convention, article XIV of which secured the rights of British subjects. The 
British Government objected to the Law as being in contravention of that 
article. The Boers urged in reply that the British Government had previously 
given their consent, whether express or implied to the law in question. 
A dispute thus arose between the British and Boer Governments, and the 
matter was referred to arbitration. The arbitrator’s award was unsatisfactory. 
He tried to please both parties. The Indians were therefore the losers. The only 
advantage they reaped, if advantage it can be called, was that they did not 
lose as much as they might have done otherwise. The Law was amended in 1886 
in accordance with the arbitrator’s award. The registration fee was reduced 
from twenty- five to three pounds. The clause, which completely debarred 
Indians from holding landed property, was removed, and it was provided 
instead, that the Indians could own fixed property in such locations, wards and 
streets as were specially set apart for their residence by the Transvaal 
Government. This Government did not honestly carry out the terms of the 
amended clause, and withheld from Indians the right to purchase freehold land 
even in the locations. In all towns inhabited by Indians, these locations were 
selected in dirty places situated far away from the towns where there was no 
water supply, no lighting arrangement and no sanitary convenience to speak of. 
Thus the Indians became the Panchamas of the Transvaal. It can be truly said 
that there is no difference between these locations and the untouchables’ 
quarters in India. Just as the Hindus believe that touching Dhedhs or residence 
in their neighbouhood would lead to pollution, so did the Europeans in the 
Transvaal believe, for all practical purposes, that physical contact with the 
Indians or living near them would defile them. Again the Transvaal Government 
interpreted Law 3 of 1885 to mean that the Indians could trade, too, 
exclusively in the locations. The arbitrator had decided that the interpretation 
of the law rested with the ordinary Tribunals of the Transvaal.The Indian Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39 traders were, therefore, in a very awkward condition. Still they managed to 
maintain their position fairly well by carrying on negotiations in one place, by 
having recourse to law courts in another, and by exerting what little influence 
they possessed in a third. Such was the miserable and precarious position of 
Indians in the Transvaal at the outbreak of the Boer War. 
We shall now turn to examine the position in the Free State. Hardly a dozen 
Indians had opened shops there when the Europeans started a powerful 
agitation. The Volksraad passed a stringent law and expelled all Indian traders 
from the Free State, awarding them nominal compensation. That law provided 
that no Indian could on any account hold fixed property or carry on mercantile 
or farming business or enjoy franchise rights in the Free State. With special 
permission an Indian could settle as a labourer or as a hotel waiter. But the 
authorities were not obliged to grant even this precious permission in every 
case. The result was that a respectable Indian could not live in the Free State 
even for a couple of days without great difficulty. At the time of the Boer War 
there were no Indians in the Free State except a few waiters. 
In the Cape Colony, too, there was some newspaper agitation against Indians, 
and the treatment to which they were subjected was not free from humiliating 
features. For example, Indian children could not attend public schools, etc, and 
Indian travelers could hardly secure accommodation in hotels. But there were 
no restrictions as to trade and the purchase of land for a long time. 
There were reasons for this state of things. As we have already seen, there was 
a fair proportion of the Malays in the population of the Cape colony in general 
and of Cape town in particular. As the Malays are Musalmans, they soon came in 
contact with their Indian co-religionists, and consequently with other Indians 
late on. Moreover, some Indian Musalmans married Malay women. How could 
the Government of the Cape Colony legislate against the Malays? The Cape was 
their motherland, Dutch was their mother tongue, they had been living with the 
Dutch from the very first and therefore largely imitated them in their ways of 
life. The Cape Colony, therefore, has been the least affected by colour 
prejudice. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40 Again as the Cape Colony was the oldest settlement and the chief centre of 
culture in South Africa, it produced sober, gentlemanly and large hearted 
Europeans. In my opinion, there is no place on earth and no race, which is not 
capable of producing the finest types of humanity, given suitable opportunities 
and education. It has been my good fortune to come across this class of people 
in all parts of South Africa. In the Cape Colony, however, the proportion of such 
persons was very much the larger. Perhaps the best known and the most 
learned among them is Mr. Merriman, who was a member of the first and 
subsequent ministries that came in power after the grant of responsible 
government to the Cape Colony in 1872, was again the Premier in the last 
ministry when the Union was established in 1910, and was known as the 
Gladstone of South Africa. Then there are the Moltenos and the Schreiners. Sir 
John Molteno was the first Premier of the Colony in 1872. Mr. W. P. Schreiner, 
was a well- known advocate, for some time Attorney-General, and later on 
Premier. His sister, Olive Schreiner, was a gifted lady, popular in South Africa 
and well known wherever the English language is spoken. Even since she wrote 
the book she became famous as the authoress of Dreams . Her love for all 
mankind was unbounded. Love was written in her eyes. Although she belonged 
to such a distinguished family and was a learned lady, she was so simple in 
habits that she cleaned utensils in her house herself. Mr. Merriman, the 
Moltenos and the Schreiners, had always espoused the cause of the Negroes. 
Whenever the rights of the Negroes were in danger, they stoutly stood up in 
their defence. They had kindly feelings for the Indians as well, though they 
made a distinction between Negroes and Indians. Their argument was that as 
the Negroes had been the inhabitants of South Africa long before the European 
settlers, the latter could not deprive them of their natural rights. But as for the 
Indians it would not be unfair if laws calculated to remove the danger of their 
undue competition were enacted. All the same they had a warm corner in their 
hearts for Indians. When Gokhale went to South Africa, Mr. Schreiner presided 
over the Townhall meeting in Cape Town, where he was accorded his first 
public reception in that country. Mr. Merriman also treated him with great 
courtesy and expressed his sympathy with the Indian cause. There were other Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41 Europeans of the type of Mr. Merriman. I have mentioned these well-known 
names as typical of their class. 
The newspapers in Cape Town, too, were less hostile to Indians than in other 
parts of South Africa. 
While it is true that for these reasons there has always been less race hatred in 
the Cape Colony than in other parts, it is but natural that the anti-Indian 
feeling which constantly found expression in the other colonies also found its 
way to the Cape. There too two laws copied from Natal were passed, namely, 
the Immigration Restriction Act and the Dealers’ Licenses Act. 
It can be said that the door in South Africa, which was formerly wide open, had 
thus been almost closed against Indians at the time of the Boer War. In the 
Transvaal there was no restriction on immigration except the registration fee of 
three pounds. When Natal and the Cape Colony closed their ports to Indians, 
they had difficulty in landing on their way to the Transvaal which was in the 
interior. They could reach it via Delagoa Bay, a Portuguese port. But the a 
Portuguese also more or less imitated the British. It must be mentioned that 
some stray Indians were able to find their way to the Transvaal via Natal or 
Delagoa Bay by suffering great hardships or by bribing port officers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42  
06. A REVIEW OF THE EARLY STRUGGLE 
 While considering the position of Indians in the pre vious chapters, we have 
seen to some extent how they withstood the attacks made upon them. In order, 
however, to give an adequate idea of the origin of Satyagraha, it is necessary to 
devote special space to the endeavours made with a view to defend Indian 
interests in the pre-Satyagraha days. 
Up till 1893 there were hardly any free and well educated Indians in South 
Africa capable of espousing the Indian cause. English-knowing Indians were 
mostly clerks whose knowledge of English was only commensurate with the 
needs of their occupation and not adequate to drafting representations, and 
who, again, must give all their time to their employers. A second group of 
English-educated Indians was composed of such of them as were born in South 
Africa. They were mostly the descendants of indentured labourers, and if at all 
qualified for the work, were in Government service as interpreters in law 
courts. Thus, they were not in a position to help the Indian cause beyond 
expressing their fellow-feelings. 
Again, indentured and ex-indentured labourers hailed mainly from Uttar 
Pradesh and Madras State, while, as we have already seen, the Musalmans 
mostly traders and the Hindus mostly clerks, who chiefly represented the class 
of free Indians, belonged Gujarat. Besides there were a few Parsi traders and 
clerks, but the total population of Parsis in South Africa did not probably 
exceed thirty or forty souls. A fourth group among free Indians was composed 
of Sindhi traders. There were two hundreds or more Sindihisin South Africa. 
Wherever the Sindhi has settled outside India he deals in ‘fancy goods’, 
namely, silks and brocades, carved boxes and other furniture made of ebony, 
sandalwood and ivory and similar goods. His customers are mainly Europeans. 
Indentured labourers were called ‘coolies’ by Europeans. A ‘coolie’ means a 
porter. The expression was used so extensively that the indentured labourers 
began to describe themselves as ‘coolies’. Hundreds of Europeans called Indian 
lawyers and Indian traders ‘coolie’ lawyers and ‘coolie’ traders. There were Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43 some Europeans who were unable to perceive or believe that the name implied 
an insult, but many used it as a term of deliberate contempt. Free Indians, 
therefore, tried to differentiate themselves from the indentured labourers. For 
this and other reasons peculiar to conditions in India, a distinction was sought 
to be drawn in South Africa between indentured and freed labourers on the one 
hand and free Indians on the other. 
Free Indians and especially the Musalman traders undertook to resist the 
wrongs detailed above, but no direct attempt was made to seek the co-
operation of the indentured and ex-indentured labouers. Probably it did not 
occur to anyone to enlist their support; if the idea did suggest itself to some, 
there was in their opinion the risk of making matters worse by allowing them to 
join the movement. And as it was considered that the free traders were the 
chief target of attack, the measures for defence were limited to that class. It 
can be truly said that free Indians fought well against difficulties, seeing that 
they were thus seriously handicapped, that they were ignorant of English, and 
that they had no experience of public work in India. They sought the help of 
European barristers, had petitions prepared, waited upon the authorities on 
some occasions in deputations, and did what they could to mend matters. This 
was the state of things up till 1893. 
It will be helpful to the reader to bear some important dates in mind. Before 
1893 Indians had been hounded out of the Orange Free State. In the Transvaal, 
Law 3 of 1885 was in force. In Natal, measures, calculated to enable only 
indentured labourers to live in the colony and to turn out the rest, were under 
contemplation, and responsible government had been achieved to that end. 
I left India for South Africa in April, 1893. I had no idea of the previous history 
of the Indian emigrants. I went there on a purely professional visit. A well-
known firm of Porbandar Memans then carried on trade in Durban under the 
name and style of Dada Abdulla. An equally well-known and rival firm traded at 
Pretoria under the designation of Taib Haji Khanmamad. Unfortunately, an 
important law-suit was pending between the rivals. A partner of the firm of 
Dada Abdulla who was in Porbandar thought that it would help their case if Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44 they engaged me and sent me to South Africa. I had been just called to the bar 
and was quite a novice in the profession, but he had no fear of my mishandling 
their case, as he did not want me to conduct the case in the court but only to 
instruct the able South African lawyers they had retained. I was fond of novel 
experiences. I loved to see fresh fields and pastures new. It was disgusting to 
have to give commission to those who brought me work. The atmosphere of 
intrigue in Saurashtra was choking me. The engagement was only for one year. I 
did not see any objection to my accepting it. I had nothing to lose as Messers 
Dada Abdulla expressed their willingness to pay my travelling expenses as well 
as the expenses that would be incurred in South Africa and a fee of one 
hundred and five pounds. This arrangement had been made through my elder 
brother, now deceased, who was as father to me. For me his will was a 
command. He liked the idea of my going to South Africa. So I reached Durban in 
May 1893. 
Being a barrister-at-law, I was well dressed according to my lights and landed 
at Durban with a due sense of my importance. But I was soon disillusioned. The 
partner of Dada Abdulla who had engaged me had given me an account of what 
things were like in Natal. But what I saw there with my own eyes absolutely 
belied his misleading picture. My informant was, however, not to blame. He 
was a frank, simple man, ignorant of the real state of affairs. He had no idea of 
the hardships to which Indians were subjected in Natal. Conditions which 
implied grave insult had not appeared to him in that light. I observed on the 
very first day that the Europeans meted out most insulting treatment to 
Indians. 
I will not describe my bitter experience in the courts within a fortnight of my 
arrival, the hardships I encountered on railway trains, the thrashings I received 
on the way and the difficulty in and the practical impossibility of securing 
accommodation in hotels. Suffice it to say, that all these experiences sank in 
me. I had gone there only for a single case prompted by self-interest and 
curiosity. During the first year, therefore, I was merely the witness and the 
victim of these wrongs. I then awoke to a sense of my duty. I saw that from the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45 standpoint of self-interest South Africa was no good to me. Not only did I not 
desire but I had a positive aversion to earning money or sojourning in a country 
where I was insulted. I was on the horns of a dilemma. Two courses were open 
to me. I might either free myself from the contrast with Messrs Dada Abdulla on 
the ground that circumstances had come to my knowledge which had not been 
disclosed to me before, and run back to India. Or I might bear all hardships and 
fulfill my engagement. I was pushed out of the train by a police constable at 
Maritzburg, and the train having left, was sitting in the waiting room, shivering 
in the bitter cold. I did not know where my luggage was, nor did I dare to 
inquire of anybody, lest I might be insulted and assaulted once again. Sleep was 
out of the question. Doubt took possession of my mind. Late at night, I came to 
the conclusion that to run back to India would be cowardly. I must accomplish 
what I had undertaken. I must reach Pretoria, without minding insults and even 
assaults. Pretoria was my goal. The case being fought out there. I made up my 
mind to take some steps, if that was possible, side by side with my work. This 
resolution somewhat pacified and strengthened me but I did not get any sleep.  
Next morning I wired to the firm of Dada Abdulla and to the General Manager of 
the Railway. Replies were received from both. Dada Abdulla and his partner 
Sheth Abdulla Haji Adam Jhaveri who was then in Natal took strong measures. 
They wired to their Indian agents in various places to look after me. They 
likewise saw the General Manager. The Indian traders of Maritzburg came to 
see me in response to the telegram received by the local agent. They tried to 
comfort me and told me that all of them had had the same bitter experiences 
as myself, but they did not mind such things, being habituated to them. Trade 
and sensitiveness could ill go together. They had therefore made it a principle 
to pocket insults as they might pocket cash. They told me how Indians could 
not enter the railway station by the main gate and how difficult it was for them 
to purchase tickets. I left for Pretoria the same night. The Almighty Searcher of 
all hearts put my determination to a full test. I suffered further insults and 
received more beatings on my way to Pretoria. But all this only confirmed me 
in my determination. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46 Thus in 1893, I obtained full experience of the condition of Indians in South 
Africa. But I did nothing beyond occasionally talking with the Indians in Pretoria 
on the subject. It appeared to me that to look after the firm’s case and to take 
up the question of the Indian grievances in South Africa at the same time was 
impossible. I could see that trying to do both would be to ruin both. 1894 was 
thus already upon us. I returned to Durban and prepared to return to India. At 
the farewell entertainment held by Dada Abdulla, someone put a copy of the 
Natal Mercury  in my hands. I read it and found that the detailed report of the 
proceedings of the Natal Legislative Assembly contained a few lines under the 
caption ‘Indian Franchise’. The local Government was about to introduce a Bill 
to disfranchise Indians, which could only be the beginning of the end of what 
little rights they were then enjoying. The speeches made at the time left no 
doubt about the intention of the Government. I read the report to the traders 
and others present and explained the situation to them as best I could. I was 
not in possession of all the facts. I suggested that the Indians should strenuously 
resist this attack on their rights. They agreed but declared their inability to 
fight the battle themselves and urged me to stay on. I consented to stay a 
month or so longer by which time the struggle would be fought out. The same 
night I drew up a petition to be presented to the Legislative Assembly. A 
telegram was sent to the Government requesting a delay of proceedings. A 
committee was appointed at once with Sheth Haji Adam as Chairman and the 
telegram was sent in his name. The further reading of the Bill was postponed 
for two days. That petition was the first ever sent by the Indians to a South 
African Legislature. It did create an impression although it failed to defeat the 
Bill, the later history of which I have narrated in Chapter Four. This was the 
South African Indians’ first experience of such agitation, and a new thrill of 
enthusiasm passed through the community. Meetings were held every day and 
more and more persons attended them. The requisite funds were 
oversubscribed. Many volunteers helped in preparing copies, securing signatures 
and similar work without any remuneration. There were others who both 
worked and subscribed to the funds. The descendants of the ex-indentured 
Indians joined the movement with alacrity. They knew English and wrote a fine Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47 hand. They did copying and other work ungrudgingly day and night. Within a 
month, a memorial with ten thousand signatures was forwarded to lord Ripon, 
and the immediate task I had set before myself was done. 
I asked for leave to return home. But the agitation had aroused such keen 
interest among the Indians that they would not let me go. They said: “You 
yourself have explained to us that this is the first step taken with a view to our 
ultimate extinction. Who knows whether the Colonial Secretary will return a 
favourable reply to our memorial? You have witnessed our enthusiasm. We are 
willing and ready to work. We have funds too. But for want of a guide, what 
little has been done will go for nothing. We therefore think it is your duty to 
stay on.” I also felt that it would be well if a permanent organization was 
formed to watch Indian interests. But where was I to live and how? They 
offered me a regular salary, but I expressly declined. One may not receive a 
large salary for public work. Besides, I was a pioneer. According to my notions 
at the time, I thought I should live in a style usual for barristers and reflecting 
credit on the community, and that would mean great expense. It would be 
improper to depend for my maintenance upon a body whose activities would 
necessitate a public appeal for funds, and my power of work would be thereby 
crippled. For this and similar reasons I flatly refused to accept remuneration for 
public work. But I suggested that I was prepared to stay if the principal traders 
among them could see their way to give me legal work and give me retainers 
for it beforehand. The retainers might be for a year. We might deal with each 
other for that period, examine the results, and then continue the arrangement 
if both parties were agreeable. This suggestion was cordially accepted by all.  
I applied for admission as an advocate of the Supreme Court at Natal. The Natal 
Law Society opposed my application on the sole ground that the law did not 
contemplate that coloured barristers should be placed on the roll. The late Mr. 
Escombe, the famous advocate, who was Attorney-General and afterwards also 
Premier of Natal, was my counsel. The prevailing practice for a long time was 
that the leading barrister should present such applications without any fees, 
and Mr. Escombe advocated my cause accordingly. He was also Senior Counsel Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48 for my employers. The Senior Court over-ruled the Law Society’s objection, and 
granted my application. Thus, the Law Society’s opposition brought me into 
further prominence without their wishing it. The newspapers of South Africa 
ridiculed the Law Society and some of them even congratulated me. 
The temporary committee was placed on a permanent footing. I had never 
attended a session of the Indian National Congress, but had read about it. I had 
seen Dadabhai, the Grand Old Man of India and admired him. I was therefore a 
Congress devotee, and wished to popularize the name. Inexperienced as I was, I 
did not try to find out a new name. I was also afraid of committing a mistake. 
So I advised the Indians to call their organization the Natal Indian Congress. I 
laid before them very imperfectly what meager knowledge I had of the Indian 
National Congress. Anyhow the Natal Indian Congress was founded about May 
1894. There was this difference between the Indian and the Natal Congress, 
that the latter organization worked throughout the year and those who paid an 
annual subscription of at least three pounds were admitted to membership. 
Amounts exceeding that sum were gratefully received. Endeavors were made to 
obtain the maximum amount from each member. There were about half a 
dozen members who paid twenty-four pounds a year. There was a considerable 
number of those paying twelve pounds. About three hundred members were 
enrolled in a month. They included Hindus, Musalmans, Parsis and Christians, 
and came from all Indian States that were represented in Natal. The work 
proceeded with great vigour throughout the first year. The well-to-do traders 
went about far off villages in their own conveyances, enrolling new members 
and collecting subscriptions. Everybody did not pay for the mere asking. Some 
required to be persuaded. This persuasion was a sort of political training, and 
made people acquainted with the facts of the situation. Again, a meeting of 
the Congress was held at least once a month, when detailed accounts were 
presented and adopted. Current events were explained and recorded in the 
minute-book. Members asked various questions. Fresh subjects were 
considered. The advantage of all this was that those who never spoke at such 
meetings got accustomed to do so. The speeches again must be in proper form. 
All this was a novel experience. The community was deeply interested. In the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49 meanwhile the welcome news came that Lord Ripon had disallowed the 
Disfranchising Bill, and this redoubled their zeal and self-confidence. 
Side by side with external agitation, the question of internal improvement was 
also taken up. The Europeans throughout South Africa had been agitating 
against Indians on the ground of their ways of life. They always argued that the 
Indians were very dirty and close-fisted. They lived in the same place where 
they traded. Their houses were mere shanties. They would not spend money 
even on their own comforts. How could cleanly open-handed Europeans with 
their multifarious wants compete in trade with such parsimonious and dirty 
people? Lectures were therefore delivered, debates held, and suggestions made 
at Congress meetings on subjects such as domestic sanitation, personal 
hygiene, the necessity of having separate buildings for houses and shops and for 
well-to-do traders of living in a style befitting their position. The proceedings 
were conducted in Gujarati. 
The reader can see what an amount of practical and political education the 
Indians thus received. Under the auspices of the Congress, the Natal Indian 
Educational Association was formed for the benefit of the young Indians, who, 
being the children of ex-indentured labouers, were born in Natal and spoke 
English. Its members paid a nominal fee. The chief objects of the Association 
were to provide a meeting place for those youths, to create in them a love for 
the mother country and to give them general information about it. It was also 
intended to impress upon them that free Indians considered them as their own 
kith and kin, and to create respect for the latter in the minds of the former. 
The funds of the Congress were large enough to leave a surplus after defraying 
its expenses. This was devoted to the purchase of land which yields an income 
to the present day. 
I have deliberately entered into all these details, for without them the reader 
cannot realize how Satyagraha spontaneously sprang into existence and how the 
Indians went through a natural course of preparation for it. I am compelled to 
omit the remarkable subsequent history of the Congress, how it was confronted 
with difficulties, how Government officials attacked it and how it escaped Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50 scatheless from their attacks. But one fact must be placed on record. Steps 
were taken to save the community from the habit of exaggeration. Attempts 
were always made the draw their attention to their own shortcomings. 
Whatever force there was in the arguments of the Europeans was duly 
acknowledged. Every occasion, when it was possible to co-operate with the 
Europeans on terms of equality and consistent with self-respect, was heartily 
availed of. The newspapers were supplied with as much information about the 
Indian movement as they could publish, and whenever Indians were unfairly 
attacked in the Press replies were sent to the newspapers concerned. 
There was an organization in the Transvaal similar to the Natal Indian Congress 
but quite independent of it. There were likewise differences in the 
constitutions of the two bodies into which we need to enter. There was a 
similar body in the Cape Town as well with a constitution different from that of 
the Natal Congress and the Transvaal Association. Still the activities of all the 
three bodies were nearby identical. 
The Natal Congress completed its first year in the middle of 1895. My work as 
an advocate met with the approval of my clients, and my stay in Natal was 
prolonged. In 1896 I went to India for six months with the leave of the 
community. I had hardly completed that period in India, when I received a 
cablegram from Natal asking me to return at once, and so did I. The events of 
1896-97 demand a fresh chapter for their treatment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51  
07. A REVIEW OF THE EARLY STRUGGLE 
(C
ontinued) 
Thus the Natal Indian Congress was placed on a perman ent footing. I spent 
nearly two years and a half in Natal, mostly doing political work. I then saw 
that if I was still to prolong my stay in South Africa, I must bring over my family 
from India. I likewise thought of making a brief sojourn in the homeland and of 
acquainting Indian leaders with the condition of Indian settlers in Natal and 
other parts of South Africa. The Congress allowed me leave of absence for six 
months and late the Mr. Adamji Miyakhan, the well-known merchant of Natal, 
was appointed Secretary in my stead. He discharged his duties with great 
ability. He had a fair knowledge of English, which had been greatly 
supplemented by use. He had studied Gujarati in the ordinary course. As he had 
mercantile dealings chiefly with the Zulus, he had acquired an intimate 
knowledge of the Zulu language and was well conversant with Zulu manners and 
customs. He was a man of very quiet and amiable disposition. He was not given 
to much speech. I have entered into these details in order to show, that to the 
holding of responsible positions, truthfulness, patience, tolerance, firmness, 
presence of mind, courage and common sense are far more essential 
qualifications than a knowledge of English or mere learning. Where these fine 
qualities are absent, the best literary attainments are of little use in public 
work. 
I returned to India in the middle of the year 1896. As steamers from Natal were 
then more easily available for Calcutta than for Bombay, I went on board one 
bound for that city. For the indentured labourers were embarked from Calcutta 
or Madras. While proceeding to Bombay from Calcutta, I missed my train on the 
way and had to stop in Allahabad for a day. My work commenced there. I saw 
Mr. Chesney of the Pioneer. He talked with me courteously, but told me frankly 
that his sympathies were with the Colonials. He, however, promised that if I 
wrote anything, he would read it and notice it in his paper. This was good 
enough for me. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52 While in India, I wrote a pamphlet on the condition of Indians in South Africa. It 
was noticed by almost all newspapers and it passed through two editions. Five 
thousand copies were distributed in various places in India. It was during this 
visit that I had the privilege of seeing Indian leaders, Sir Pherozeshah Mehta, 
Justices Badruddin Tyebji and Mahadev Govind Ranade and others in Bombay, 
and Lokmanya Tilak and his circle, Prof. Bhandarkar and Gopal Krishna Gokhale 
and his circle in Poona. I delivered speeches in Bombay, Poona and Madras. I do 
not propose to deal with these events in detail.  
I cannot, however, resist the temptation of describing here a sacred 
reminiscence of Poona, although it is not strictly relevant to our subject. The 
Sarvajanik Sabha was controlled by the Lokamanya, while Shri Gokhale was 
connected with the Deccan Sabha. I first saw the Tilak Maharaj. When I spoke 
to him about my intention to hold a meeting in Poona, he asked me if I had 
seen Gopalrao. I did not understand whom he meant. He therefore asked me 
again if I had seen Shri Gokhale and if I knew him. 
“I have not yet seen him. I know him by name and mean to see him,” I replied. 
“You do not seen to be familiar with Indian politics”, said the Lokmanya. 
“I stayed in India only for a short time after my return from England, and had 
not then applied myself to political questions, as I thought it beyond my 
capacity,” I said. 
Lokamanya then said : “In that case I must give you some information. There 
are two parties in Poona, one represented by the Sarvajanik Sabha and the 
other by the Deccan Sabha.” 
I replied : “I know something about this matter.”  
Lokamanya : “It is easy to hold a meeting here. But, it seems to me that you 
wish to lay your case before all the parties here and seek to enlist the support 
of all. I like your idea. But if a member of the Sarvajanik Sabha is selected to 
preside over your meeting, no member of the Deccan Sabha will attend it. 
Similarly, if a member of the Deccan sabha were to preside, member of the 
Sarvajanik Sabha would absent themselves. You should therefore find out a Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53 non-partisan as chairman. I can only offer suggestions in the matter, and shall 
not be able to render any other assistance. Do you know Prof. Bhandarkar? Even 
if you do not know him, you should see him. He is considered a neutral. He does 
not take part in politics, but perhaps you can induce him to preside over your 
meeting. Speak to Shri Gokhale about this, and seek his advice too. In all 
probability he will give you the same advice. If a man of the position of Prof. 
Bhandarkar consents to preside, I am certain that both the parties will see to it 
that a good meeting is held. At any rate you can count upon our fullest help in 
the matter.” 
I then saw Gokhale. I have written elsewhere how I fell in love with him at this 
very first sight. The curious may look up the files of Young India1 or Navajivan2 
for it. Gokhale liked the advice which lokamanya had given me. Accordingly I 
paid my respects to the venerable Professor. He heard attentively the story of 
the Indian wrongs in Natal and said, “You see I rarely take part in public life. 
Then again, I am getting old. But what you have told me has stirred me deeply. 
I like your idea of seeking the co-operation of all parties. You are young and 
ignorant of political conditions in India. Tell the members of both the parties 
that I have agreed to your request. On an intimation from any of them that the 
meeting is to be held, I will certainly come and preside.” A successful meeting 
was held in  Poona. The leaders of both the parties attended and spoke in 
support of my cause. 
I then went to Madras. There I saw Sir (then Mr. Justice) Subrahmanya Aiyar, 
Shri P. Anandacharlu, Shri J. Subrahmanyam, the then editor of the Hindu, Shri 
Parameshvaran Pillai, editor of the Madras Standard, Shri Bhasyam lyenger, the 
famous advocate, Mr. Norton and others. A great meeting too was held. From 
Madras I went to Calcutta, where I saw Surendranath Banerji, Maharaja 
Jyotindra Mohan Tagore, the late Mr. Saunders, the editor of the Englishman, 
and others. While a meeting was being arranged in Calcutta, I received a 
cablegram from Natal asking me to return at once. This was in November 1896. 
I concluded that some movement hostile to the Indians must be on foot. I 
therefore left my work at Calcutta incomplete and went to Bombay, where I Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54 took the first available steamer with my family. s.s. Courland had been 
purchased by Messers Dada Abdulla and represented one more enterprise of 
that very adventurous firm, namely, to run a steamer between Porbandar and 
Natal. The s. s. Naderi, a steamer of the Persian Navigation Company, left 
Bombay for Natal immediately after. The total number of passengers on the 
two steamers was about 800. 
The agitation in India attained enough importance for the principle Indian 
newspapers to notice it in their columns and for Reuter to send cablegrams 
about it to England. This I came to know on reaching Natal. Reuter’s 
representative in England had sent a brief cablegram to South Africa, 
containing an exaggerated summary of my speeches in India. This is not an 
unusual experience. such exaggeration is not always international. Very busy 
people with prejudices and prepossessions of their own read something 
superficially and then prepare a summary which is sometimes partly a product 
of imagination. This summary, again, is differently interpreted in different 
places. Distortion thus takes place without anyone intending it. This is the risk 
attending public activities and this is also their limitation. While in India I had 
criticized the Europeans of Natal. I had spoken very strongly against the three 
pounds tax on indentured labourers. I had given a vivid account of the 
sufferings of an indentured labourer named Subrahmanyam who had been 
assaulted by his master, whose wounds I had seen and whose case was in my 
hands. When the Europeans in Natal read the distorted summary of my 
speeches, they were greatly exasperated against me. The remarkable fact, 
however, was that what I had written in Natal was more severe and detailed 
than what I wrote and spoke in India. My speeches in India were free from the 
slightest exaggeration. On the other hand, as I knew from experience that if we 
describe an event to a stranger, he sees more in it that what we intend to 
convey, I had deliberately described the South African situation in India less 
forcibly than the facts warranted. But very few Europeans would read what I  
wrote in Natal, and still fewer would care for it. The case, however, was 
obviously different with my speeches and writings in India. Thousands of 
Europeans would read Reuter’s summaries. Moreover, a subject which is Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55 considered worthy of being communicated by cablegram becomes invested with 
an importance it does not intrinsically possess. The Europeans of Natal thought 
that my work in India carried the weight attributed to it by them and that 
therefore the system of indentured labour would perhaps come to an end, and 
hundreds of European planters would suffer in consequence. Besides, they felt 
blackened before India. 
While the Europeans for Natal were thus in an excited state of mind, they 
heard that I was returning to Natal with my family per s. s. Courland, that it 
carried from 300 to 400 Indian passengers, and that s. s. Naderi was also 
arriving at the same time with an equal number of Indians. This inflamed them 
all the more, and there was a great explosion of feelings. The Europeans of 
Natal held large meetings, which were attended by almost all the prominent 
members of their community. The Indian passengers in general and myself in 
particular came in for a great deal of severe criticism. The expected arrival of 
the s. s. Courland and the s. s. Naderi was represented as an ‘invasion’ of 
Natal. The speakers said that I had brought those 800 passengers to Natal and 
that this was my first step towards flooding Natal with free Indians. A 
unanimous resolution was passed that the passengers of both the steamers 
including myself should be prevented from landing in Natal. If the government 
of Natal would not or could not prevent the passengers from landing, the 
Committee appointed at the meeting was to take the law into their own hands 
and to prevent the Indians from landing by main force. Both the steamers 
reached Durban on the same day. 
The reader will remember that bubonic plague made its first appearance in 
India in 1896. In their effort to prevent our landing the Government of Natal 
were hampered by legal difficulties as the Immigration Restriction Act had not 
yet come into being. Otherwise their sympathies were entirely with the 
committer of Europeans referred to above. The late Mr. Escombe, a member of 
the Government, took a prominent part in the proceedings of that Committee. 
It was he who instigated them. There is a rule in force at all ports that if a case 
of contagious disease occurs on board a steamer, or if a steamer is coming from Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56 an infected port, it is detained in quarantine for a certain period. This 
restriction canbe imposed only on sanitary grounds, and under orders from the 
Health Officer of the port. The Government of Natal abused their power by 
enforcing the above rule for political purposes. Although there was no 
contagious disease on board, both the steamers were detained for beyond the 
usual time limit, for as many as twenty-three days. Meanwhile, the Committee 
of Europeans continued their activities. Messrs Dada Abdulla, who were the 
owners of the s. s. Courland and the agents for the s. s. Naderi, were subjected 
to a severe hectoring by them. Inducements were offered to them if they 
agreed to take back the passengers, and they were threatened with loss of 
business if they refused to do so. But the partners of the firm were no cowards. 
They said they did not care if they were ruined; they would fight to the bitter 
end but would not he coerced into committing the crime of sending away those 
helpless but innocent passengers; they were no strangers to patriotism. The old 
advocate of the firm, Mr. F.A. Laughton, K.C., was also a brave man. 
As luck would have it, the late Shri Mansukhlal Hiralal Nazar, a Kayastha 
gentleman from Surat and a nephew of the late Mr. justice Nanabhai Haridas, 
reached Africa about the same time. I did not know him, nor was I aware of his 
going. I need scarcely say that I had no hand in bringing the passengers who 
arrived by the s. s. Naderi and the s. s. Courland. Most of them were old 
residents of South Africa. Many again were bound for the Transvaal. 
Threatening notices were served by the Committee of Europeans even upon 
these passengers. The captains of the steamers read them out to the 
passengers. The notices expressly stated that the Europeans of Natal were in a 
dangerous temper, and said in effect that if in spite of the warning the Indian 
passengers attempted to land, the members of the Committee would attend at 
the port and push every Indian into the sea. I interpreted this notice to the 
passengers on the s. s. Courland. An English-knowing passenger on board the s. 
s.Naderi did the same for his fellow-passengers. The passengers on both the 
steamers flatly declined to go back and added that many of them were 
proceeding to the Transvaal, that some of the rest were old residents of Natal, 
that in any case every one of them was legally entitled to land and that the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57 threats of the Committee notwithstanding, they were determined to land in 
order to test their right to do so.  
The Government of Natal was at its wits’ end. How long could an unjust 
restriction be enforced? Twenty-three days had passed already. Dada Abdulla 
did not flinch, nor did the passengers. The quarantine was thus lifted after 23 
days and the steamers were permitted to steam into harbour. Meanwhile, Mr. 
Escombe pacified the excited Committee of Europeans. At a meeting which was 
held, he said: “The Europeans in Durban have displayed commendable unity 
and courage. You have done all you could. Government has also helped you. 
The Indians were detained for 23 days. You have given sufficient expression to 
your sentiments and your public spirit. That will make a profound impression on 
the Imperial Government. Your action has made the path of the Government of 
Natal easy. If you now prevent by force a single Indian passenger from landing, 
you will injure your own interests and place the Government in an awkward 
position. Andeven then you will not succeed in preventing the Indians from 
landing. The passengers are not at all to blame. There are women and children 
among them. When they embarked at Bombay, they had no idea of your 
feelings. I would therefore advise you to disperse and not to obstruct these 
people. I assure you, however, that the Government of Natal will obtain from 
the Legislative Council the requisite powers in order to restrict future 
immigration.” This is only a summary of Mr. Escombe’s speech. His audience 
was disappointed, but he had great influence over the Europeans of Natal. They 
dispersed in consequence of his advice and both the steamers came into port.  
A message reached me from Mr. Escombe advising me not to land with the 
others but to wait until evening when he would send the Superintendent of 
Water Police to escort me home, and adding that my family were free to land 
at any time. This was not an order according to law, but was by way of advice 
to the captain not to allow me to land and of warning to me of the danger that 
was hanging over my head. The captain had not the power forcibly to prevent 
me from landing. But I came to the conclusion that I should accept this 
suggestion. I sent my family to residence of my old friend and client, Parsi Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58 Rustomji, instead of to my own place, and told them that I would meet them 
there. When the passengers had disembarked, Mr. Laughton, counsel for Dada 
Abdulla and a personal friend of mine, came up and met me. He asked me why 
I had not yet landed. I told him about Mr. Escombe’s letter. He said that he did 
not like the idea of my waiting till evening and then entering the city like a 
thief or offender, that if I was not afraid, I should accompany him there and 
then, and that we would walk to the town as if nothing had happened. I replied 
: “I do not think I am afraid. It is only a question of propriety whether or not I 
should accept Mr. Escombe’s suggestion. And we should also consider whether 
the captain of the steamer is responsible in the matter.” Mr. Laughton smiled 
and said : “What has Mr. Escombe done for you that you must needs heed his 
suggestion? And what reason have you to believe that he is actuated by 
kindliness and not by some ulterior motive? I know more than you what has 
happened in the town, and what hand Mr. Escombe had in the happenings 
there.” I interrupted him with a shaking of the head. “We might assume, 
“continued Mr. Laughton, “that he is actuated by the best of motives. But I am 
positively of opinion that if you comply with his suggestion, you will stand 
humiliated. I would, therefore, advise you, if you are ready, to accompany me 
just now. The captain is our man, and his responsibility is our responsibility. He 
is accountable only to Dada Abdulla. I know what they will think of the matter, 
as they have displayed great courage in the present struggle. I replied : “Let us 
then go. I have no preparations to make. All I have to do is to put on my 
turban. Let us inform the captain and start.” We took the captain’s leave. 
Mr. Laughton was an old and well-known advocate of Durban. I had come in 
intimate contact with him before I returned to India. I used to consult him in 
difficult cases and often to engage him as my senior. He was a brave and 
powerfully built man. 
Our road lay through the principal street of Durban. It was about half past four 
in the evening when we started. The sky was slightly overcast and the sun was 
not to be seen. It would take a pedestrian at least one hour to reach Rustomji 
Sheth’s place. The number of the persons present about the wharf was not Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59 larger than what is to be usually seen there. As soon as we landed, some boys 
saw us. As I was the only Indian who put on a turban of particular type, they at 
once recognized me, began to shout ‘Gandhi’, ‘Gandhi’, ‘thrash him’, 
’surround him’, and came up towards us. Some began to throw pebbles at us. A 
few elderly Europeans joined the boys. Gradually the party of rioters began to 
grow. Mr. Laughton thought that there was danger in our going on foot. He 
therefore hailed a rickshaw. I had never sat in a rickshaw before, as it was 
thoroughly disgusting to me to sit in a vehicle pulled by human beings. But I 
then felt that it was my duty to use that vehicle. I have experienced five or 
seven times in my life that one, whom God wishes to save, cannot fall even if 
he will. If I did not fall I cannot take any credit for it to myself. These 
rickshaws are pulled by Zulus. The elderly Europeans and the boys threatened 
the rickshaw puller that if he allowed me to sit in his rickshaw they would beat 
him and smash his rickshaw to pieces. The rickshaw boy, therefore, said ‘Kha’ 
(meaning ‘no’) and went away. I was thus spared the shame of a rickshaw ride. 
We had no alternative now but to proceed to our destination on foot. A mob 
followed us. With every step we advanced, it grew larger and larger. The 
gathering was enormous when we reached West Street. A man of powerful build 
took hold of Mr. Laughton and tore him away from me. He was not therefore in 
a position to come up with me. The crowd began to abuse me and shower upon 
me stones and whatever else they could lay their hands on. They threw down 
my turban. Meanwhile a burly fellow came up to me, slapped me in the face 
and then kicked me. I was about to fall down unconscious when I held on to the 
railings of a house nearby. I look breath for a while and when the fainting was 
over, proceeded on my way. I had almost given up the hope of reaching home 
alive. But I remember well that even my heart did not arraign my assailants. 
While I was thus wending my way, the wife of the Superintendent of Police at 
Durban was coming from the opposite direction. We knew each other well. She 
was a brave lady. Although the sky was cloudy and the sun about to set, she 
opened her sunshade for my protection and began to walk at my side. The 
Europeans would not insult a lady, especially the wife of the old and popular Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60 Superintendent of Police, nor would they hurt her. They must avoid injuring her 
while aiming blows at me. The injuries, therefore, which I received after she 
joined me, were not serious. Meanwhile the Superintendent of Police came to 
know of the attack upon me and sent me. The police surrounded me. The 
police station was on our way. When we reached there I saw that the 
Superintendent of Police was waiting for us. He offered me asylum in Police 
Station, but I declined the offer with thanks and said, “I must reach my 
destination. I have faith in the fair play of the citizens of Durban and in the 
righteousness of my own cause. I am thankful to you for sending the police 
party for my protection. Mrs. Alexander too has contributed to my safety.”  
I reached Rustomji’s house without further trouble. It was nearly evening when 
I reached there. Dr. Dadibarjor, the medical officer of the s. s. Courland, who 
was with Rustomji Sheth, began to treat me. He examined my wounds. There 
were not many of them. One blind wound in particular was very painful. But I 
was not yet privileged to rest in peace. Thousands of Europeans gathered 
before Rustomji Sheth’s house. After nightfall, hooligans also joined the crowd. 
The crowd sent word to Rustomji Sheth that if he did not hand me over to 
them, they would burn him and his house along with me. Rustomji Sheth was 
too good an Indian to be daunted. When Superintendent Alexander came to 
know how matters stood, he quietly joined the crowd with a number of 
detectives. He sent for a bench and stood upon it. Thus under the pretence of 
talking to the crowd, he took possession of the entrance to Rustomji’s house so 
that none could break and enter it. He had already posted detectives at proper 
places. Immediately on arrival, he had instructed a subordinate to disguise 
himself as an Indian trader by putting on Indian dress and painting his face to 
see me and deliver to me the following message: “If you wish to save your 
friend, his guests and property, and your own family, I advise you to disguise 
yourself as an Indian constable, come out through Rustomji’s godown, steal 
through the crowd with my man and reach the Police Station. A carriage is 
awaiting you at the corner of the street. This is the only way in which I can 
save you and others. The crowd is so excited that I am not in a position to 
control it. If you are not prompt in following my directions, I am afraid the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61 crowd will raze Rustomji’s house to the ground and it is impossible for me to 
imagine how many lives will be lost and how much property destroyed.” 
I gauged the situation at once. I quickly disguised myself as a constable and left 
Rutomji’s house. The Police Officer and I reached the Police Station in safety. 
In the meantime Mr. Alexander was humouring the crowd by singing topical 
songs and talking to them. When he knew that I had reached the Police Station, 
he became serious and asked: 
“What do you want?” 
“We want Gandhi.” 
“What will you do with him?” 
“We will burn him.” 
“What harm has he done to you?” 
“He has vilified us in India and wants to flood Natal with Indians.” 
“What if he does not come out?” 
“We will then burn this house.” 
“His wife and children are also there. There are other men and women besides. 
Would you not be ashamed of burning women and children?” 
“The responsibility for that will rest with you. What can we do when you make 
us helpless in the matter? We do not wish to hurt anyone else. It would be 
enough if you hand over Gandhi to us. If you do not surrender the culprit, and if 
others are injured in our endeavour to capture him, would it be fair on your 
part to blame us?” 
The Superintendent gently smiled and informed the crowd that I had left 
Rustomji’s house, passed through their midst, and reached another place 
already. The crowd laughed loudly and shouted, “It is a lie, it is a lie.” 
The Superintendent said : “If you will not believe your old Superintendent of 
Police, please appoint a committee of three or four men from amongst you. Let 
others promise that they will not enter the house, and that if the committee Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62 fails to find Gandhi in the house, you will peacefully return to your homes. You 
got excited today and did not obey the police. That reflects discredit on you, 
not on the police. The police therefore played a trick with you; it removed your 
prey from your midst and you have lost the game. You certainly cannot blame 
the police for this. The police, whom you yourselves have appointed, have 
simply done their duty.” 
The Superintendent addressed the crowd with such suavity and determination, 
that they gave him the promise he had asked for. A committee was appointed. 
It searched Rustomji’s house through and through, and reported to the crowd 
that the Superintendent was right and had beaten them in the game. The 
crowd was disappointed. But they kept their word and dispersed without 
committing any mischief. This happened on January 13, 1897. 
The same morning after the quarantine on the steamers had been removed, the 
reporter of a Durban newspaper had seen me on the steamer. He had asked me 
everything. It was quite easy to dispose of the charges against me to his 
satisfaction. I showed to him in detail that I had not indulged in the least 
exaggeration. What I had done was only my duty. If I had failed to discharge it, 
I would be unworthy of the name of the man. All this appeared in the 
newspapers the next day. Sensible people among the Europeans admitted their 
mistake. The newspapers expressed their sympathy with the standpoint of the 
Europeans in Natal, but at the same time fully defended my action. This 
enhanced my reputation as well as the prestige of the Indian community. It was 
proved that the Indians, poor as they were, were no cowards, and that the 
Indian traders were prepared to fight for their self-respect and for their 
country regardless of loss. 
Thus though the Indian community had to suffer hardship and though Dada 
Abdulla incurred big losses, the ultimate result, I believe, was entirely 
beneficial. The community had an opportunity of measuring their own strength 
and their self-confidence increased in consequence. I had a most valuable 
experience, and whenever I think of that day, I feel that God was preparing me 
for the practice of Satyagraha. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63 The events in Natal had their repercussion in England Mr. Chamberlain, 
Secretary of State for the Colonies, cabled to the Government of Natal asking 
them to prosecute my assailants and to see that justice was done to me. 
Mr. Escombe, who was Attorney-General with the Government of Natal, called 
me. He told me about Mr. Chamberlain’s cable. He expressed his regret for the 
injuries I had sustained, and his pleasure that the consequences of the assault 
were not more serious. He added, “I can assure you that I did not at all intend 
that you or any other member of your community should be injured. As I feared 
that you might possibly be hurt, I sent you word to say that you should land at 
night. You did not like my suggestion. I do not wish to blame you in the least 
that you accepted Mr. Laughton’s advice. You were perfectly entitled to do 
what you thought fit. The Government of Natal fully accepts Mr. Chamberlain’s 
demand. We desire that the offenders should be brought to book. Can you 
identify any of your assailants?” 
I replied : “I might perhaps to able to identify one or two of them. But I must 
say at once before this conversation proceeds that I have already made up my 
mind not to prosecute my assailants. I cannot see that they are at fault. What 
information they had, they had, they had obtained from their leaders. It is too 
much to expect them to judge whether it was correct or otherwise. If all that 
they heard about me was true, it was natural for them to be excited and do 
something wrong in a fit of indignation. I would not blame them for it. Excited 
crowds have always tried to deal out justice in that manner. If anyone is to 
blame it is the Committee of Europeans, you yourself and therefore, the 
Government of Natal. Reuter might have cabled any distorted account. But 
when you knew that I was coming to Natal, it was your duty and duty of the 
Committee to question me about the suspicions you entertained with regard to 
my activities in India, to hear what I had to say and then do what might appear 
proper in the circumstances. Now I cannot prosecute you or the Committee for 
the assault. And even if I could, I would not seek redress in a court of law. You 
took such steps as seemed advisable to you for safeguarding the interests of the 
Europeans of Natal. That is a political matter, and it remains for me to fight Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64 with you in the political field and to convince you and the other Europeans that 
the Indians who constitute a large proportion of the population of the British 
Empire wish to preserve their self-respect and safeguard their rights without 
injuring the Europeans in the least.”  
Mr. Escombe said, “I quite understand what you say, and I appreciate it. I was 
not prepared to hear that you were not willing to prosecute your assailants. I 
would not have been displeased in the least had you prosecuted them. But 
since you have signified your determination not to prosecute, I do not hesitate 
to say not only that you have come to a right decision in the matter, but you 
will render further service to your community by your self-restraint. I must at 
the same time admit that your refusal to prosecute your assailant will save the 
Government of Natal from a most awkward position. If you so desire, the 
Government will see that your assailants are arrested but it is scarcely 
necessary to tell you that it would irritate the Europeans and to give rise to all 
manner of criticism, which no Government would relish. But if you have finally 
made up your mind not to prosecute, you should write to me a note signifying 
your intention to that effect. I cannot defend my government merely by 
sending Mr. Chamberlain summary of our conversation. I should cable to him a 
summary of your note. I am not, however, asking you to let me have the note 
just now. You had better consult your friends. Consult Mr. Laughton also. And if 
after such consultations you still adhere to your resolution not to prosecute, 
write to me. But your note should clearly state that you, on your own 
responsibility, refuse to prosecute your assailants. Then only can I make use of 
it.” 
I said : “I had no idea that you had sent for me in this connection. I have not 
consulted any one on the subject, nor do I wish to consult any one now. When I 
decided to land and proceed with Mr. Laughton, I had made up my mind that I 
should not feel aggrieved in case I was injured. Prosecuting my assailants is 
therefore out of the question. This is a religious question with me, and I believe 
with you that I shall serve my community as well as myself by this act of self-Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65 restraint. I propose, therefore, to take all the responsibility on my shoulders 
and to give you the note you ask for here and now. “  
I then obtained some blank paper from him, wrote out the desired note and 
handed It over to him. 
 
1. Issue of July 13, 1921 
2. Issue of July 28 1921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66  
08.A REVIEW OF THE EARLY STRUGGLE 
(C
oncluded) 
The Work in England 
The reader has seen in the previous chapters how the Indians tried to 
ameliorate their condition and enhanced their prestige. Side by side with the 
effort to develop, strength from within they sought such assistance as they 
could from India and England. I have dealt to some extent with the activities in 
India. It now remains to note what steps were taken to enlist support from 
England. It was essential, in the first place, to establish relations with the 
British Committee of the Indian National Congress; weekly letters with full 
particulars were thereforewritten to Dadabhai, the Grand Old Man of India, and 
to Sir William Wedderburn, the Chairman of the committee and whenever there 
was an occasion to send copies of representations, a sum of at least 10 pounds 
was remitted as a contribution towards postal charges and the general 
expenditure of the Committee. 
I shall here place on record a sacred reminiscence of Dadabhai Naoroji. He was 
not the Chairman of the committee. It seemed to us, however, that the proper 
course for us was to send money to him in the first instance which he might 
then forward to the Chairman on our behalf. But Dadabhai returned the very 
first installment sent to him and suggested that we should remit money, and 
address communications, intended for the Committee directly to Sir Willam 
Wedderburn. He himself would certainly render all possible assistance. But the 
prestige of the Committee would increase only if we approached the 
Committee through Sir Willam. I also observed that Dadabhai, though far 
advanced in age, was very regular in his correspondence. Even when he had 
nothing particular to write about he would acknowledge receipt of letters by 
return of post with a word of encouragement thrown in. Even such letters he 
used to write personally and kept copies of them in his tissue paper book. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67 I have shown in a previous chapter that although we had called our organization 
the ‘Congress’, we never intended to make our grievance a party question. We 
therefore corresponded with gentlemen belonging to other parties as well, with 
the full knowledge of Dadabhai. The most prominent among them were Sir 
Muncherjee Bhownuggree and Sir W. W Hunter. Sir Muncherjee was then a 
Member of Parliament. His assistance was valuable, and he always used to 
favour us with important suggestions. But if there was any one who had 
realized the importance of the Indian question in South Africa before the 
Indians themselves and accorded them valuable support, it was Sir WIlliam 
Wilson Hunter. He was editor of the Indian section of The Times, wherein he 
discussed our question in its true perspective, ever since we first addressed him 
in connection with it. He wrote personal letters to several gentlemen in support 
of our cause. He used to write to us almost every week when some important 
question was on the anvil. This is the purport of his very first letter: “I am sorry 
to read the situation there. You have been conducting your struggle 
courteously, peacefully and without exaggeration. My sympathies are entirely 
with you on this question. I will do my best publicly as well as in private to see 
that justice is done to you. I am certain that we cannot yield even an inch of 
ground in this matter. Your demand being so reasonable, no impartial person 
would even suggest that you should moderate it.” He reproduced the letter 
almost word for word in the first article he wrote for The Times on the 
question. His attitude remained the same throughout, and Lady Hunter wrote in 
the course of a letter that shortly before his death he had prepared an outline 
of a series of articles which he had planned on the Indian question. 
I have mentioned the name of Shri Mansukhlal Nazar in the last chapter. This 
gentleman was deputed to England on behalf of the Indian Community to 
explain the situation in detail. He was instructed to work with members of all 
parties, and during his stay in England he kept in touch with Sir W. W. Hunter, 
Sir Muncherjee Bhownuggree and the British Committee of the Indian National 
Congress. He was likewise in touch with several retired officers of the Indian 
Civil Service, with the India Office and with the Colonial office. Thus our 
endeavours were directed in all possible quarters. The result of all this Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68 evidently was that the condition of Indian overseas became a question of first-
rate importance in the eyes of the Imperial Government. This fact reacted for 
good as well as for evil on the other colonies. That is to say, in all the colonies 
where Indians had settled, they awoke to the importance of their own position 
and the Europeans awoke to the danger which they thought the Indians were to 
their predominance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69  
09. THE BOER WAR 
The reader has seen in the previous chapters what was  the condition of the 
Indians in South Africa at the outbreak of the Boer War and what were the 
steps taken so far in order to ameliorate it. 
In 1899, Dr. Jameson carried out his raid on Johannesburg in pursuance of the 
conspiracy, which he had entered into with the owners of the gold mines. The 
conspirators had expected that the Boer Government would come to know of 
the raid only after they captured Johannesburg. Dr. Jameson and his associates 
badly blundered in this calculation of theirs. They fell into another error when 
they imagined that even in a case of the plot being discovered, untrained Boer 
farmers could do nothing against sharpshooters trained in Rhodesia. The raiders 
had likewise expected that a large majority of the population of Johannesburg 
would receive them with open arms. Here too the good Doctor was reckoning 
without his host. President Kruger had full information beforehand. With great 
deliberation, skill and secrecy he made preparations to meet Dr. Jameson and 
simultaneously arranged to arrest his fellow conspirators. Dr. Jameson, 
therefore, was greeted by the Boers with gunfire before he had reached 
anywhere near Johannesburg. The Doctor’s party was in no position to try 
conclusions with the army which faced them. Arrangements were similarly 
complete for preventing a rising in Johannesburg. None dared raise their heads 
and the millionaires of Johannesburg were dumbfounded in consequence of 
President Kruger’s action. The result of his excellent preparations was that the 
raid was disposed of with a minimum of loss in men as well as money. 
Dr. Jameson and his friends, the owners of gold mines, were arrested and 
placed on their trial without delay. Some were sentenced to be hanged. Most of 
these convicts were millionaires; but the Imperial Government could do nothing 
for them, as they were guilty of a raid in broad daylight. President Kruger 
became an important man all at once. Mr. Chamberlain, the Secretary of State 
for the Colonies, sent a humble cablegram to him, and appealed to his sense of 
mercy on behalf of the convicted magnates. President Kruger was perfect Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70 master of his own game. He had no apprehension of his independence being 
challenged by any power in South Africa. The conspiracy of Dr. Jameson and his 
friends was a well-planned affair in their own eyes, but to President Kruger it 
seemed to be an act of insensate folly. He therefore complied with Mr. 
Chamberlain’s humble request and not only did not enforce the sentence of 
death against any of the convicts but granted them all full pardon and set them 
free. 
But things could not go on like this for any length of time. President Kruger 
knew that the Jameson raid was only a minor symptom of a serious malady. It 
was impossible that the millionaires of Johannesburg should not endeavour to 
wipe out their disgrace by all means in their power. Again, nothing had been 
done to carry out the reforms for which the Jameson raid purported to have 
been organized. The millionaires, therefore, were not likely to hold their 
peace. Lord Milner, the British High Commissioner in South Africa, had full 
sympathy with their demands. Mr. Chamberlain, too, while expressing his 
appreciation of President Kruger’s magnanimity towards the Jameson raiders, 
had drawn his attention to the necessity for reforms. Everyone believed that an 
appeal to the sword was inevitable. The demands of the Uitlanders were 
calculated in the end to extinguish Boer domination in the Transvaal. Both the 
parties were aware that the ultimate result would be war, and both were 
therefore preparing for it. The war of words which ensued was worthy of note. 
When President Kruger ordered out arms and ammunition, the British Agent 
warned him that the British would be compelled to bring troops into South 
Africa in self defence. When British troops arrived in South Africa, President 
Kruger taunted the British and pushed forwards his preparations for war. Thus 
each side was protesting against the other’s activities and strengthening its 
own preparations. 
When President Kruger had completed his preparations, he saw that to delay 
any longer was to play into the hands of his enemies. The British had an 
inexhaustible supply of men and money. They could, therefore, afford to bide 
their time, gradually preparing for war and in the meantime ask President Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71 Kruger to redress the grievances of Uitlanders, and thus show to the world that 
they could not help waging war as he refused to grant redress. Then they would 
enter the war with such grand preparations that the Boers could not stand the 
shock and would have to accept British demands in a spirit of humiliation. Every 
Boer man between eighteen and sixty years in age was a skilled fighter. Boer 
women, too, were capable of fighting if they chose. National independence had 
with the Boers all the force of a religious principle. Such a brave people would 
not suffer humiliation even at the hands of a world empire. 
President Kruger had already arrived at an understanding with the Orange Free 
State. Both the Boer republics followed an identical policy. President Kruger 
had not the slightest intention of accepting the British demands whether in full 
or even to the extent of satisfying the Uitlanders. Both the republics, 
therefore, thought that war being inevitable, for them to give any more time to 
the British was only to give them a chance of advancing their preparations. 
President Kruger thereupon delivered an ultimatum to Lord Milner, and at the 
same time mobilized troops on the frontiers of the Transvaal as well as the 
Free State. The result of such action was a foregone conclusion. A world empire 
like the British would not take a threat lying down. The time limit laid down in 
the ultimatum expired and Boers, advancing with lightning speed, laid siege to 
ladysmith, Kimberley and Mafeking. This great war thus broke out in 1899. The 
reader will remember that one of the causes of the war alleged by the British 
was the treatment accorded to the Indians by the Boers 
The great question, as to what the Indians in South Africa should do on this 
occasion, now presented itself for solutions. Among the Boers, the entire male 
population joined the war. Lawyers gave up their practice, farmers their farms, 
traders their trade and servants left their service. The British in South Africa 
did not join the war in anything like the same proportion as the Boers. 
However, a large number of civilians in cape Colony, Natal and Rhodesia 
enrolled themselves as volunteers. Many distinguished English traders and 
lawyers followed suit. I now found very few lawyers in the court where I was 
practicing as an advocate. Most of the senior members of the bar were engaged Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72 in war work. One of the charges laid against the Indians was, that they went to 
South Africa only for money-grubbing and were merely a deadweight upon the 
British. Like worms which settle inside wood and eat it up hollow, the Indians 
were in South Africa only to fatten themselves upon them. The Indians would 
not render them the slightest aid if the country was invaded or if their homes 
were raided. The British in such a case would have not only to defend 
themselves against the enemy but at the same time to protect the Indians. We 
Indians carefully considered this charge. All of us felt that this was a golden 
opportunity for us to prove that it was baseless. But on the other hand the 
following considerations were also urged by some: 
“The British oppress us equally with the Boers. If we are subjected to hardships 
in the Transvaal, we are not very much better off in Natal or the Cape Colony. 
The difference, if any, is only one of the degree. Again we are more or less a 
community of slaves; knowing as we do that a small nation like the Boers is 
fighting for its very existence, why should we be instrumental in their 
destruction? Finally, from a practical point of view, no one will take it upon 
himself to predict a defeat for the Boers. And if they win, they will never fail 
to wreak vengeance upon us.” 
There was a powerful party among us, which strongly advanced the above 
argument. I could understand it and allowed it due weight. However, it did not 
command itself to me and, I refuted it to myself and to the community as 
follows: 
“Our existence in south Africa is only in our capacity as British subjects. In 
every memorial we have presented, we have asserted our rights as such. We 
have been proud of our British citizenship, or have given our rulers and the 
world to believe that we are so proud. Our rulers profess to safeguard our 
rights because we are British subjects, and what little rights we still retain, we 
retain because we are British subjects. It would be unbecoming to our dignity 
as a nation to look on with folded hands at a time when ruin stared the British 
in the face as well as ourselves, simply because they ill-treat us here. And such 
criminal inaction could only aggravate our difficulties. If we missed this Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73 opportunity, which had come to us unsought, of proving the falsity of a charge 
which we believed to be false, we should stand self-condemned, and it would 
be no matter for surprise if then the English treated us worse than before and 
sneered at us more than ever. The fault in such a case would lie entirely at our 
door. To say, that the charges preferred against ourselves had no foundation in 
fact and were absolutely untenable, would only be to deceive ourselves. It is 
true that we are helots in the Empire, but so far we have tried to better our 
condition, continuing the while to remain in the Empire. That has been the 
policy of all our leaders in India, and ours too. And if we desire to win our 
freedom and achieve our welfare as members of the British Empire, here is a 
golden opportunity for us to do so by helping the British in the war by all means 
at our disposal. It must largely be conceded that justiceis on the side of the 
Boers. But every single subject of a state must not hope to enforce his private 
opinion in all cases. The authorities may not always be right, but so long as the 
subjects own allegiance to a state, it is their clear duty generally to 
accommodate themselves, and to accord their support, to acts of the state. 
“Again, if any class among the subjects considers that the action of a 
government is immoral from a religious standpoint, before they help or hinder 
it, they must endeavour fully and even at the risk of their lives to dissuade the 
government from pursuing such a course. We have does nothing of the kind. 
Such a moral crisis is not present before us, and no one says that we wish to 
hold aloof from this war for any such universal and comprehensive reason. Our 
ordinary duty as subjects, therefore, is not to enter into the merits of the war, 
but when war has actually broken out, to render such assistance as we possibly 
can. Finally, to suggest that in case the Boers won, and a Boer victory was well 
within, the range of possibility, our last state would be worse than our first, 
and the Boers would exact frightful revenge, would be doing injustice to the 
chivalrous Boers as well as to ourselves. To waste the slightest thought upon 
such a contingency would only be a sign of our effeminacy and a reflection on 
our loyalty. Would an Englishman think for a moment what would happen to 
himself if the English lost the war? A man about to join a war cannot advance 
such an argument without forfeiting his manhood.” Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74 I advanced these arguments in 1899, and even today I do not see any reason for 
modifying them. That is to say, if I had today the faith in the British Empire 
which I can then entertained, and if I now cherished the hope, which I did at 
that time, of achieving our freedom under its aegis, I would advance the same 
arguments, word for word, in South Africa, and in similar circumstances, even 
in India. I heard many attempted refutations of these arguments in South Africa 
and subsequently in England. But I discovered no ground for changing my views. 
I know that my present opinions have no bearing on the subject of this volume, 
but there are two valid reasons why I have adverted to the matter here. I have, 
in the first place, no right to except that the reader who takes up this book in a 
hurry will give it a patient and attentive perusal, and such a reader will find it 
difficult to reconcile the above views with my present activities. Secondly, the 
underlying, principle in the above arguments in Satyagraha, insistence on truth. 
That one should appear to be as one really is and should act accordingly, is not 
the last, but the first step to practical religion. The building up of a religious 
life is impossible without such a foundation. 
To return to our narrative. 
My arguments commended themselves to many. The readers must not suppose 
that I was the only one to advance them. Moreover, even before these views 
were set forth, there were many Indians who held that we should do our bit in 
the war. But now the practical question arose: Who would lend an ear to the 
weak voice of the Indians when there was raging this terrible whirlwind of war? 
What weight would this offer of help carry? None of us had ever wielded a 
weapon of war. Even the work performed by non-combatants in war required 
training. None of us knew even how to march in step. It was no easy task to 
perform long marches with one’s baggage on one’s own shoulders. Again, the 
whites would treat us all as ‘coolies’, insult us and look down upon us. How was 
all this to be borne? And if we volunteered for service, how could we induce the 
Government to accept our offer? Finally, we came to the conclusion, that we 
should make earnest endeavours to get our offer accepted, that the experience 
of our work would teach us to do more work, that if we had the will, God would Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75 grant us the ability to serve, that we need not worry how we could do the work 
entrusted but should train ourselves for it as best we might, and that having 
once decided to serve, we could cease to think of discriminating between 
dignified work and other and serve, putting up even with insults if it came to 
that. 
We encountered formidable difficulties in getting our offer favourably 
entertained. The story is interesting but this is not the place to detail it. 
Suffice it to say that the leaders among us received training in nursing the 
wounded and the sick, obtained medical certificates of physical fitness and 
sent a formal letter to the Government. This letter and the eagerness we 
evinced to serve in whatever capacity the Government would accept us created 
a very good impression. The Government thanked us in reply but rejected our 
offer for the time. Meanwhile the Boers continued to advance like a great 
flood, and it was feared that they might reach Durban. There were heaps of 
wounded and dead everywhere. We were continually renewing our offer, and 
sanction was given at last for the formation of an Indian ambulance Corps. We 
had expressed our willingness even to do sweepers’ or scavengers’ work in 
hospitals. No, wonder, therefore, that the idea of an Ambulance Corps was 
perfectly welcome to us. Our offer had been made, in the first instance, in 
respect of free and exindentured Indians, but we had suggested the desirability 
of permitting the indentured Indians too to join the rest. As Government was 
then in need of as many men as they could get, they approached the employers 
of indentured labourers to allow their men to volunteer. Thus a large and 
splendid corps composed of nearly eleven hundred Indians left Durban for the 
front. At the time of our departure, we received the congratulations and the 
blessings of Mr. Escombe, whose name is already familiar to the reader and who 
was the head to the Europeans volunteers in Natal.  
 All this was a complete revelation to the English newspapers. No one expected 
that the Indians would take any part in the war. An Englishman wrote in a 
leading newspaper a poem eulogistic of the Indians with the following line as a 
refrain: ‘We are sons of the Empire after all.’ Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76  There were between three and four hundred ex-indentured Indians in the 
Crops, Who had been recruited by the efforts of the free Indians. Of these, 
thirty-seven were looked upon as leaders, as the offer to Government had been 
sent under their signatures and as they had brought the others together, among 
the leaders there were barristers and accountants, while the rest were either 
artisans such as masons or carpenters or ordinary laborers’. Hindus and 
Musalmans, Madrasis and upcountry men, all classes and creeds were well 
represented. There was hardly any trader in the crops, but the traders 
subscribed considerable sums of money. The crops had needs which were not 
adequately met by the military ration, and which, if satisfied, might provide 
them with some amenities in their hard camp life. The traders undertook to 
supply such comforts, and likewise rendered good assistance in entertaining the 
wounded in our charge with sweets, cigarette and such other things. Whenever 
we camped near towns, the local traders did their best to look after us. 
The indentured laborers, who joined this Corps, were under the charge of 
English overseers from their respective factories. But the work for them was 
the same as for ourselves and as we were all to live together, they were highly 
pleased at the prospect, and the management of the entire Crops naturally 
passed into our hands. Thus the whole Crops were described as the Indian 
Crops, and the community received the credit for its work. As a matter of fact 
the Indians were not entitled to the credit for the inclusion of indentured 
laborers in the corps, which should rightly have gone to the planters. But there 
is no doubt that the free Indians, That is to say, the Indian community, 
deserved credit for the excellent management of the Corps when once it was 
formed and this was acknowledged by general Buller in his despatches. 
Doctor Booth, under whom we had placed ourselves for training in first aid, 
joined the Corps in the capacity of medical Superintendent. He was a pious 
clergyman, and though his work chiefly lay among the Indian Christians, he 
freely mixed with Indians of all denominations. Most of the thirty-seven leaders 
mentioned above had received their training at his hands. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77 There was a European Ambulance Crops as well as the Indian, and both worked 
side by side in the same place. 
Our offer to Government was absolutely unconditional, but the letter by which 
they accepted it granted us immunity from service within the firing line. This 
meant that the permanent Ambulance Crops attached to the army was to bear 
far away the soldiers as they got wounded and leave them behind the army 
outside the line of fire. The temporary ambulance Crops of Europeans as well 
as Indians were formed in view of the great effort, which General Buller was to 
put forth for the relief of General White in Ladysmith and in which, it was 
apprehended, there might be more wounded than could be dealt with by the 
permanent Corps. In the country where the armies were operating there were 
no made roads between the battlefield and the base-hospitable and it was 
therefore impossible to carry the wounded by means of ordinary transport. The 
base-hospital was always situated near a railway station and at a distance of 
between seven and twenty-five miles from the battlefield. 
We soon got work and that too harder than we had expected. To carry the 
wounded seven or eight miles was part of our ordinary routine.But sometimes 
we had to carry badly wounded soldiers and officers over a distance of twenty-
five miles. The march would commence at eight in the morning. Medicines must 
be administered on the way, and we were required to reach the base- hospital 
at five. This was very hard work indeed. It was only once that we had to carry 
the wounded twenty-five miles in a single day. Again the British army met with 
reverse after reverse in the beginning of the war and large numbers were 
wounded. The officers therefore were compelled to give up their idea of not 
taking us within the firing line. But it must be stated that when such as 
emergency arose we were told that as the terms of our contract included 
immunity from such service, General Buller had no intention of forcing us to 
work under fire if we were not prepared to accept such risk, but if we 
undertook it voluntarily, it would be greatly appreciated. We were only too 
willing to enter the danger zone and had never liked a remain outside. We Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78 therefore welcomed this opportunity. But none of us received a bullet wound or 
any other injury.  
The Corps had many pleasant experiences into which I may not enter here. It 
must however be placed on record, that although our Corps, including the 
indentured laborers who might be supposed to be rather uncouth, often came 
in contact with the members of the temporary Ambulance Corps composed of 
Europeans as well as with the Europeans soldiers, none of us felt that 
Europeans treated us with contempt or even with discourtesy. The temporary 
Corps was composed of South African Europeans, who had taken part in the 
anti-Indian agitation before the war. But the knowledge that the Indians, 
forgetful of their wrongs, were out to help them in the hour of their need, had 
melted their hearts for the time being. I have stated already that our work was 
mentioned by the General Buller in his despatches. War medals too were 
conferred on the thirty-seven leaders. 
When General Buller’s operations in connection with the relief of Ladysmith 
were over, that is in about two months time, our Corps was disbanded as well 
as the Europeans. The war continued long after this. We were always prepared 
to rejoin, and it was stated in the order disbanding our Corps that Government 
would certainly utilize our services if operations on a long scale were again 
necessary. 
This contribution of the Indians in South Africa to the war was comparatively 
insignificant. They suffered hardly any loss of life. Yet even a sincere desire to 
be of help is bound to impress the other party, and is doubly appreciated when 
it is quite unexpected. Such fine feeling for the Indians lasted during the 
continuance of the war. 
Before closing this chapter, I must place a note-worthy incident on record. 
Among those who were in Ladysmith when it was invested by the Boers, there 
were besides Englishmen a few stray Indian settlers. Some of these were 
traders, while the rest were indentured laborers, working on the railways or as 
servants to English gentlemen, one of whom was Parbhusingh. The office in 
command at Ladysmith assigned various duties to every resident of the place. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 79 The most dangerous and most responsible work was assigned to Parbhusingh 
who was a ‘coolie’. On a hill near Ladysmith the Boers had stationed a pom-
pom, whose operations destroyed many buildings and even occasioned some 
loss of life. An interval of a minute or two must pass before a shell which had 
been fired from the gun reached a distant objective. If the besieged got even 
such a short notice, they could take cover before the shell dropped in the town 
and thus save themselves. Parbhusingh was to sit pearched up in a tree, all the 
time that the gun was working, with his eyes fixed on the hill and to ring a bell 
the moment he observed a flash, on hearing on the bell, the residents of 
Ladysmith instantly took cover and saved themselves from the deadly cannon 
ball whose approach was thus announced. 
The officer in charge of Ladysmith, in eulogizing the invaluable services 
rendered by Parbhusingh, stated that he worked so zealously that not once had 
he failed to ring the bell. It need hardly be said that his own life was constantly 
in peril. The story of his bravery came to be known in Natal and at last reached 
the ears of Lord Curzon, then Viceroy of India, who sent a Kashmir robe for 
presentation to Parbhusingh and wrote to the Natal Government, asking them 
to carry out the presentation ceremony with all possible publicity. This duty 
was assigned to the Mayor of Durban who held a public meeting in the Town 
Hall for the purpose. This incident has a twofold lesson for us. First, we should 
not despise any man, however humble or insignificant-looking he may be. 
Secondly, no matter how timid a man is, he is capable of the loftiest heroism 
when he is put to the test. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 80  
10. AFTER THE WAR 
The most important phase of the war was over in 1900.  Ladysmith Kimberley 
and Mafeking had been relieved. General Cronje had surrendered at 
Paardeburg. Parts of the British colonies occupied by the Boers had been 
wrested from their hands and Lord Kitchener had conquered the Transvaal and 
the Orange Free State. Only guerilla warfare was left. 
I thought that my work in South Africa was now over. I had stayed there six 
years instead of one month as originally intended. The outlines of the work 
before us were fairly fixed. Still I could not leave South Africa without the 
willing consent of the Indian community. I informed my colleagues that I 
intended taking up public work in India. I had learnt in South Africa the lesson 
of service instead of self-interest, and was longing for opportunities of such 
work. Shri Mansukhlal Nazar was there and so was Mr. Khan. Some Indian youths 
bred in South Africa had returned from England as barristers. In these 
circumstances, it would not be improper if I returned to India. When I had 
urged all these arguments, I was permitted to return only on the condition that 
if an unexpected situation arose in South Africa requiring my presence there, 
the community might recall me any day and I should at once go back. They 
undertook in such a case to bear my travelling expenses and the expenses 
incurred during my stay in South Africa. I agreed to this arrangement and 
returned to India. 
I decided to practice in Bombay as a barrister, primarily with a view to public 
work under the advice and guidance of Gokhale and secondarily in order to 
make a living for myself side by side with public work. I rented chambers 
accordingly and began to get some work. Thanks to my close connection with 
South Africa, clients who had returned from that country alone gave me work 
which more than sufficed for my necessities. But peace was never to be my 
portion in this life. I had been in Bombay hardly three or four months when I 
received an urgent cablegram from South Africa stating that the situation there Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 81 was serious, that Mr. Chamberlain was expected shortly, and that my presence 
was necessary. 
I wound up my Bombay office and house and started for South Africa by the 
first available steamer. This was near the end of 1902. I had returned to India 
towards the close of 1901 and had opened my office at Bombay about March 
1902. The cablegram did not contain full details. I guessed that there was 
trouble in the Transvaal. But I went to South Africa without my family as I 
thought I would be able to return to India in four or six months. I was however 
simply amazed when I reached Durban and heard everything. Many of us had 
hoped that the position of Indians throughout South Africa would improve after 
the war. We did not anticipate trouble in the Transvaal and the Free State at 
any rate, as Lord Lansdowne, Lord Selborne and other high functionaries had 
declared when the war broke out that the treatment accorded to the Indians by 
the Boers was one of the cases of the war. The British Agent at Pretoria had 
often told me that if the Transvaal became a British Colony, all the grievances 
under which the Indians labored would be instantly redressed. The Europeans 
too believed that as the Transvaal was now under the British flag, the old laws 
of the Boer republic directed against the Indians could not be enforced. This 
principle was so widely accepted that the auctioneers who before the war did 
not accept bids from Indians for the purchase of land now openly accepted such 
bids. Many Indians thus purchased lands at public auctions, but when they 
tendered the deeds of transfer to the revenue officer for registration, the 
officer in charge refused to register the deeds quoting Act 3 of 1885! All this I 
learnt on landing at Durban. The readers said that Mr. Chamberlain would first 
come to Durban and we must first acquaint him with the situation in Natal. This 
done, I was to follow him to the Transvaal. 
A deputation waited upon Mr. Chamberlain in Natal. He gave it a courteous 
hearing and promised to confer with the Natal government on the subject of its 
representations. Personally I did not expect that the laws which I had been 
promulgated in Natal before the war would be modified very soon. These laws 
have already been described in a previous chapter. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 82 As the reader is aware, any Indian could at any time the enter the Transvaal 
before the war. I observed that this was not the case now any longer. The 
restrictions however, equally applied to all Europeans as well as Indians. The 
condition of the country was still such, that if a large number of people entered 
the Transvaal all at once, there would not be sufficient food and clothing to go 
round, as all the shops had not reopened after the war. The goods stocked in 
shops been unceremoniously appropriated by the late Boer Government. I 
therefore thought, that if the restrictions were only temporary, there was no 
reason for aaprehension. But then there was a difference in the procedure by 
which a European and an Indian could obtain a permit, and this afforded ground 
for misgiving and alarm. Permit offices were opened in the various ports of 
South Africa. For all practical purposes a European could obtain permit for the 
mere asking, while an Asiatic Department was created in the Transvaal for 
dealing with Indians. The creation of this special department was a new 
departure. Indians were required to apply to the head of that department in 
the first instance. After he had granted their applications , they could generally 
obtain permits at Durban or any other port. 
If I had to go through all these formalities there was no hope of my getting a 
permit before Mr. Chamberlain left the Transvaal. The Indians in the Transvaal 
could not procure a permit for me. It was more than they could do. They had 
therefore relied upon my connections in Durban for obtaining a permit for me. I 
did not know the permit officer, but as I knew the Police Superintendent of 
Durban, I asked him to accompany me to the permit office. He consented and 
gave the necessary assurances. I obtained a permit on the strength of the fact 
that I had stayed in the Transvaal for a year in 1893 and thus reached Pretoria. 
The atmosphere in Pretoria was decidedly ominous. I could see that the Asiatic 
Department was merely a frightful engine of oppression for the Indians. The 
officers in charge were some of the adventures who had accompanied the army 
from India to South Africa during the war and had settled there in order to try 
their luck. Some of them were corrupt. Two officers were even prosecuted for 
bribery. The jury declared them not guilty, but as really there was no doubt Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 83 entertained as to their guilt, they were subsequently dismissed from service. 
Partiality was the order of the day. When a separate department is thus 
created and when restricting existing rights is the sole reason for its existence, 
officers are naturally inclined to devise fresh restrictions from time to time in 
order to justify their existence and in order to show that they are efficient in 
the discharge of their duties. This is exactly what happened in the present 
case. 
I saw that I had to begin my work from the very beginning. The Asiatic 
Department could not at once make out how I had managed to enter the 
Transvaal. They did not venture to ask me directly. I imagine they thought me 
above smuggling myself in to the country. They indirectly obtained information 
as to how I secured a permit. A deputation from Pretoria prepared to wait upon 
Mr. Chamberlain. I drafted the memorial for submission to him but the Asiatic 
Department excluded me from the deputation. It appeared to the Indian 
leaders that they should not see Mr. Chamberlain if I was prevented from going 
with them. But I did not countenance this idea. I said that I should not mind the 
insult to me and advised them to ignore it too. The memorial was there and it 
was essential that it should be presented to Mr. Chamberlain. Mr. George 
Godfrey, an Indian barrister, who was present at the time, was charged with 
the task of reading the memorial. The deputation waited upon Mr. 
Chamberlain. My name being mentioned in course of the interview he said, “I 
have already seen Mr. Gandhi in Durban. I therefore refused to see him here, in 
order that I might learn about the situation in the Transvaal at first hand from 
local residents.” In my view this remark only added fuel to the fire. Mr. 
Chamberlain spoke out as he had been tutored by the Asiatic Department, 
which thus tried to import into the Transvaal the atmosphere which pervades 
India. Everyone knows how British officers consider Bombay men as foreigners, 
in, say, Champaran. At that rate how could I who lived in Durban know anything 
about the situation in the Transvaal? Thus did the Asiatic Department coach Mr. 
Chamberlain.Little did he know that I had lived in the Transvaal, and that even 
if I had not, I was fully conversant with the Indian situation there. There was 
only one pertinent question in the present case: Who possessed the best Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 84 knowledge of the situation in the Transvaal? The Indians had already answered 
it for themselves by asking me to go there all the way from India. But it is no 
new experience to find that arguments based on reason do not always appeal to 
men in authority. Mr. Chamberlain was then so much under the influence of the 
men on the spot and so anxious was he to humour the Europeans that there was 
little or no hope of his doing us justice. Still the deputation waited upon him, 
only in order that no legitimate step for obtaining redress might be omitted 
whether by oversight or through a sense of wounded self-respect. 
I was now confronted by a dilemma even more difficult than the one which 
faced me in 1894. From one standpoint, it seemed I could return to India as 
soon as Mr. Chamberlain left in South Africa. On the other hand I could clearly 
see that if I returned with the vain fancy of serving on a larger field in India 
while I was fully aware of the great danger which started the South African 
Indians in the face, the spirit of service which I had acquired would be 
stultified. I thought that even if that meant living in South Africa all my life, I 
must remain there until the gathering clouds were dispersed or until they broke 
upon and swept us all away, all our counteracting efforts notwithstanding. This 
is how I spoke to the Indian leaders. Now, as in 1894, I declared my intention to 
maintain myself be legal practice. As for community, this was precisely what 
they wanted. 
I soon applied for admission to practice in the Transvaal. There was some 
apprehension that the Law Society here too would oppose my application, but 
it proved here groundless. I was enrolled as an attorney of the Supreme Court, 
and opened an office in Johannesburg. Of all places in the Transvaal, 
Johannesburg had the largest population of Indians and was therefore well 
suited for me to settle in, from the standpoint of public work as well as of my 
own maintenances. I was daily gaining bitter experience of the corruptness of 
the Asiatic Department, and the best efforts of the Transvaal British Indian 
Association were directed to finding a remedy for this disease. The repeal of 
Act 3 of 1885 now receded in the background as a distant objective. The 
immediate aim was limited to saving ourselves from the on-rushing flood in the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 85 shape of this Asiatic Department. Indian deputations waited Lord Milner, upon 
Lord Selborne who had come there, upon Sir Arthur Lawley who was the 
Lieutenant Governor of the Transvaal and who subsequently became Governor 
of Madras, and upon officers of lesser dignity. I often used to see Government 
officers. We obtained some slight relief here and there, but it was all 
patchwork. We used to receive some such satisfaction as is experienced by a 
man who has been deprived of his all by robbers and who by beseeching the 
robbers induces them to return something of very small value. It was in 
consequence of this agitation that the officers whose dismissal I have referred 
to above were prosecuted. Our misgivings as regards the restrictions on Indian 
immigration proved correct. Permits were no longer required from Europeans, 
while they continued to be demanded from Indians. The late Boer Government 
never strictly enforced their drastic anti Asiatic legislation, not because they 
were generous but because their administration was lax. A good officer has not 
under the British Government as much scope for the exercise of his goodness as 
he had under the Boer regime. The British Constitution is old and stereotyped 
and officers under it have to work like machines. Their liberty of action is 
restricted by a system of progressive checks. Under the British Constitution, 
therefore, if the policy of the Government is liberal, the subjects receive the 
utmost advantage of its liberality. On the other hand if their policy is 
oppressive or niggardly, the subjects feel the maximum weight of their heavy 
hand. The reverse is the case under constitutions such as that of the late Boer 
republic. Whether or not the subjects reap full advantage from a liberal law 
largely depends upon the officers who are charged with  its administration. 
Thus, when British power was established in the Transvaal, all laws adversely 
affecting the Indians began to be more and more strictly enforced day by day. 
Loopholes, whether they existed, were carefully closed. We have already seen 
that the Asiatic Department was bound to be harsh in its operations. The repeal 
of the old laws was therefore out of the question. It only remained for the 
Indians to try and see how their rigours might be mitigated in practice. 
Our principle must be discussed sooner or later, and if we discuss it at this 
stage, it will perhaps facilities an understanding of the Indian point of view and Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 86 of the situation as it developed hereafter. Soon after the establishment of 
British rule in the Transvaal and the Free State, Lord Milner appointed a 
committee whose terms of reference were to prepare a list of such of the old 
laws of both the republics as placed restrictions on the liberty of the subjects 
or were opposed to the spirit of the British Constitution. The anti-Indian laws 
could clearly have been included in this description. But Lord Milner’s object in 
appointing the committee was not to redress the grievances of Indians but 
those of Britishers. He wanted to repeal at the earliest opportunity those laws 
which indirectly pressed hard upon Britishers. The committee submitted their 
report in a very short time, and many acts, large and small which affected 
Britishers prejudicially, were, it can be said, repealed by a smoke of the pen. 
The same committee prepared a list of anti-Indian acts. There were published 
in the form of a book, which served as a handy manual easily used or from our 
standpoint abused by the Asiatic Department.  
Now, if the anti Indian laws did not mention the Indians by name and were not 
thus made expressly applicable to them alone but to all subjects, and if their 
enforcement had been left to the discretion of administrators; or had the laws 
imposed general restrictions which could have been enforced against Indians in 
a specially rigorous manner, the object of the legislators would all the same 
have been achieved by such laws, and yet the laws would have been general 
laws. None would have felt insulted by their enactment, and when the existing 
bitterness was softened by time, there would be no need to modify the laws, 
but only a more liberal administration of the laws would have sufficed to 
relieve the aggrieved community. Just as I have called laws of the second kind 
general laws, those of the first kind can be described as particular or racial, 
and establish what is known as the ‘colour bar’, as on the specific ground of 
colour they impose greater restrictions on members of the dark or brown races 
than on Europeans. 
To take one instance from the laws which were already in force. The reader 
will remember that the first disfranchising Act which was enacted in Natal but 
was subsequently disallowed by the Imperial Government provided for the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 87 disqualifications as voters of all Asiatics as such. Now if such a law were to be 
altered public opinion should be far educated that the majority be not only not 
hostile but actually friendly to Asiatics. The colour bar it set up could only be 
removed when such cordial feelings were established. This is an illustration of 
racial or class legislation. The act referred to was withdrawn and a second was 
enacted in its place which nearly achieved an identical object yet was of a 
general nature, the sting of racial distribution being removed. The substance of 
one of its clauses is as follows: ‘No person can be placed on the voters’ roll in 
Natal who is a native of countries which have not hitherto possessed elective 
representative institutions based on the parliamentary franchise.’ No reference 
is made here to Indians or Asiatics. The opinions of counsels could differ as to 
whether or not India possesses representative institutions based on the 
parliamentary franchise. But assuming for the sake of argument that India did 
not in 1894 and does not even now enjoy the parliamentary franchise, no one 
can say off hand that the officer in charge of voters’ lists in Natal has done an 
illegal act if he includes the names of Indians in the lists. There is always a 
general presumption in favour of the right of the subject. So long therefore as 
the government of the dat dies bit become positively hostile, the names of 
Indians and others could be included in the electoral roll, the above law 
notwithstanding. That is to say, if the dislike for Indians became less marked 
and if the local Government was unwilling to injure the Indians, their names 
could be entered in the voters’ lists without the slightest modification of the 
law. This is the advantage of a general law. Other instances of the same kind 
can be cited from among the laws in force in South Africa, which have been 
referred to in previous chapters. The wise policy, therefore, is to enact as little 
class legislation as possible; and it would be wiser still to avoid it altogether. 
Once law is enacted, many difficulties must be encountered before it can be 
reversed. It is only when public opinion is highly educated that the laws in 
force in a country can be repealed. A constitution under which laws are 
modified or repealed every now and then cannot be said to be stable or well 
organized. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 88 We can now better appreciate the poison which was present in the anti-Asiatic 
laws in the Transvaal. They were all racial in character. The Asiatics as much 
could not vote; nor could they own land outside the locations set apart for 
them by the Government. The administrations could do nothing for the Indians 
so long as these laws were not removed from the statute-book. Lord Milner’s 
committee could make a separate list of such laws only as were not general in 
character. Had they been general laws, all laws, enforced only against the 
Asiatics though not expressly directed against them, would have been repealed 
along with the rest. The officers in charge could never have argued their 
helplessness and said that they had no alternative but to enforce the laws so 
long as the new legislatures did not abrogate them.  
When these laws passed into the hands of the Asiatic Department it began to 
enforce them strictly. If the laws were at all worthy of being enforced, 
Government must arm itself with further powers in order to close the loopholes 
intentionally kept or left by inadvertence in favour of Asiatics. This looks quite 
simple and straight. Either the laws are bad in which case they should be 
repealed, or they are proper in which case their deficiencies should be 
remedies. The ministers had adopted the policy of enforcing the laws. The 
Indians had stood shoulder to shoulder with the British and risked their lives 
during the late war, but that was now a story three or four years old. The 
British Agent at Pretoria had put up a fight on behalf of the Indians, but that 
was during the old regime. The grievances of the Indians figured as one of the 
declared causes of the war, but that declaration was made by short-sighted 
statesmen who had no knowledge of local conditions. The local officials clearly 
observed that the anti-Asiatic laws enacted by the late Boer Government were 
neither adequately severe nor systematic. If the Indians could enter the 
Transvaal at will and carry on trade wherever they chose, British traders would 
suffer great loss. All these and similar arguments carried greater weight with 
the Europeans and their representatives in the ministry. They were all out to 
amass the maximum of wealth in a minimum of time; how could they stand the 
Indians becoming co-sharers with them? Hypocrisy pressed political theory into 
service in order to make out a plausible case. A barefaced selfish or mercantile Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 89 argument would not satisfy the intelligent Europeans of South Africa. The 
human intellect delights in inventing specious arguments in order to support 
injustice itself, and the South African Europeans were no exception to this 
general rule. These were the arguments advanced by General Smuts and 
others: 
“South Africa is a representative of Western civilization while India is the 
centre of Oriental culture. Thinkers of the present generation hold that these 
two civilizations cannot go together. If nations representing these rival cultures 
meet even in small groups, the result will only be an explosion. The West is 
opposed to simplicity while Orientals consider that virtue to be of primary 
importance. How can these opposite views be reconciled? It is not the business 
of statesmen, practical men as they are, to adjudicate upon their relative 
merits. Western civilization may or may not be good, but Westerners wish to 
stick to it. They have made tireless endeavours to save that civilization. They 
have shed rivers of blood for its sake. They have suffered great hardships in its 
cause. It is therefore too late for them now to chalk out a new path for 
themselves. Thus considered, the Indian question cannot be resolved into one 
trade jealously or race hatred. The problem is simply one of preserving one’s 
own civilization, that is of enjoying the supreme right of self-preservation and 
discharging the corresponding duty. Some public speakers may like to inflame 
the Europeans by finding fault with Indians, but political thinkers believe and 
say that the very qualities of Indians count for defects in South Africa. The 
Indians are disliked in South Africa for their simplicity, patience, perseverance, 
frugality and other worldliness. Westerners are enterprising, impatient, 
engrossed in multiplying their material wants and in satisfying them, fond of 
good cheer, anxious to save physical labour and prodigal in habits. They are 
therefore afraid that if thousands of Orientals settled in South Africa are, the 
Westerners must go to the wall. Westerners in South Africa are not prepared to 
commit suicide and their leaders will not permit them to be reduced to such 
straits.” Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 90 I believe I have impartially recapitulated the arguments urged by men of the 
highest character among the Europeans. I have characterized their arguments 
as pseudo-philosophical, but I do not thereby wish to suggest that they are 
groundless. From a practical point of view, that is to say, from the standpoint 
of immediate self-interest they have much force. But form the philosophical 
point of view, they are hypocrisy pure and simple. In my humble opinion, no 
impartial person could accept such conclusions and no reformer would place his 
civilization in the position of helplessness in which those who urge these 
arguments have placed theirs. So far as I am aware, no Eastern thinker fears 
that if Western nations came in free contact with Orientals, Oriental culture 
would be swept away like sand by the onrushing tide of Western civilization. So 
far as I have a grasp of Eastern thought it seems to me that Oriental civilization 
not only does not fear but would positively welcome free contact with Western 
civilization. If contrary instances can be met with in the East, they do not 
affect the principle I have laid down, for a number of illustrations can be cited 
in its support. However that may be, Western thinkers claim that the 
foundation of Western civilization is the predominance of might over right. 
Therefore it is that the protagonists of that civilization devote most of their 
time to the conservation of brute force. These thinkers likewise assert that the 
nations which do not increase their material wants are doomed to destruction. 
It is in pursuance of these principles that Western nations have settled in South 
Africa and subdued the numerically overwhelmingly superior races of South 
Africa. It is absurd to imagine that they would fear the harmless population of 
India. The best proof of the statement that the Europeans have nothing to fear 
from the Asiatics is provided by the fact that had the Indians continued to work 
in South Africa for all time as mere laborers, no agitation would have been 
started against Indians immigration. 
The only remaining factors are trade and colour. Thousands of Europeans have 
admitted in their writings that trade by Indians hits petty British traders hard, 
and that the dislike of the brown races has at present become part and parcel 
of the mentality of Europeans. Even in the United States of America, where the 
principle of statuary equality has been established, a man lie Booker T. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 91 Washington who has received the best Western education, is a Christian of high 
character and has fully assimilated Western civilization, was not considered fit 
for admission to the court of President Roosevelt, and probably would not to be 
so considered even today. The Negroes of the United States have accepted 
Western civilization. They have embraced Christianity. But the black pigment 
of their skin constitutes their crime, and if in the Northern States they are 
socially despised, they are lynched in the southern States on the slightest 
suspicion of wrongdoing. 
The reader will thus see that there is not much substance in the ‘philosophical’ 
arguments discussed above. But he must not therefore conclude that all those 
who urge them do so in a hypocritical spirit. Many of them honestly hold these 
views to be sound. It is possible that if we were placed in their position, we too 
would advance similar arguments. We have a saying in India that as is a man’s 
conduct, such is his understanding. Who is there but has observed that our 
arguments are but a reflection of our mentality, and that if they do not 
commend themselves to others, we become dissatisfied, impatient and even 
indignant? 
I have deliberately discussed this question with much minuteness, as I wish the 
reader to understand different points of view and in order that the reader, who 
has so far not done so, may acquire the habit of appreciating and respecting 
varieties of standpoint. Such large-mindedness and such patience are essential 
to the understanding of Satyagraha and above all to its practice. Satyagraha is 
impossible in the absence of these qualities. I do not write this book merely for 
the writing of it. Nor is it my object to place one phase of the history of South 
Africa before the public. My object in writing the present volume is that the 
nation might know how Satyagraha, for which I live, for which I desire to live 
and for which I believe I am equally prepared to die, originated and how it was 
practised on a large scale; and knowing this, it may understand and carry it out 
to the extent that it is willing and able to do so. 
To resume our narrative. We have seen that the British administrators decided 
to prevent fresh Indian immigrants from entering the Transvaal, and to render Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 92 the position of the old Indian settlers so uncomfortable that they would feel 
compelled to leave the country in sheer disgust, and even if they did not leave 
it, they would be reduced to a state bordering on serfdom. Some men looked 
upon as great statesmen in South Africa had declared more than once that they 
could afford to keep the Indians only as hewers of wood and drawers of water. 
On the staff of the Asiatic Department was among others Mr. Lionel Curtis who 
is now known to fame as the missionary for diarchy in India. This young man, as 
he then was, enjoyed the confidence of Lord Milner. He claimed to do 
everything according to scientific method, but he was capable of committing 
serious blunders. The Municipality of Johannesburg had suffered a loss of 
14,000 pound in consequence of one such blunder committed by him. He 
suggested that if fresh Indian immigration was to be stopped, the first step to 
be taken to that end was the effective registration of the old Indian residents 
in South Africa. That done, no one could smuggle himself into the country by 
practising personation, and if anyone did, he could be easily detected. The 
permits which were issued to Indians after the establishment of British rule in 
the Transvaal contained the signature of the holder or his thumb-impression if 
he was illiterate. Later on someone suggested the inclusion besides of a 
photograph of the holder, and this suggestion was carried out by administrative 
action, legislation being unnecessary. The Indian leaders therefore did not 
come to know of this innovation at once. When in course of time these novel 
features came to their notice, they sent memorials to the authorities, and 
waited upon them in deputations on behalf of the community. The official 
argument was that Government could not permit Indians to enter the country 
without regulation of some sort, and that therefore all Indians should provide 
themselves with uniform permits containing such details as might render it 
impossible for anyone but the rightful holders to enter the country. It was my 
opinion that although we were not bound by law to take out such permits, the 
Government could insist on requiring them so long as the Peace preservation 
Ordinance was in force. The Peace Preservation Ordinance in South Africa was 
something like the Defence of India Act in India. Just as the Defence of India 
Act was kept on the statute-book in India longer than necessary in order to Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 93 harass the people, so was this ordinance allowed to remain in force long after 
the necessity for it had passed in order to harass Indians in South Africa. As for 
the Europeans, it was a dead letter for all practical purposes. Now if permits 
must be taken out, they should contain some mark of identification. There was 
nothing wrong therefore that those who were illiterate should allow their 
thumb-impression to be taken. I did not at all like the inclusion of photographs 
in the permits. Musalmans again had religious objections to such a course. 
The final upshot of the negotiations between the Indian community and the 
authorities was that the Indians consented to change their permits for new 
once and agreed that fresh Indian immigrants should take out permits in the 
new form. Although the Indians were not bound in law, they voluntarily agreed 
to re-registration in the hope that new restrictions might not be imposed upon 
them, it might be clear to all concerned that the Indians did not wish to bring 
in fresh immigrants by unfair means, and the Peace Preservation Ordinance 
might no longer be used to harass new-comers. Almost all Indians thus changed 
their old permits for new once. This was no small thing. The community 
completed like one man with the greatest promptitude this re-registration, 
which they were not legally bound to carry out. This was a proof of their 
veracity, tact, large-mindedness, commonsense and humility. It also showed 
that the community had no desire to violate in any way any law in force in the 
Transvaal. The Indians believed that if they behaved towards the Government 
with such courtesy, it would treat them well, show regard to them and confer 
fresh rights upon them. We shall see in the next chapter how the British 
government in the Transvaal rewarded them for this great aft of courtesy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 94  
11. THE REWARD OF GENTLENESS THE BLACK ACT 
The year 1906 was well under way when this reregistra tion was completed. I 
had re-entered the Transvaal in 1903 and opened my office in Johannesburg 
about the middle of that year. Two years had thus passed in merely resisting 
the inroads of the Asiatic Department. We all expected now that re-registration 
would satisfy the Government and confidently looked forward to a period of 
comparative peace for the community. But that was not to be. The reader has 
been already introduced to Mr. Lionel Curtis. This gentleman held, that the 
Europeans had not attained their objective simply because the Indian changed 
their old permits for new certificated of registration. It was not enough in his 
eyes, that great measures were achieved by mutual understanding. He was of 
opinion that these should have the force of law behind them, and that thus only 
could the principles underlying them be secured for all time. Mr. Curtis wanted 
such restrictions to be placed upon Indians as would produce a striking 
impression all over South Africa and ultimately serve as a model for the other 
Dominions of the Empire to imitate. He would not consider the Transvaal to be 
safe so long as even a single point in South Africa was open to Indians. Again, 
re-registration by mutual consent was calculated to increase the prestige of the 
Indian community while Mr Curtis was keen upon lowering it. He would not care 
to carry Indian opinion with him but would not care to carry Indian opinion with 
him but would frighten us into submission to external restrictions backed up by 
rigorous legal sanctions. He therefore drafted an Asiatic Bill and advised the 
Government that so long as his Bill was not passed, there was no provision in 
the laws already in force to prevent the Indians from surreptitiously entering 
the Transvaal or to remove unauthorized residents from the country. Mr Curtis’ 
arguments met with a ready response from the Government, and a draft Asiatic 
Law Amendment Ordinance to be introduced into the Legislative Council was 
published in the Transvaal Government Gazette. 
Before dealing with this Ordinance in detail, it would be well to dispose of an 
important event in a few words. As I was the author of the Satyagraha Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 95 movement, it is necessary to enable the reader fully to understand some events 
of my life. The Zulu ‘rebellion’ broke out in Natal just while attempts were 
thus being made to impose further disabilities upon Indians in the Transvaal. I 
doubted then and doubt even now if the outbreak could be described as a 
rebellion, but it has always been thus described in Natal. Now as in the Boer 
War, many European residents of Natal joined the army as volunteers. As I too 
was considered a resident of Natal, I thought I must do my bit in the war. With 
the community’s permission, therefore, I made an offer to the Government to 
raise a Stretcher-bearer Corps for service with the troops. The offer was 
accepted. I therefore broke up my Johannesburg home and sent my family to 
Phoenix in Natal where my co-workers had settled and from where Indian 
Opinion was published. I did not close the office as I knew I would not be away 
for long. 
I joined the army with a small corps of twenty or twenty-five men. Most of the 
provinces of India were represented even on this small body of men. The corps 
was on active service for a month. I have always been thankful to God for the 
work which then fell to our lot. We found that the wounded Zulus would have 
been left uncared for, unless we had attended to them. No Europeans would 
help to dress their wounds. Dr. Savage, who was in charge of the ambulance, 
was himself a very humane person. It was no part of our duty to nurse the 
wounded after we had taken them to the hospital. But we had joined the war 
with a desire to do all we could, no matter whether it did or did not fall within 
the scope of our work. The good Doctor told us that he could not induce 
Europeans to nurse the Zulus, and that it was beyond his power to compel them 
and that he would feel obliged if we undertook this mission of mercy. We were 
only too glad to o this. We had to cleanse the wounds of several Zulus which 
had not been attended to for as many as five six days and were therefore 
stinking horribly. We liked the work. The Zulus could not talk to us, but form 
their gestures and the expression of their eyes they seemed to feel as if God 
had sent us to their succour. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 96 The work for which we had enlisted was fairly heavy, for sometimes during the 
month we had to perform a march of as many as forty miles a day. 
The Corps was disbanded in a month. Its work was mentioned in despatches. 
Each member of the Corps was awarded the medal especially struck for the 
occasion. The Governor wrote a letter of thanks. The three sergeants of the 
Corps were Gujaratis, Shris Umiashankar Manchharam Shelat Surendra Bapubhai 
Medh, and Harishankar Ishvar Joshi. All the three had a fine physique and 
worked very hard. I cannot just now recall the names of the other Indians, but I 
well remember that one of these was a Pathan, who used to express his 
astonishment on finding us carrying as large a load as, and marching abreast of, 
himself. 
While I was working with the Corps, two ideas which had long been floating in 
my mind became firmly fixed. First, an aspirant after a life exclusively devoted 
to service must lead a life of celibacy. Secondly, he must accept poverty as a 
constant companion through life. He may not take up any occupation which 
would prevent him or make him shrink from undertaking the lowliest of duties 
or largest risks. 
Letters and telegrams, asking me to proceed to the Transvaal at once, had 
poured in, even while I was serving with the Corps. On return from the war, 
therefore, I just met the friends at Phoenix and at once reached Johannesburg. 
There I read the draft Ordinance referred to above. I took the Transvaal 
Government Gazette Extraordinary of August 22, 1906 in which the Ordinance 
was published, home from the office. I went up a hill near the house in the 
company of a friend and began to translate the draft Ordinance into Gujarati 
for Indian Opinion. I shuddered as I read the sections of the Ordinance one 
after another. I saw nothing in it except hatred of Indians. It seemed to me 
that if the Ordinance was passed and the Indians meekly accepted it, that 
would spell absolute ruins for the Indians in South Africa. I clearly saw that this 
was a question of life and death for them. I further saw that even in the case of 
memorials and representations proving fruitless, the community must not with 
folded hands. Better die than submit to such a law. But how were we to die? Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 97 What should we dare and do so that there would be nothing before us except a 
choice of victory or death? An impenetrable wall was before me, as it were, 
and I could not see my way through it. I must acquaint the reader with the 
details of the proposed measure, which shocked me so violently. Here is a brief 
summary of it. 
Every Indian, man, woman o r child of eight years or upwards, entitled to 
reside in the Transvaal, must register his or her name with the Registrar of 
Asiatics and take out a certificate of registration. 
The applicants for registration must surrender their old permits to the 
Registrar, and state in their applications their name, residence, caste, age, 
etc. The registrar was to note down the important marks of identification upon 
the applicant’s person, and take his finger and thumb impressions. Every Indian 
who failed thus to forfeit his right of residence in the Transvaal. Failure to 
apply would be held to be an offence in law for which the defaulter could be 
fined, sent to prison or even deported within the discretion of the court. 
Parents must apply on behalf of their minor children and bring them to the 
Registrar in order to give their finger impressions, etc. In case of parents failing 
to discharge this responsibility laid upon them, the minor on attaining the age 
of sixteen years must discharge it himself, and if he defaulted, he made himself 
liable to the same punishments as could be awarded to his parents. The 
certificate of registration issued to an applicant must be produced before any 
police officer whenever and wherever he may be required to do so. Failure thus 
to produce the certificate would be held to be an offence for which the 
defaulter could be fined or sent to prison. Even a person walking on public 
thoroughfares could be required to produce his certificate. Police officers could 
enter private houses in order to inspect certificates. Indians entering the 
Transvaal from some place outside it must produce their certificates before the 
inspector on duty. Certificates must be produced on demand in courts which 
the holder attended on business, and in revenue offices which issued to him a 
trading or bicycle licence. That is to say, if an Indian wanted any government 
office to do for him something within its competence, the officer could ask to Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 98 see his certificates before granting his request. Refusal to produce the 
certificate or to supply such particulars or means of identification as may be 
prescribed by regulation would be also held to be an offence for which the 
person refusing could be fined or sent to prison. 
I have never known legislation of this nature being directed against free men in 
any part of the world. I know that indentured Indians in Natal are subject to a 
drastic system of passes, but these poor fellows can hardly be classed as free 
men. However even the laws to which they are subject are mild in comparison 
to the Ordinance outlined above and the penalties they impose are a mere 
fleabite when compared with the penalties laid down in the Ordinance. A 
trader with assets running into lakhs could be deported and thus faces with 
utter ruin in virtue of the Ordinance. And the patient reader will see later on 
how persons were even deported for breaking some of its provisions. There are 
some drastic laws directed against criminal tribes in India, with which this 
Ordinance can be easily compared and will be found not to suffer by the 
comparison. The giving a novelty in South Africa. With a view to seeing some 
literature on the subject, I read a volume on finger impressions by Mr. Henry, a 
police officer, from which I gathered that finger prints are required by law only 
from criminals. I was therefore shocked by this compulsory requirement 
regarding finger prints. Again, the registration of women and children under 
sixteen was proposed for the first time by this Ordinance. 
The next day there was held a small meeting of the leading Indians to whom I 
explained the Ordinance word by word. It shocked them as it had shocked me. 
One of them said in a fit of passion: ‘If anyone came forward to demand a 
certificate from my wife, I would shoot him on that spot and take the 
consequences.’ I quieted him and, addressing the meeting said, ‘This is a very 
serious crisis. If the Ordinance were passed and if we acquiesced in it, it would 
be imitated all over South Africa. As it seems to me, it is designed to strike at 
the very root of our existence in South Africa. It is not the last step, but the 
first step with a view to hound us out of the country. We are therefore 
responsible for the safety, not only of the ten or fifteen thousand Indians in the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 99 Transvaal both of the entire Indian community in South Africa. Again, if we 
fully understand all the implications of this legislation, we shall find that 
India’s honour is in our keeping. For the Ordinance seeks to humiliate not only 
ourselves but also the motherland. The humiliation consists in the degradation 
of innocent men. No one will take it upon himself to say that we have done 
anything to deserve such legislation. We are innocent, and insult offered to a 
single innocent member of a nation is tantamount to insulting the nation as a 
whole. It will not, therefore, do to be hasty, impatient or angry. That cannot 
save us from this onslaught. But God will come tour help, if we calmly think out 
and carry out in the time measures of resistance, presenting a united front and 
bearing the hardship, which such resistance brings in its train.’ All present 
realized the seriousness of the situation and resolved to hold a public meeting 
at which a number of resolutions must be proposed and passed. A Jewish 
theatre was hired for the purpose. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 100  
12. THE ADVENT OF SATYAGRAHA 
The meeting was duly held in September 11, 1906. It w as attended by delegates 
from various places in the Transvaal. But I must confess that even I myself had 
not then understood all the implications of the resolutions I had helped to 
frame; nor had I gauged all the possible conclusions to which they might lead. 
The old Empire Theatre was packed from floor to ceiling. I could read in every 
face the expectation of something strange to be done or to happen. Mr Abdul 
Gani, Chairman of the Transvaal British Indian Association, presided. He was 
one of the oldest Indian residents of the Transvaal, and partner and manager of 
the Johannesburg branch of the well-known firm of Mamad Kasm kamrudin. The 
most important among the resolutions passed by which the Indians solemnly 
determined not to submit to the Ordinance in the even t of its becoming law in 
the teeth of their opposition and to suffer all the penalties attaching to such 
non-submission. 
I fully explained this resolution to the meeting and received a patient hearing. 
The business of the meeting was conducted in Hindi or Gujarati; it was 
impossible therefore that anyone present should not follow the proceedings. 
For the Tamils and Telugus who did not know Hindi there were Tamil and 
Telugu speakers who fully explained everything in their respective languages. 
The resolution was duly proposed, seconded and supported by several speakers 
one of whom was Sheth Haji Habib. He too was a very old and experienced 
resident of South Africa and made an impassioned speech. He was deeply 
moved and went so far as to say that we must pass this resolution with god as 
witness and must never yield a cowardly submission to such degrading 
legislation. He then went on solemnly to declare in the name of God that he 
would never submit to that law, and advised all present to do likewise. Others 
also delivered powerful and angry speeches in supporting the resolution. When 
in the course of his speech Sheth Haji Habib came to the solemn declaration, I 
was at once startled and put on my guard. Only then I did fully realize my own 
responsibility and the responsibility of the community. The community had Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 101 passed many a resolution before and amended such resolutions in the light of 
further reflection or fresh experience. There were cases in which resolutions 
passed had not been observed by all concerned. Amendments in resolutions and 
failure to observe resolutions on the part of persons agreeing thereto are 
ordinary experiences of public life all the world over. But no one over imports 
the name of God into such resolutions. In the abstract there should not be any 
distinction between a resolution and an oath taken in the name of God. When 
an intelligent man makes a resolution deliberately he never swerves from it by 
a hair’s breadth. With him, his resolution carries as much weight as a 
declaration made with God as witness does. But the world takes no note of 
abstract principles and imagines an ordinary resolution and an oath in the name 
of God to be poles asunder. A man who makes an ordinary resolution is not 
ashamed of himself when he deviates from it, but a man who violates an oath 
administered to him is not only ashamed of himself, but is also looked upon by 
society as a sinner. This imaginary distinction has struck such a deep root in the 
human mind that a person making a statement on oath before a judge is held to 
have committed an offence in law if the statement is proved to be false and 
receives drastic punishment. 
Full of these thoughts as I was, possessing as I did much experience of solemn 
pledges, having profited by them, I was taken aback by Sheth Haji Habib’s 
suggestion of an oath. I thought out the possible consequences of it in a 
moment. My perplexity gave place to enthusiasm. And although I had no 
intention of taking and oath or inviting others to do so when I went to the 
meeting, I warmly approved of the Sheth’s suggestion. But at the same time it 
seemed to me that the people should have explained to them clearly the 
meaning of a pledge. And if even then they were prepared to do so; otherwise I 
must understand that they were not still ready to stand the final test. I 
therefore asked the President for permission to explain to the meeting the 
implications of Sheth Haji Habib’s suggestion. The President readily granted it 
and I rose to address the meeting. I give below a summary of my remarks just 
as I can recall them now: Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 102 “I wish to explain to this meeting that there is a vast difference between this 
resolution and every other resolution we have passed up to date and that there 
is a wide divergence also in the manner of making it. It is very grave resolution 
we are making, as our existence in South Africa depends upon our fully 
observing it. The manner of making the resolution suggested by our friend is as 
much of a novelty as of a solemnity. I did not come to the meeting with a view 
to getting the resolution passed in that manner, which redounds to the credit 
of Sheth Haji Habib as well as it lays a burden of responsibility upon him. I 
tender my congratulations to him. I deeply appreciate his suggestion, but if you 
adopt it you too will share his responsibility. You must understand what is this 
responsibility, and as an adviser and servant of the community, it is my duty 
fully to explain it to you. 
“We all believe in one and the same God, the differences of nomenclature in 
Hinduism and Islam notwithstanding. To pledge ourselves or to take an oath in 
the name something to be trifled with. If having taken such an oath we violate 
our pledge we are guilty before God and man. Personally I hold that a man, 
who deliberately and intelligently takes a pledge and then breaks it, forfeits his 
manhood. And just as a copper coin treated with mercury not only becomes 
valueless when detected but also makes its owner liable to punishment, in the 
same way a man who lightly pledges his word and then breaks it becomes a 
man of straw and fits himself for punishment here as well as hereafter. Sheth 
Haji Habib is proposing to administer an oath of a very serious character. There 
is no one in this meeting who can be classed as an infant or as wanting in 
understanding. You are all well advanced in age and have seen the world; many 
of you are delegates and have discharged responsibility in a greater or lesser 
measure. No one present, therefore, can ever hope to excuse himself by saying 
that he did not know what he was about when he took the oath. 
“I know that pledged and vows are, and should be, taken on rare occasions. A 
man who takes a vow every now and then is sure to stumble. But if I can 
imagine a crisis in the history of the Indian community of South Africa when it 
would be in the fitness of things to take pledges that crisis is surely now. There Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 103 is wisdom in taking serious steps with great caution and hesitation. The caution 
and hesitation have their limits, and we have now passed them. The 
Government has taken leave of all sense of decency. We would only be 
betraying our unworthiness and cowardice, if we cannot stake our all in the 
face of the conflagration which envelopes usand sit it watching it with folded 
hands. There is no doubt, therefore, that the present is a proper occasion for 
taking pledges. But every one of us must think out for himself if he has the will 
and the ability to pledge himself. Resolutions of this nature cannot be passed 
by a majority vote. Only those who take a pledge can be bound by it. This 
pledge must not be taken with a view to produce an effect on outsiders. No one 
should trouble to consider what impression it might have upon the Local 
Government the Imperial Government, or the Government of India. Everyone 
must only search his own heart, and if the inner voice assures him that he has 
the requisite strength to carry him through, then only should he pledge himself 
if and then only will his pledge bear fruit. 
“A few words now as to the consequence. Hoping for the best, we may say that 
if a majority of the Indians pledge themselves to resistance and if all who take 
the pledge themselves to resistance and if all who take the pledge prove true 
to themselves, the Ordinance may not be passed and, if passed, may be soon 
repealed. It may be that we may not be called upon to suffer at all. But if on 
the one hand a man who takes a pledge must be a robust optimist, on the other 
hand he must be prepared for the worst. Therefore I want to give you an idea 
of the worst that might happen to us in the present struggle. Imagine that all of 
us present here numbering 3,000 at the most pledge ourselves. Imagine again 
that the remaining 10, 000 Indians take no such pledge. We will only provoke 
ridicule in the beginning. Again, it is quite possible that in spite of the present 
warning some or many of those who pledge themselves may weaken at the very 
first trial. We may have to go to jail, where we may be insulted. We may have 
to go hungry and suffer extreme heat or cold. Hard labour may be imposed 
upon us. We may be flogged be rude warders. We may be fined heavily and our 
property may be attached and held up to auction if there are only a few 
resisters left. Opulent today we may be reduced to abject poverty tomorrow. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 104 We may be deported. Suffering from starvation and similar hardships in jail, 
some of us may fall ill and even die. In short, therefore, it is not at all 
impossible that and worse. If someone asks me when and how the struggle may 
end, I may say that If the entire community manfully stands the test, the end 
will be near. If many of us fall back under storm and stress, the struggle will be 
prolonged. But I can boldly declare, and with certainty, that so long as there is 
even a handful of men true to their pledge, there can only one end to the 
struggle, and that is victory. 
“A word about my personal responsibility. If I am warning you of the risks 
attendant upon the pledge, I am at the same time inviting you to pledge 
yourselves, and I am fully conscious of my responsibility in the matter. It is 
possible that a majority of those present here may take the pledge in a fit of 
enthusiasm or indignation but may weaken under the ordeal, and only a handful 
may be left to face the final test. Even then there is only one course open to 
someone like me, to die but not to submit to the law. It is quite unlikely but 
even if everyone else flinched leaving me alone to face the music, I am 
confident that I would never violate my pledge. Please do not misunderstanding 
me. I am not saying this out of vanity, but I wish to put you, especially the 
leaders upon the platform, on your guard. I wish respectfully to suggest It to 
you that if you have not the will or the ability to stand firm even when you are 
perfectly isolated, you must not only not take the pledge yourselves but you 
must declare your opposition before the resolution is put to the meeting and 
before its members begin to take pledges and you must not make yourselves 
parties to the resolution. Although we are going to take the pledge in a body, 
no one should imagine that default on the part of one or many can absolve the 
rest from their obligation. Everyone should fully realize his responsibility, then 
only pledge himself independently of others and understand that he himself 
must be true to his pledge even unto death, no matter what others do.” 
I spoke to this effect and resumed my seat. The meeting heard me word by 
word in perfect quite. Other leaders too spoke. All dwelt upon their own 
responsibility and the responsibility of the audience. The president rose. He too Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 105 made the situation clear, and at last all present, standing with upraised hands, 
took an oath with God as witness not to submit to the Ordinance if it became 
law. I can never forget the scene, which is present before my mind’s eye as I 
write. The community’s enthusiasm knew no bounds. The very next day there 
was some accident in the theatre in consequence of which it was wholly 
destroyed by fire. On the third day friends brought me the news of the fire and 
congratulated the community upon this good omen, which signified to them 
that the Ordinance would meet the same fate as the theatre. I have never been 
influenced by such so called signs and therefore did not attach any weight to 
the coincidence. I have taken note of it here only as a demonstration of the 
community’s courage and faith. The reader will find in the subsequent chapters 
many more proofs of these two high qualities of the people. 
The workers did not let the grass grow under their feet after this great 
meeting. Meetings were held everywhere and pledges of resistance were taken 
in every place. The Principal topic of discussion in Indian Opinion now was the 
Black Ordinance. 
At the other end, steps were taken in order to meet the Local Government. A 
deputation waited upon Mr Duncan, the Colonial Secretary, and told him among 
other things about the pledges. Sheth Haji Habib, who was a member of the 
deputation, said, ‘I cannot possibly restrain myself if any office comes and 
proceeds to take my wife’s finger prints. I will kill him there and then and die 
myself. The Minister stared at the Sheth’s face for a while and said, 
‘Government is reconsidering the advisability of making the Ordinance 
applicable to women, and I can assure you at once that the clauses relating to 
women will be deleted. Government has understood you feeling in the matter 
and desire to respect it. But as for the other provisions, I am sorry to inform 
you that Government is and will remain adamant. General Botha wants you to 
agree to this legislation after due deliberation. Government deem it to be 
essential to the existence of the Europeans. They will certainly consider any 
suggestions about details which you may make consistently with the objects of 
the Ordinance, and my advice to the deputation is that your interest lies in Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 106 agreeing to the legislation and proposing changes only as regards the details.’ I 
am leaving out here the particulars of the discussion with the Minister, as all 
those arguments have already been dealt with. The arguments were just the 
same, there was only a difference in phraseology as they were set forth before 
the Minister. The deputation withdraw, after informing him that his advice 
notwithstanding, acquiescence in the proposed legislation was out of the 
question, and after thanking Government for its intention of exempting women 
from its provisions. It is difficult to say whether the exemption of women was 
the first fruit of the community’s agitation, or whether the Government as an 
after thought made a concession to practical considerations which Mr Curtis had 
ruled out of his scientific methods. Government claimed that it had decided to 
exempt women independently of the Indian agitation. Be that as it might, the 
community established to their own satisfaction a cause and effect relation 
between the agitation and the exemption and their fighting spirit rose 
accordingly. 
Now of us knew what name to give to our movement. I then used the term 
‘passive resistance’ in describing it. I did not quite understand the implications 
of ‘passive resistance’ as I called it. I only knew that some new principle had 
come into being. As the struggle advanced, the phase ‘passive resistance’ gave 
rise to confusion and it appeared shameful to permit this great struggle to be 
known only by and English name. Again, that foreign phrase could hardly pass 
as current coin among the community. A small prize was therefore announced 
in Indian Opinion to be awarded to the reader who invented the best 
designation for our struggle. We thus received a number of suggestions. The 
meaning of the struggle had been then fully discussed in Indian Opinion and the 
competitors for the prize had fairly sufficient material to serve as a basis for 
their exploration. Shri Maganlal Gandhi was one of the competitors and he 
suggested the word ‘Sadagraha,’ meaning ‘firmness in a good cause.’ I liked the 
word, but it did not fully represent the whole idea I wished it to connote. I 
therefore corrected it to ‘Satyagraha’. Truth (Satya) implies love, and firmness 
(agraha) engenders and therefore serves as a synonym for force. I thus began to 
call the Indian movement ‘Satyagraha’, that is to say, the Force which is born Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 107 of Truth and Love or non-violence, and gave up the use of the phrase ‘passive 
resistance,’ in connection with it, so much so that even in English writing we 
often avoided it and used instead the word ‘Satyagraha’ it self or some other 
equivalent English phrase. This then was the genesis of the movement which 
came to be known as Satyagraha, and of the word used as a designation for it. 
Before we proceed any further with our history we shall do well to grasp the 
difference between passive resistance and Satyagraha, which is the subject of 
our next chapter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 108  
13. SATYAGRAHA V. PASSIVE RESISTANCE 
As the movement advanced, Englishmen too began to wat ch it with interest. 
Although the English newspapers in the Transvaal generally wrote in support of 
the Europeans and of the black Act, they willingly published contribution from 
well-known Indians. They also published Indian representations to Government 
in full or at least a summary of these, sometimes sent their reporters to 
important meetings of the Indians, and when such was not the case, made room 
for the brief reports we sent them.  
These amenities were of course very useful to the community, but by and by 
some leading Europeans came to take interest in the movement as it 
progressed. One of these was Mr Hosken, one of the magnates of Johannesburg. 
He had always been free from colour prejudice but his interest in the Indian 
question deepened after the starting of Satyagraha. The Europeans of 
Germiston, which is something like a suburb of Johannesburg, expressed a 
desire to hear me. A meeting was held, and introducing me and the movement I 
stood for to the audience, Mr Hosken observed, “The Transvaal Indians have 
had recourse to passive resistance when all other means of securing redress 
proved to be of no avail. They do not enjoy the franchise. Numerically they are 
only a few. They are weak and have no arms. Therefore they have taken to 
passive resistance which is a weapon of the weak.” These observations took me 
by surprise, and the speech, which I was going to make took an altogether 
different complexion in consequence. In contradicting Mr. Hosken, I defined our 
passive resistance as ‘soul force’. I saw at this meeting that a use of the phase 
‘passive resistance’ was apt to give rise to terrible misunderstanding. I will try 
to distinguish between passive resistance and soul force by amplifying the 
argument which I made before that meeting so as to make things clearer.  
I have no idea when the phrase ‘passive resistance’ was first used in English and 
by whom. But among the English people, whenever a small minority did not 
approve of some obnoxious piece of legislation, instead of rising in rebellion 
they took the passive or milder step of not submitting to the law and inviting Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 109 the penalties of such non-submission upon their heads. When the British 
Parliament passed the Education Act some years ago, the Non-conformists 
offered passive resistance under the leadership of Dr.== Clifford. The great 
movement of the English women for the vote was also known as passive 
resistance. It was in view of these two cases that Mr Hosken described passive 
resistance as a weapon of the weak or the vote less. Dr Clifford and his friends 
had the vote, but as they were in a minority in the Parliament, they could not 
prevent the passage of the education Act. That is to say, they were weak in 
numbers. Not that they were averse to the use of arms for the attainment of 
their aims, but they had no hope of succeeding by force of arms. And in a well-
regulated state, recourse to arms every now and then in order to secure 
popular rights would defeat its own purpose. Again some of the Non-
conformists would generally object to taking up arms even if it was a practical 
proposition. The suffragists had no franchise rights. They were weak in numbers 
as well as in physical force. Thus their case lent colour to Mr Hosken’s 
observations. The suffragist movement did not eschew the use of physical 
force. Some suffragists fired buildings and even assaulted men. I do not think 
they ever intended to kill anyone. but they did intend to thrash people when an 
opportunity occurred, and even thus to make things hot for them.  
But brute force had absolutely no place in the Indian movement in any 
circumstances, and the reader will see, as we proceed, that no matter how 
badly they suffered, the Satyagrahis never used physical force, and that 
tooalthough there were occasions when they were in a position to use it 
effectively. Again, although the Indians had no franchise and were weak, these 
considerations had nothing to do with the organization of Satyagraha. This is 
not to say, that the Indians would have taken to Satyagraha even if they had 
possessed arms or the franchise. Probably there would have taken to 
Satyagraha even if they had possessed arms or the franchise. Probably there 
would not have been any scope for Satyagraha if they had the franchise. If they 
had arms, the opposite party would have thought twice before antagonizing 
them. One can therefore understand, that people who possess arms would have 
fewer occasions for offering Satyagraha. My point is that I can definitely assert Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 110 that in planning the Indian movement there never was the slightest thought 
given to the possibility or otherwise of offering armed resistance. Satyagraha is 
soul force pure and simple, and whenever extent there is room for the use of 
arms or physical force or brute force, there and to that extent is there so much 
less possibility for soul force. These are purely antagonistic forces in my view, 
and I had full realization of this antagonism even at the time of the advent of 
Satyagraha. 
We will not stop here to consider whether these views are right or wrong. We 
are only concerned to note the distinction between passive resistance and 
Satyagraha, and we have seen that there is a great and fundamental difference 
between the two. If without understanding this, those who call themselves 
either passive resisters or Satyagrahis believe both to be one and the same 
thing, there would be injustice to both leading to untoward consequences. The 
result of our using the phrase ‘passive resistance’ in South Africa was, not that 
people admired us by ascribing to us the bravery and self-sacrifice of the 
suffragists but we were mistaken to be a danger to person and property which 
the suffragists were, and even a generous friend like Mr. Hosken imagined us to 
be weak. The power of suggestion is such, that a man at last becomes what he 
believes himself to be. If we continue to believe ourselves and let others 
believe, that we are weak and helpless and therefore offer passive resistance, 
our resistance would never make us strong, and at the earliest opportunity we 
would give up passive resistance, our resistance would never make us strong, 
and at the earliest opportunity we would give up passive resistance as a 
weapon of the weak. On the other hand If we are Satyagrahis and offer 
Satyagraha believing ourselves to be strong, two clear consequences result from 
it. Fostering the idea of strength, we grow stronger and stronger every day. 
With the increase in our strength, our Satyagraha too becomes more effective 
and we would never be casting about for an opportunity to give it up. Again, 
while there is no scope for love in passive resistance, on the other had not only 
has hatred no place in Satyagraha but is a positive breach of its ruling principle. 
While in passive resistance there is a scope for the use of arms when a suitable 
occasion arrives, in Satyagraha physical force is forbidden even in the most Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 111 favorable circumstances. Passive resistance is often look upon as a preparation 
for the use of force while Satyagraha can never be side by side with the use of 
arms. Satyagraha and brute force, being each a negation of the other, can 
never go together. Satyagraha may be offered to one’s nearest and dearest; 
passive resistance can never be offered to them unless of course they have 
ceased to be dear and become an object of hatred to us. In passive resistance 
there is always present an idea of harassing the other party and there is a 
simultaneous readiness to undergo and hardships entailed upon us by such 
activity, while in Satyagraha there is not the remotest idea of injuring the 
opponent. Satyagraha postulates the conquest of the adversary by suffering 
postulates the conquest of the adversary by suffering in one’s own person. 
These are the distinctions between the two forces. But I do not wish to suggest 
that the merits, or if you like, the defects of passive resistance thus 
enumerated are to be seen in every movement which passes by that name. But 
it can be shown that these defects have been notices in many cases of passive 
resistance. Jesus Christ indeed has been acclaimed as the prince of passive 
resisters but I submit in that case passive resistance must mean Satyagraha and 
Satyagraha alone. There are not many cases in history of passive resistance in 
that sense. One of these is that of the Doukhobors of Russia cried by Tolstoy. 
The phrase passive resistance was not employed to denote Christians in the 
early days of Christianity. I would therefore class them as Satyagrahis. And if 
their conduct be described as passive resistance, passive resistance becomes 
synonymous with Satyagraha. It has been my object in the present chapter to 
show that Satyagraha is essential different from what people generally mean in 
English by the phrase ‘passive resistance’. 
While enumerating the characteristics of passive resistance, I had to sound a 
note of warning in order to avoid injustice being done to those who had 
recourse to it. It is also necessary to point out that I do not claim for people 
calling themselves Satyagrahis all the merits which I have described as being 
characteristic of Satyagraha. I am not aware of the fact that many a Satyagraha 
so called is an utter stranger to them. Many suppose Satyagraha to be a weapon Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 112 of the weak. Others have said that it is a preparation for armed resistance. But 
I must repeat once more that it has not been my object to describe Satyagrahis 
as they are but to set forth the implications of Satyagraha and characteristics 
of Satyagrahis as they ought to be.  
In a word, we had to invent a new term clearly to denote the movement of the 
Indians in the Transvaal and to prevent its being confused with passive 
resistance generally so called. I have tried to show in the show in the present 
chapter the various principles which were then held to be part and parcel of 
the connotation of that term. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 113  
14. DEPUTATION TO ENGLAND 
In the Transvaal itself we took all necessary measure s for resisting the Black act 
such as approaching the Local Government with memorials, etc. The legislative 
Council deleted the clause affecting women but the rest of the ordinance was 
passed practically in the shape in which it was first drafted. The spirit of the 
community was then high and having closed its ranks it was unanimous in 
opposition to the Ordinance. No one therefore was despondent. We however 
still adhered to the resolution to exhaust all appropriate constitutional 
remedies in the first instance. The Transvaal was yet a Crown Colony, so that 
the Imperial Government was responsible for its legislation as well as its 
administration. Therefore the royal assent to measures passed by its legislature 
was not a mere formality, but very often it might so happen that the King, as 
advised by his ministers, might withhold his assent to such measures if they 
were found to be in conflict with the spirit of the British Constitution. On the 
other hand, in the case of a Colony enjoying responsible government the royal 
assent to measures passed by its legislature is more often than not a matter of 
course. 
I submitted to the community that if a deputation was to go England, it was as 
well that they realized their responsibility in the matter still more fully, and 
with this end in view I placed three suggestions before our Association. First, 
although we had taken pledges at the meeting in the Empire Theatre, we 
should once again obtain individual pledges from leading Indians, so that if they 
had given way to doubt or weakness, they would be found out. One of the 
reasons advances by me in support of this suggestion was, that if the 
deputation was backed up by Satyagraha, they would then have no fears and 
could boldly inform the Secretary of the State for the Colonies about the 
resolution of the community. Secondly, arrangements for meeting the expenses 
of the deputation must be made in advance. And thirdly, the maximum number 
of members should be fixed. I made this last suggestion in order to correct the 
current misapprehension that a large number of members would be able to put Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 114 in more work, and to bring this idea into relief that the members should join 
the deputation not because it was an honour to them but with a single minded 
devotion to the cause. The three suggestions were accepted. Signatures were 
taken. Many signed the pledge, but still I saw even among those who had orally 
pledges themselves at the meeting, there were some who hesitated to sign it. 
When once a man has pledged himself he need hesitate to pledge himself a 
hundred times. But yet it is no uncommon experience to find men weakening in 
regard to pledges deliberately taken and getting perplexed when asked to put 
down a verbal pledge in black and white. The necessary funds, too, were 
found. The greatest difficulty however was encountered in selecting the 
personnel of the deputation. I was to go, but who would go with me? The 
Committee took much time in arriving at a decision. Many a night passed, and 
we had a full experience of the bad habits which are generally prevalent in 
association. Some proposed to cut the Gordian knot by asking me to go alone, 
but I flatly declined. There was for all practical purposes no Hindu-Muslim 
problem in South Africa. But it could not be claimed that there were no 
differences between the two sections and if these differences never assumed 
an acute form, that may have been to some extent due to the peculiar 
conditions in South Africa, but was largely and definitely due to the leaders 
having worked with devotion and frankness and thus given a fine lead to the 
community. My advice was that there must be a Musalman gentleman going 
with me, and that the personnel should be limited to two. But the Hindus at 
once said that as I represented the Indian community as a whole, there should 
be a representative of Hindu interests. Some even said that there should be one 
Konkani Musalman, one Meman, one Patidar, and one Anavala and so on. At 
least, all understood the real position and only two of us, Mr H.O.Ali and myself 
were duly elected. 
H.O. Ali could be considered semi-Malay. His father was an Indian Musalman 
and his mother Malay. His mother tongue, we might say, was Dutch. But he had 
been so well educated in English that he could speak Dutch and English equally 
well. He had also cultivated the art of writing to the newspapers. He was a Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 115 member of the Transvaal British Indian Association and he had long been taking 
part in public affairs. He spoke Hindustani, too, freely. 
We set to work as soon as we reached England. We got printed the memorial to 
be submitted to the Secretary of the State which we had drafted in the steamer 
on our way to England. Lord Elgin was Secretary of State for the Colonies and 
Lord (then Mr) Moreley Secretary of State for India. We met Dadabhai and 
through him the British Committee of the Indian National Congress. We placed 
our case before it and signified our intention to seek the co-operation of all the 
parties, as advised by Dadabhai. The Committee approved of our policy. 
Similarly we met Sir Muncherjee Bhownugree, who also was of much help. He 
as well as Dadabhai advised us to secure the co-operation of some impartial 
and well known Anglo Indian who should introduce our deputation to Lord Elgin. 
Sir Muncherjee suggested some names, too, one of which was that of Sir Lepel 
Griffin. Sir W. W. Hunter was now no longer alive; or else on account of his 
deep knowledge of the condition of Indians in South Africa he would have led 
the deputation himself or induced some influential member of the House of 
Lords to do so.  
We met Sir Lepel Griffin. He was opposed to current political movements in 
India, but he was much interested in this question and agreed to lead the 
deputation not for the sake of courtesy but for the justice and righteousness of 
our cause. He read all the papers and became familiar with the problem. We 
likewise interviewed other Anglo-Indians, Members of Parliament, and as many 
others of any importance as were within our reach. The deputation waited 
upon Lord Elgin who heard everything with attention, expressed his sympathy, 
referred to his own difficulties and yet promised to do for us all he could. The 
same deputation met Mr Morley who also declared his sympathy and whose 
observations in replying to the deputation I have already summarized. Sir 
William Wedderburn was instrumental in calling a meeting of the Committee of 
the House of Commons for Indian Affairs in the drawing room of the House and 
we placed our case before them too as best we could. We met Mr. Redmond, 
the then leader of the Irish Party. In short, we met as many members of Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 116 Parliament as we could, irrespective of the party to which they belonged. The 
British Committee of the Indian National Congress was of course very helpful. 
But according to English customs men belonging to a certain party and holding 
certain views only would join it, while there were many others who had nothing 
to do with the Committee but yet rendered us all possible assistance. We 
determined to organize a standing committee upon which all these could come 
together and thus be even more useful in watching over our interests and men 
of all parties liked our idea. 
The burden of carrying on the work of an institution chiefly falls upon it 
secretary. The secretary should be such, that not only does he have full faith in 
the aims and the objects of the institution, but he should be able to devote 
nearly all his time to the achievement of these aims and has great capacity for 
work. Mr. L. W. Ritch, who belonged to South Africa, was formerly articles to 
me and was now a student for the bar in London, satisfied all the requirements. 
He was there in England and was also desirous of taking up the work. We 
therefore ventured to form the South Africa British Indian Committee. 
In England and other Western countries there is one, in my view, barbarous 
custom of inaugurating movements at dinners. The British Premier delivers in 
the Mansion House on the ninth of November an important speech in which he 
adumbrates his programme for the year and publishes his own forecast of the 
future, and which therefore attracts universal notice. Cabinet ministers among 
others are invited to dinner by the Lord Mayor of London, and when the dinner 
is over, bottles of wine are uncorked, all present drink to the health of the host 
and the guest, and speeches too are made while this merry business is in 
progress. The toast for the British Cabinet is proposed, and the Premier makes 
the important speech referred to in reply to it. And as in public, so in private, 
the person with whom some important conversations are to be held is, as a 
matter of custom, invited to dinner, and the topic of the day is broached either 
at or after dinner. We too had to observe this custom not once but quite a 
number of times, although of course we never touched meat or liquor. We thus 
invite our principal supporters to lunch. About a hundred covers were laid. The Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 117 idea was to tender our thanks t our friends, to bid them good bye and at the 
same item to constitute the Standing Committee. Here too, speeches were 
made, as usual, after dinner, andthe Committee was also organized We thus 
obtained greater publicity for our movement. 
After a stay in England of about six weeks we returned to South Africa. When 
we reached to South Africa. When we reached Madeira, we received a 
cablegram from Mr. Ritch to the effect that Lord Elgin had declared that he was 
unable without further consideration to advise His Majesty the King that the 
Transvaal Asiatic Ordinance should be brought into operation. Our joy knew no 
bounds. The steamer took about a fortnight to reach Cape Town from Maderia 
and we had quite a good time of it during these days and built many castles in 
the air about the coming redress of many more grievances. But the ways of 
Providence are inscrutable. We shall see in the next chapter how the castles we 
had laboriously built toppled down the passed into nothingness. 
But I must place one or two sacred reminiscences on record before closing this 
chapter. We had utilized every single minute of our time in England. The 
sending of a large number of circulars etc., could not be done singlehanded, 
and we were sorely in need of outside help. Money indeed does bring us this 
kind of help, but my experience ranging over forty years has taught me that 
assistance thus purchased can never compare with purely voluntary service. 
Fortunately for us we had many volunteer helpers. Many and Indian youth who 
was in England for study surrounded us and some of themhelped us day and 
night without any hope of reward or fame. I do not remember that any of them 
ever refused to do anything as being beneath his dignity, be it the writing of 
addresses or fixing of stamps or the posting of letters. But there was an English 
friend named Symonds who cast all these into the shade. Whom the Gods love 
die young and so did this benevolent Englishman. I met first him in South 
Africa. He had been in India. When he was in Bombay in 1897, he moved 
fearlessly among the Indians affected by the plague and nursed them. It had 
become a second nature with him not to be daunted by death when ministering 
to sufferers from infectious diseases. He was perfectly free from any race or Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 118 colour prejudice. He was independent in temperament. He believed that truth 
is always with the minority. It was this belief of his which first drew him to me 
in Johannesburg, and he often humorously assured me that he would withdraw 
his support of me if he ever found me in a majority, as he was of opinion that 
truth itself is corrupted in the hands of majority. He had read very widely. He 
was private secretary to Sir George Farrar, one of millionaires of Johannesburg. 
He was an expert stenographer. He happened to be in England when we were 
there. I did not know where he was, but the noble Englishman found us out as 
our public work had secured for us newspaper advertisement. He expressed his 
willingness to do for us anything he could. ‘I will work as a servant if you like,’ 
he said, ‘and if you need a stenographer, you know you can scarcely come 
across the like of me.’ we were in need of both these kinds of help, and I am 
not exaggerating when I say that this Englishman toiled for us day and night 
without any payment. He was always on the typewriter till twelve or one 
o’clock at night. Symonds would carry messages and post letters, always with 
smile curling round his lips. His monthly income was about forty-five pounds, 
but he spent it all in helping his friends and others. He was about thirty years 
of age. He was unmarried and wanted to remain so all his life. I pressed him 
hard to accept some payment but he flatly refused and said, ‘ I would be failing 
in my duty ifI acceptedany remuneration for this service.’ I remember that on 
the last night he was awake till three o’clock while we were winding up our 
business and packing our things. He parted with us the next day after seeing us 
off on the steamer, and a sad parting it was. I have often experienced that 
benevolence is by no means peculiar to the brown skin.  
For the benefit of young aspirants after public work, I note down the fact that 
we were so punctilious in keeping the accounts of the deputation that we 
preserved even such trifling vouchers as the receipts for the money spent in the 
steamers upon, say, soda water. Similarly we preserved the receipts for 
telegrams. I do not remember to have entered a single item under sundries did 
not figure in our accounts at all, and if they did they were intended to cover a 
few pennies or shillings the manner of whose spending we could not recall at 
the time of writing the accounts at the end of the day. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 119 I have clearly observed in this life the fact that we become trustees or 
responsible agents from the time that we reach years of discretion. So long as 
we are with our parents, we must account to them for moneys or business they 
entrust to us. They may be sure of our rectitude and may not ask us for 
accounts, but that does not affect our responsibility. When we become 
independent householders, there arises the responsibility to our family. We are 
not the sole proprietors of our acquisitions; our family is a co-sharer of them 
along with ourselves. We must account for every single pie for their sake. If 
such is our responsibility in private life, in public life it is all the greater. I have 
observed that voluntary workers are apt to behave as if they were not bound to 
render a detailed account of the business or money’s with which they are 
entrusted because like Caesar’s wife they are above suspicion. This is sheer 
nonsense, as the keeping of accounts has nothing whatever to do with 
trustworthiness or the reverse. Keeping accounts is an independent duty, the 
performance of which is essential to clean work, and if the leading workers of 
the institution which we voluntarily serve do not ask us for accounts out of a 
sense of false courtesy or fear, they too are equally to blame. If a paid servant 
is bound to account for work done and money spent by him, the volunteer is 
doubly bound to do so, for his very work is a reward to him. This is a very 
important matter, and as I know that this is generally not sufficiently attended 
to in many institutions, I have ventured to take up so much space here in 
adverting to the subject. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 120  
15. CROOKED POLICY 
As soon as we handed at Cape Town, and more so when w e reached 
Johannesburg, we saw that we had overrated the Madeira cablegram. Mr Ritch 
who sent it was not responsible for this. He cabled only what he had heard 
about the measure being disallowed. As we have already observed, the 
Transvaal was then, that is to say in 1906, a Crown colony. Crown Colonies are 
represented in England by agents one of whose duties it is to instruct the 
Secretary of State for the Colonies in all matters affected Colonial interests. 
The Transvaal was then represented by Sir Richard Solomon, the noted lawyer 
of South Africa. Lord Elgin had disallowed the Black Act in consultation with 
him. Responsible government was to be conferred on the Transvaal on January 
1, 1907. Lord Elgin therefore assured Sir Richard that if an identical measure 
was passed by the Transvaal legislature constituted after the grant of 
responsible government, it would not be refused the royal assent. But so long 
as the Transvaal was a Crown Colony, the Imperial Government would be held 
directly responsible for such class legislation, and as racial discrimination was a 
departure from the fundamental principles of the British Empire, he could not 
but advise His Majesty to disallow the measure in question. 
If the measure was to be thus disallowed only in name and if the Transvaal 
Europeans could at the same time have their own way, Sir Richard Solomon had 
no reason to object to such an excellent arrangement. I have characterized this 
as crooked policy, but I believe it could be given a still harsher name with 
perfect justice. The Imperial Government is directly responsible for the 
legislation of Crown Colonies, and there is no place in its constitution for 
discrimination on the ground of race or colour. So far so good. One can also 
understand that the imperial Government could not all at once disallow 
measures passed by the legislatures of Colonies enjoying responsible 
government. But to hold private conferences with Colonial agents and in 
advance to promise the royal assent to legislation which is in open violation of 
the Imperial Constitution, what is this if it is not a breach of faith and an Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 121 injustice to those whose rights are thus pilfered? Really speaking Lord Elgin by 
his assurance encouraged the Transvaal Europeans in their anti Indian 
activities. If he wanted to do this, he ought to have told the Indian deputation 
so in plain terms. As a matter of fact the Empire cannot escape responsibility 
even for the legislation of Colonies enjoying responsible government. Even such 
Colonies are bound to accept the fundamental principles of the British 
Constitution. As for example no such colony can revive the institution of 
legalized slavery. If Lord Elgin disallowed the Black Act because it was an 
improper piece of legislation, and he could disallow it only on this ground, it 
was his clean duty privately to have warned Sir Richard Solomon that the 
Transvaal could not enact such an iniquitous law after the grant of responsible 
government, and if it had any intention of doing so, the Imperial Government 
would be constrained to reconsider the advisability of granting it and such 
superior status. Or he should have told Sir Richard that responsible government 
could be conferred only on the condition that the rights of the Indians were 
fully safeguards. Instead of following such straightforward procedure, Lord 
Elgin made an outward show of friendliness to the Indians, while at the same 
time he really and secretly supported the Transvaal government and 
encouraged it to pass once more the very law which he had vetoed himself. 
This is not the only or the first case of such tortuous policy followed by the 
British Empire. Even an indifferent student of its history will easily recall 
similar incidents. 
In Johannesburg, therefore, the sole topic of conversation was the trick played 
upon us by Lord Elgin and the Imperial Government. Our disappointment in 
South Africa was as deep as had been our joy in Madeira. Ye the immediate 
became even more enthusiastic than before. Everyone said that we must never 
fear as our struggle was independent of any help from the Imperial 
Government. We must look for assistance only to our own selves and to that 
God in Whose name we had pledged ourselves to resistance. And even crooked 
policy would in time turn straight if only we were true to ourselves.  Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 122 Responsible government was established in the Transvaal. The first measure 
passed by the new Parliament was the budget; the second was the Asiatic 
Registration Act, which was, except for an alteration in the date specified in 
one of its clauses, which lapse of time made necessary, and exact replica of the 
original Ordinance, and was rushed through all its stages at a single sitting on 
March 21, 1907. The disallowance of the Ordinance, therefore, was forgotten as 
if it was a dream. The Indians submitted memorials etc., as usual, but who 
would listen to them? The Act was proclaimed to take effect from July 1, 1907 
and Indians were called upon to apply for registration under it before July 31. 
The delay in enforcing the Act was due not to any desire to oblige the Indians, 
but to the exigencies of the case. Some time must elapse before the formal 
sanction of the Crown to the measure was signified, and the preparation of the 
forms set forth in schedulesand the opening of permit offices at various centres 
would also take time. The delay therefore was intended solely for the Transvaal 
Government’s own convenience. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 123  
16. AHMAD MUHAMMAD KACHHALIA 
When the deputation was on its way to England, I happe ned to talk about the 
anti-Asiatic legislation in the Transvaal with the Englishman who had settled in 
South Africa, and when I informed him of the object of our visit to England, he 
exclaimed, ‘I see you are going to London in order to get rid of the dog’s 
collar.’ He thus compared the Transvaal permit to dog’s collar, but I did not 
quite understand then, and cannot exactly tell while recording that incident 
even now, whether he thus intended to express his contempt for the Indians 
and joy at their humiliation, or whether he only meant to show his strong 
feeling in the matter. According to the golden rule that a person’s words must 
not be interpreted so as to do him an injustice, I take it that the gentleman 
used this graphic language only in order to evince him strong feeling. However 
that may be, the Transvaal Government on the side was preparing to throw the 
dog’s collar on the Indians necks, while on the other side the Indians were 
getting ready to put up a fight against the wicked policy of that Government 
and were concerting measures calculated to strengthen them in their resolution 
never to were that collar. Of course, we were writing letters to friends in 
England as well as in India and trying thus to keep them in touch with the 
situation from day to day. But a Satyagraha struggle depends but little upon 
help from outside, and it is only internal remedies that are effective. The 
leaders’ time therefore was chiefly taken up with the endeavors to keep all the 
elements of the community up to the mark. 
One important question before us was that agency we should use for carrying 
on the struggle. The Transvaal British Indian Association had a large 
membership. Satyagraha had not yet seen the light of the day when it was 
established. The Association has resisted in the past, and must resist in the 
future, not one obnoxious law, but quite a host of them. Besides organizing 
resistance to obnoxious legislation, it had many other functions of a political 
and social nature to perform. Again all the members of the Association were 
not pledged to resist the Black Act through Satyagraha. At the same time we Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 124 must take account of external risks to which the Association would be exposed 
in the event of its being identified with the Satyagraha struggle. What if the 
Transvaal Government declared the struggle to be seditious and all institutions 
carrying it on as illegal bodies? What would, in such case, be the position of 
members who were not Satyagrahis? And what about the funds which were 
contributed at a time when Satyagraha was not so much as thought of? All these 
were weighty considerations. Lastly, the Satyagrahis were strongly of opinion 
that they not only must not entertain any ill-will against those who did not join 
the struggle whether for want of faith, for weakness or any other reason 
whatever, but must maintain their present friendly relations with them 
unimpaired and even work side by side with them in all other movements. 
Except the Satyagraha struggle. 
For all these reasons the community came to the conclusion that the 
Satyagraha struggle should not be carried on through any of the existing 
organizations. They might render all help in their power and resist the Black 
Act in every way open to them except that of Satyagraha, for which a new body 
named the ‘Passive Resistance Association’ was started by the Satyagrahis. The 
reader will see from this English name that the word Satyagraha had not yet 
been invented when this new Association came into being. Time fully justified 
the wisdom of constituting a fresh body for the work, and the Satyagraha 
movement might perhaps have suffered a setback if any of the existing 
organizations had been mixed up with it. Numerous members joined this new 
Association, and the community furnished it funds too with a lavish hand. 
My experience has taught me that no movement even stops or languishes for 
want of funds. This does not mean that any temporal movement can go on 
without money, but it does mean that wherever It has good men and true at its 
helm, it is bound to attract to itself the requisite funds. On the other hand, I 
have also observed that a movement takes its downward course from the time 
that it is afflicted with a plethora of funds. When therefore a public institution 
is managed from the interest of investments, I dare not call it a sin but I do say 
that it is a highly improper procedure. The public should be the bank for all Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 125 public institutions, which should not last a day longer than the public wish. An 
institution run with the interest of accumulated capital ceases to be amenable 
to public opinion and becomes autocratic and self-righteous. This is not the 
place to dwell upon the corruption of many a social and religious institution 
managed with permanent funds. The phenomenon is so common that he who 
runs may read it. 
But we must return to our narrative. Lawyers and English-educated persons do 
not by any means enjoy a monopoly of hair spitting. I saw that even the 
uneducated Indians in South Africa were quite capable of drawing minute 
distinctions and making fine arguments. Some argued that the pledge taken in 
the Old Empire Theatre had been fulfilled as the old Ordinance was disallowed, 
and those who had weakened since then took shelter under this plea. The 
argument was not quite devoid of force, yet it could not impress those whose 
resistance was not to the law as law but to the vicious principle underlying it. 
All the same it was found necessary to re-administer the oath of resistance for 
safety’s sake just to reinforce the awakening of the community and to probe 
the extent of its weakness of any. Meetings therefore were held in every place, 
where the situation was explained, the oath was administered afresh and the 
spirit of the community was found to be as high as ever. 
Meanwhile the fateful month of July was gradually drawing to an end , and on 
the last day of that month we had resolved to call a mass meeting of the 
Indians at Pretoria the capital of the Transvaal. Delegates from other places 
besides were also invited to attend. The meeting was held in the open on the 
grounds of the Pretoria mosque. After the inauguration of Satyagraha our 
meetings were so largely attended that no building could accommodate them. 
The entire Indian population in the Transvaal did not exceed 13,000 souls, of 
whom over 10,000 lived in Johannesburg and Pretoria. An attendance at public 
meetings of two thousand from an aggregate population of ten thousand would 
be considered large and satisfactory in any part of the world. A movement of 
mass Satyagraha is impossible on any other condition. Where the struggle is 
wholly dependent upon internal strength, it cannot go on at all without mass Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 126 discipline. The workers therefore did not consider such large attendance as 
anything surprising. From the very first they had decided to hold public 
meetings only in the open so that expense was nearly avoided and none had to 
go back from the place of meeting disappointed for want of accommodation. 
All these meetings, again, were mostly very quite. The audiences heard 
everything attentively. If those who were far away from the platform could not 
hear a speaker, they would ask him to speak louder. The reader scarcely needs 
to be told that there were no chairs at these meetings. Everyone sat on the 
ground. There was a very small platform designed to accommodate the 
chairman, the speaker and a couple of friends, and a small table and a few 
chairs or stools were placed upon it.  
Mr. Yusuf Ismail Mian, acting chairman of the British Indian Association, 
presided over this meeting. As the time for issuing permits under the Black Act 
was drawing nearer, the Indians were naturally anxious in spite of all their 
enthusiasm; but no less anxious than they were General Botha and General 
Smuts, all the night of the Transvaal Government at their back 
notwithstanding. No one would like to bend a whole community to his will by 
sheer force. General Botha therefore had sent Mr. William Hosken to this 
meeting to admonish us. The reader has already made this gentleman’s 
acquaintance in a previous chapter. The meeting received him warmly, and he 
said, “You know I am your friend. I need scarcely say that my feelings in this 
matter are with you. If at all I could, I would gladly make your opponents 
accede to your demands. But you need hardly to be told about the general 
hostility of the Transvaal Europeans to your community. I am here at General 
Botha’s instance. He had asked me to be bearer of his message to this meeting. 
He entertains a feeling of respect for you and understand is your sentiments, 
but he says, ‘he is helpless. All the Europeans in the Transvaal unanimously ask 
for such law, and he himself is convinced of the necessity for it. The Indians 
know fully well how powerful the Transvaal Government is. The law has again 
been endorsed by the Imperial Government. The Indians have done all they 
could and have acquitted themselves like men. But now that their opposition 
has failed, and the law has been passed, the community must prove their Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 127 loyalty and love of peace by submitting to it. General Smuts will carefully look 
into any representations you make suggesting minor changes in the regulations 
framed in virtue of the Registration Act.’ My own advice to you also is, that you 
should comply with the General’s message. I know that the Transvaal 
Government is firm regarding this law. To resist it will be to dash your head 
against a wall. I wish that your community may not be ruined in fruitless 
opposition or invite needless suffering on their heads.” I translated the speech 
to the meeting word by word, and further put them on their guard on my own 
behalf. Mr. Hosken retired amidst cheers. 
It was now time for the Indian speakers to address the meeting. One of these 
speakers was the late Ahmad Muhammad Kachhalia, the hero, not to this 
chapter alone, but of the present volume. I knew him only as a client and as 
interpreter. He had never before now taken a leading part in public work. He 
had a working knowledge of English, which he had so far improved by practice 
that when he took his friends to English lawyers, he acted as interpreter 
himself. But imterpretership was not a profession with him; he worked as 
interpreter only as a friend. He at first used to hawk piece goods, and them to 
trade on a small scale in partnership with his brother. He was a Surti Meman 
and enjoyed great regulation in his class. His knowledge of Gujarati was also 
limited but in this too he had greatly advanced, being schooled by experience. 
He had such sharp intelligence that he very easily grasped anything that was 
put to him. He solved legal difficulties with such facility as often astonished 
me. He would not hesitate to argue law even with lawyers, and very often his 
arguments were worthy of consideration for them. 
I have never, whether in South Africa or in India, come across a man who could 
surpass Mr Kachhalia in courage and steadfastness. He sacrificed his all for the 
community’s sake. He was always a man of his word. He was a strict orthodox 
Musalman, being one of the trustees of the Surti Meman mosque. But at the 
same time he looked upon Hindus and Musalmans with an equal eye. I do not 
remember that he ever fanatically or improperly sided with Musalmans as 
against Hindus. Perfectly fearless and impartial as he was, he never hesitated Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 128 to point out their faults to Hindus as well as Musalmans whenever he found it 
necessary. His simplicity and humility were worthy of imitation. My close 
contact with him for years leads me to hold firmly to the opinion that a 
community can rarely boast of having in their midst a man of the stamp of Mr. 
Kachhialia. 
Mr. Kachhalia was of the speakers at the meeting. He made a very short 
speech. He said: “Every Indian know s what the Black Act is and what it 
implies. I have heard Mr. Hosken attentively, and so have you. His speech has 
only confirmed me in my resolution. We know how powerful the Transvaal 
Government is. But it cannot do anything more than enact such a law. It will 
cast us into prison, confiscate our property, deport us or hand us. All this we 
will bear cheerfully, but we cannot simply put up with this law.” I observed 
that while saying this, Mr Kachhalia was being deeply moved. His face 
reddened, the veins on his neck and on the head were swollen with the blood 
coursing rapidly through them, his body was shaking, and moving the fingers of 
his right hand upon his throat, he thundered forth: “I swear in the name of God 
that I will be hanged but I will not submit to this law, and I hope that everyone 
present will do likewise.’ So saying he took his seat. As he moved his fingers on 
his throat, some of those seated on the platform smiled, and I remember that I 
joined them in their smile. I was rather doubtful whether Kachhalia Sheth 
would be able fully to translate his brave words into action. I am ashamed of 
this doubt now, and every time I think of it. Kachhalia always remained to the 
fore among the many Indians who literally observed their pledge in that great 
struggle without a moment’s flinching.  
The meeting cheered his as he spoke. Others then knew him very much better 
than I did, as many of them were personally familiar with this obscure hero. 
They knew that Kachhalia only says what he means and means what the says. 
There were other spirited speeches too. But I have singled out Kachhalia 
Sheth’s for mention, as it proved to be a prophecy of his subsequent career. 
Not everyone of the spirited speakers stood the final test. This great man died Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 129 in 1918, four years after the struggle was over, serving the community till the 
last.  
I will close this chapter with a reminiscence of Kachhalia Sheth which may not 
find a place elsewhere. The reader later on will hear of Tolstoy Farm where a 
number of Satyagrahi families lived. The Sheth sent his ten or twelve year old 
son Ali to be educated there as an example to others and in order that the boy 
might be brought up a life of simplicity and service. It was due to the example 
he thus set that other Musalmans likewise sent their boys to the Farm. Ali was a 
modest, bright, truthful and straightforward boy. God took him unto Himself 
before his father. If it had been given to him to live, I doubt not he would have 
turned out to be the worthy son of an excellent father. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 130  
17. A RIFT IN THE LUTE 
The first of July 1907 arrived, and saw the opening o f permit offices. The 
community had decided openly to picket each office, that is to say, to post 
volunteers on the roads leading thereto, and these volunteers were to warn 
weak-kneed Indians against the trap laid for them there. Volunteers were 
provided with badges and expressly instructed not to be impolite to any Indian 
taking out a permit. They must ask him his name, but if he refused to give it 
they must not on any account be violent or rude to him. To every Indian going 
to the permit office, they were to hand a printed paper detailed the injuries 
which submission to the Black Act would involve, and explain what was written 
in it. They must behave the police too with due respect. If the police abused or 
thrashed them, they must suffer peacefully; if the ill-treatment by the police 
was insufferable they should leave the place. If the police arrested them, they 
should gladly surrender themselves. If some such incident occurred in 
Johannesburg, it should be brought to my notice. At other places the local 
secretaries were to be informed, and asked for further instructions. Each party 
of pickets had a captain whose orders must be obeyed by the rest. 
This was the community’s first experience of that kind. All who were above the 
age of twelve were taken as pickets, so that there were many young men from 
12 to 18 years of age enrolled as such. But not one was taken who was unknown 
to the local workers. Over and above all these precautions, people were 
informed by announcements at every public meeting and other wise, that if any 
one desirous of taking out a permit was afraid of the pickets, he could ask the 
workers to detail a volunteer to escort him to the permit office and back. Some 
did avail themselves this offer. 
The volunteers in every place worked with boundless enthusiasm, and were 
ever alert and wide-awake in the performance of their duties. Generally 
speaking there was not much molestation by the police. When sometimes there 
was such molestation, the volunteers quietly put up with it. They brought to 
bear upon the work quite an amount of humour, in which the police too Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 131 sometimes joined. They devised various diversions in order to beguile their 
time. They were once arrested on a charge of obstruction the public traffic. As 
non-co-operation did not form a part of the Satyagraha struggle there, defence 
could be made in courts, though as a rule advocates for defence were not paid 
from public funds. The volunteers were declared innocent and acquitted by the 
court, which still further exalted their spirit. 
Although the Indians who wanted to take out permits were thus saved from 
rudeness or violence from the volunteers in public, I must admit, that there 
arose a body of men in connection with the movement, who without becoming 
volunteers privately threatened those who would take out permits with 
violence of injury in other ways. This was a most painful development, and 
strong measures were adopted in order to stamp it out as soon as it was found 
out. The holding out of threats nearly ceased in consequence, though it was not 
quite rooted out. The threats left and impression behind them, and as I could 
see, thus far injured the cause. Those who were threatened instantly sought 
Government protection and got it. Poison was thus instilled into the 
community, and those who were weak already grew weaker still. The poison 
thus grew more virulent, as the weak are always apt to be revengeful. 
These threats created but little impression; but the force of public opinion on 
the one hand, and on the other, the fear of one’s name being known to the 
community through the presence of volunteers acted as powerful deterrents. I 
do not know a single Indian who held it proper to submit to the Black Act. 
Those who submitted did so out of an inability to suffer ashamed of 
themselves. This sense of shame, as well as a fear of loss in trade following 
upon the displeasure of big Indian merchants, pressed heavily upon them, and 
some leading Indians found a way out this twofold difficulty. They arranged 
with the permit office, that an officer should meet them in a private house 
after nine or ten o’clock at night and give them permits. They thought that in 
this case no one would know about their submission to the law for some time at 
least and that as they were leaders, others would follow suit, thus lightening 
their burden of shame. It did not matter if they were found out afterwards. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 132 But the volunteers were so vigilant, that the community was kept informed of 
what happened every moment. There would be such information to the 
Satyagrahis. Others again, though weak themselves, would be unable to 
tolerate the idea of leaders thus disgracing themselves, and would inform the 
Satyagrahis from an idea that they too could face the music if other s were 
firm. In this way the community once received information that certain men 
were going to take out permits in a certain shop on a certain night. The 
community therefore first tried to dissuade these men. The shop too was 
picketed. But human weakness cannot be long suppressed. Some leading men 
took permits in this way at ten or eleven o’clock at night, and there was a rift 
in the lute. The very next day their names were published by the community. 
But a sense of shame has its limits. Considerations of self-interest drive shame 
away and mislead men out of the straight and narrow path. By and by 
something like five hundred men took out permits. For some time permits were 
issued in private houses, but as the sense of shame wore out, some went 
publicly to the Asiatic Office and obtained certificates of registration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 133  
18. THE FIRST SATYAGRAHI PRISONER 
When the Asiatic Department found, that notwithstandi ng all their exertions, 
they could not get more than 500 Indians to register, they decided to arrest 
someone. In Germiston there lived many Indians, one of whom was Pandit Rama 
Sundara. This man had a brave look and was endowed with some gift of the 
gab. He knew a few Sanskrit verses by heart. Hailing from North India as he did, 
he naturally knew a few dohas and chopais from the Tulsi Ramayana, and owing 
to his designation Pandit, he also enjoyed some reputation among the people. 
He delivered a number of spirited speeches in various places. Some malevolent 
Indians in Germiston suggested to the Asiatic Department that many Indians 
there would take out permits if Rama Sundara was arrested, and the officers 
concerned could scarcely resist the temptation thus offered. So Rama Sundara 
was put under arrest and this being the first case of its kind, the Government as 
well as the Indians were much agitated over it. Rama Sundara, who was till 
yesterday known only to the good people of Germiston, became in one moment 
famous all over South Africa. He became the cynosure of all eyes as if he were 
a great man put upon his trial. Government need not have taken, but it did 
take, special measures for the preservation of peace. In the court too Rama 
Sundara was accorded due respect as no ordinary prisoner but a representative 
of his community. Eager Indian spectators filed the Court-room. Rama Sundara 
was sentenced to a mouth’s simple imprisonment, and kept in a separate cell in 
the European ward in Johannesburg goal. People were allowed to meet him 
freely. He was permitted to receive food from outside, and was entertained 
everyday with delicacies prepared on behalf of the community. He was 
provided with everything he wanted. The day on which he was sentenced was 
depression with great éclat. There was no trace of depression, but on the other 
hand there was exultation and rejoicing. Hundreds were ready to go to jail. The 
officers of the Asiatic Department were disappointed in their hope of a bumper 
crop of registrants. They did not get a single registrant even from Germiston. 
The only gainer was the Indian Community. The month was soon over. Rama Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 134 Sundara was released and was taken in a procession to the place where a 
meeting had been arranged. Vigorous speeches were made. Rama Sundara was 
smothered with garlands of flowers. The volunteers held a feast in his honour, 
and hundreds of Indians envied Rama Sundara’s luck and were sorry that they 
had not the chance of suffering imprisonment.  
But Rama Sundara tuned out to be a false coin. There was no escape from the 
months’ imprisonment, as his arrest came as a surprise. In jail he had enjoyed 
luxuries to which he had been a stranger outside. Still accustomed he was to 
license, and addicted as he was to bad habits, the loneliness and the restraints 
of jail life were too much for him. In spite of all the attention showered upon 
him by the jail authorities as well as by the community, jail appeared irksome 
to him and he bid a final good-bye to the Transvaal and to the movement. 
There are cunning men in every community and in every movement and so 
there were in ours. These knew Rama Sundara through and through, but from 
an idea that even he might become an instrument of the community’s 
providence, they never let me know his secret history until his bubble had 
finally burst. I subsequently found that he was an indentured labouer who had 
deserted before completing his term. There was nothing discreditable in his 
having been an indentured labourer. The reader will see towards the end how 
indentured labourers proved to be a most valuable acquisition to the 
movement, and what a large contribution they made towards winning the final 
victory. It was certainly wrong for him not to have finished his period of 
indenture. 
I have this detailed the whole history of Rama Sundara not in order to expose 
his faults, but to point a moral. The leaders of every clean movement are 
bound to see that they admit only clean fighters to it. But all their caution 
notwithstanding, undesirable elements cannot be kept out. And yet if the 
leaders are fearless and true, the entry of undesirable persons in to the 
movement without their knowing them to be so does not ultimately harm the 
cause. When Rama Sundara was found out, he became a man of straw. The 
community forgot him, but the movement gathered fresh strength even through Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 135 him. Imprisonment suffered by him for the cause stood tour credit, the 
enthusiasm created by his trial came to stay, and profiting by his example, 
weakling besides this but I do not propose to deal with them in any detail, as it 
would not serve any useful purpose. In order that the reader may appreciate at 
their real worth, it will been enough to say that there was not one Rama 
Sundara but several and yet I observed that the movement reaped pure 
advantage from all of them.  
Let not the reader point finger of scorn at Rama Sundara. All men are 
imperfect, and when imperfection is observed in someone in a larger measure 
than in others, people are apt to blame him. But that is not fair. Rama Sundara 
did not become weak intentionally. Man can change his temperament, can 
control it, but cannot eradicate it. God has not given him so much liberty.If the 
leopard can change his spots then only can man modify the peculiarities of his 
spiritual constitution. Although Rama Sundara fled away, who can tell how he 
might have repented of his weakness? Or rather was not his very flight a 
powerful proof of his repentance? There was no need for him to flee if he was 
shameless. He could have taken out a permit and steered clear of jail by 
submission to the Black Act. Further, if at all so minded, he could have become 
a tool of the Asiatic Department, misguided his friends and become persona 
grata with the Government. Why should we not judge him charitably and say 
that instead of doing anything of the kind, he being ashamed of his weakness 
hid his face from the community and even did it a service?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 136  
19. ‘INDIAN OPINION’ 
I propose to acquaint the reader with all the weapons , internal as well as 
external, employed in the Satyagraha struggle and now therefore proceed to 
introduce to him Indian Opinion, a weekly journal which is published in South 
Africa to this very day. The Credit for starting the first Indian-owned printing 
press in South Africa is due to a Gujarati gentleman, Shri Madanjit Vyavaharik. 
After he had conducted the press for a few years in the midst of difficulties, he 
thought of bringing out a newspaper too. He consulted the late Shri Mansukhlal 
Nazar and myself. The paper was issued from Durban. Shri Mansukhlal Nazar 
volunteered to act as unpaid editor. From the very first the paper was 
conducted at a loss. At last we decided to purchase a farm, to settle all the 
workers, who must constitute themselves into assort of commonwealth, upon it 
and publish the paper from the farm. The farm is selected for the purpose is 
situated on a beautiful hill thirteen miles from Durban. The nearest railway 
station is at a distance of three miles from the farm and is called Phoenix. The 
paper was and is called Indian Opinion. It was formerly published in English, 
Gujarati, Hindi and Tamil. But the Hindi and Tamil sections were eventually 
discontinued, as the burden they imposed upon us seemed to be excessive, we 
could not find Tamil and Hindi writers willing to settle upon the farm and could 
not exercise a check upon them. The paper was thus being published in English 
and Gujarati when the Satyagraha struggle commenced. Among the settlers on 
the farm were Gujaratis, North Indians and Tamilians as well as Englishmen. 
After the premature death of Mansukhlal Nazar, his place as editor was taken 
by an English friend, Herbert Kitchin. Then the post of editor was long filled by 
Mr. Henry S. L. Polak and during our incarceration, the late Rev. Joseph Doke 
also acted as editor. Through the medium of this paper we could we could very 
well disseminate the news of the week among the community. The English 
section kept those Indians informed about the movement who did not know 
Gujarati, and for Englishmen in India, England and South Africa, Indian Opinion 
served the purpose of a weekly newsletter. I believe that a struggle which Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 137 chiefly relies upon internal strength can be carried on without a newspaper, 
but it is also my experience that we could not perhaps have educated the local 
Indian community, nor kept Indians all over the world in touch with the course 
of events in South Africa in any other way, with the same ease and success as 
through Indian Opinion, which therefore was certainly a most useful and potent 
weapon in our struggle. 
As the community was transformed in course of and as a result of the struggle, 
so was Indian Opinion. In the beginning we used to accept advertisements for 
it, and also execute job work in the printing press. I observed that some of our 
best men had to be spared for this kind of work. If we did receive 
advertisements for publication, there was constant difficulty in deciding which 
to accept and which to refuse. Again one would be inclined to refuse an 
objectionable advertisement, and yet be constrained to accept it, say because 
the advertiser was a leading member of the community and might take it ill his 
advertisement was rejected. Some of the good workers had to be set apart for 
canvassing and realizing out standings from advertisers, not to speak of the 
flattery which advertisers claimed as their due. Moreover, the view 
commended itself, that if the paper was conducted not because it yielded 
profit but purely with a view to service, the service should not be imposed upon 
the community by force but should be rendered only if the community wished. 
And the clearest proof of such wish would be forthcoming if they became 
subscribers in sufficiently large members to make the paper self-supporting. 
Finally it seemed that if was in every way better for all concerned that we 
should approach the generality of the community and explain to them the duty 
of keeping their newspaper going rather than set about to induce a few traders 
to place their advertisements with us in the name of service. On all these 
grounds we stopped advertisements in the paper with the gratifying result that 
those who were at first engrossed in the advertisement department could now 
devote their labours to improving the paper. The community realized at once 
their proprietorship of Indian Opinion and their consequent responsibility for 
maintaining it.The workers were relieved of all anxiety in that respect. Their 
only care now was to put their best work into the paper so long as the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 138 community wanted it, and they were not only not ashamed of requesting and 
Indian to subscribe to Indian Opinion, but thought it even their duty to do so. A 
change came over the internal strength and the character of the paper, and it 
became a force to reckon with. The number of subscribes which generally 
ranged between twelve and fifteen hundred increased day by day. The rates of 
subscription had to be raised and yet when the struggle was at its height, there 
were as many as 3,500 subscribers. The number of Indians who could read 
Indian Opinion in South Africa was at the outside 20,000 and therefore a 
circulation of over three thousand copies may be held to be quite satisfactory. 
The community had made the paper their own to such an extent, that if copies 
did not reach Johannesburg at the expected time, I would be flooded with 
complaints should it. The paper generally reached Johannesburg on Sunday 
morning. I know of a many, whose first occupation after they received the 
paper would be to read the Gujarati section through from beginning to end. 
One of the company would read it, and the rest would surround him to listen. 
Not all who wanted to read the paper could afford to subscribe to it by 
themselves and some of them would therefore club together for the purpose. 
Just as we stopped advertisements in the paper, we ceased to take job work in 
the press, and for nearly the same reasons. Compositors had now some time to 
spare, which was utilized in the publication of books. As here too there was no 
intention of reaping profits and as the books were printed only to help the 
struggle forward, they command good sales. Thus both paper and the press a 
made their contribution to the struggle, and as Satyagraha gradually took root 
in the community, there was clearly visible a corresponding moral amelioration 
of the paper as well as of the press from the standpoint of Satyagraha. 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 139  
20. A SERIES OF ARRESTS 
We have seen how the Government failed to reap any adva ntage from Rama 
Sundara’s arrest. On the other hand, they observed the spirit of the Indian 
community rising rapidly. The officers of the Asiatic Department were diligent 
readers of Indian Opinion. Secrecy had been deliberately ruled out of the 
movement. Indian Opinion was an open book to whoever wanted to gauge the 
strength and the weakness of the community, be he a friend, an enemy or a 
neutral. The workers had realized at the very outset that secrecy had realized 
at the very outset that secrecy had no place in a movement, where one could 
do no wrong, where there was no scope for duplicity or cunning, no scope for 
duplicity or cunning, and where strength constituted the single guarantee of 
victory. The very interest of the community demanded, that if the disease of 
weakness was to be eradicated, it must be first properly diagnosed and given 
due publicity. When the officers saw that this was the policy of Indian Opinion, 
the paper became for them a faithful mirror of the current history of the Indian 
community. They thus came to think the strength of the movement could not 
by any means be broken so long as certain leaders were at large. Some of the 
leading men were consequently served with a notice in Christmas week of 1907 
to appear before the Magistrate. It must be admitted that this was an act of 
courtesy on the part of the officers concerned. They could have arrested the 
leaders by a warrant if they had chosen to do so. Instead of this they issued 
notices and this, besides being evidence of their courtesy, also betrayed their 
confidence that the leaders were willing and prepared to be arrested. Those 
who had thus been warned appeared before the Court on the date specified, 
Saturday December 28, 1907, to show cause why, having failed to apply for 
registration as required by law, they should not be ordered to leave the 
Transvaal within a given period. 
One of these was one Mr. Quinn the leader of the Chinese residents of 
Johannesburg, who numbered three to four hundred, and were either traders or 
farmers. India is noted for its agriculture, but I believe that we in India is noted Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 140 for its agriculture, but I believe that we in India are not as far advanced in 
agriculture as the Chinese are. The modern progress of agriculture in America 
and other countries defies description, but I consider it to be still in an old 
country like India and a comparison between India and China would be 
therefore fairly instructive. I observed the agricultural methods of the Chinese 
ion Johannesburg and also talked with them on the subject, and this gave me 
the impression that the Chinese are more intelligent as well as diligent than we 
are. We often allow land to lei fallow thinking it is of no use, while the Chinese 
would grow good crops upon it, thanks to their minute knowledge of varying 
soils. 
The Black Act applied to the Chinese as well as to the Indians whom they 
therefore joined in the Satyagraha struggle. Still from first to last the activities 
of the two communities were not allowed to be mixed up. Each worked through 
its own independent organization. This arrangement produced the beneficent 
result that so long s both the communities stood to their guns, each would be a 
source of strength to the other. But if one of the two gave way that would 
leave the morale of the other unaffected or at least the other would steer clear 
of the danger of a total collapse. Many of the Chinese eventually fell away as 
their leader played them false. He did not indeed submit to the obnoxious law, 
but one morning someone came and told me that the Chinese leader had fled 
away without handing over charge of the books and moneys of the Chinese 
Association in his possession. It is always difficult for followers to sustain a 
conflict in the absence of their leader, and the shock is all the greater when 
the leader has disgraced himself. But when the arrests commenced, the 
Chinese were in high spirits. Hardly any of them had taken out a permit, and 
therefore their leader Mr. Quinn was warned to appear along with the Indians. 
For some time at any rate Mr. Quinn put in very useful work. 
I would like to introduce to the reader one out of the several leading Indians 
who constituted the first batch of prisoners, Shri Thambi Naidoo.Thambi Naidoo 
was a Tamilian born in Mauritius where his parents had migrated from Madras 
State. He was an ordinary trader. He had practically received no scholastic Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 141 education whatever. But a wide experience had been his schoolmaster. He 
spoke and wrote English very well, although his grammar was not perhaps free 
from faults. In the same way he had acquired a knowledge of Tamil. He 
understood and spoke Hindustani fairly well and he had some knowledge of 
Telugu too, though he did not know the alphabets of these languages. Again, he 
had a very good knowledge of the Creole dialect current in Mauritius which is a 
sort of corrupt French, and he knew of course the language of the Negroes. A 
working knowledge of so many languages was not a rare accomplishment among 
the Indians of South Africa, hundreds of whom could claim a general 
acquaintance with all these languages. These men become such good linguists 
almost without effort. And that is because their brains are not fatigued by 
education received through the medium of a foreign tongue, their memory is 
sharp, and they acquire these different languages simply by talking with people 
who speak them and by observation. This does not involve any considerable 
strain on their brains but on the other hand the easy mental exercise leads to a 
natural development of their intellect. Such was the case with Thambi Naidoo. 
He had a very keen intelligence and could grasp new subjects very quickly. His 
every-ready wit was astonishing. He had never seen India. Yet his love for the 
homeland knew no bounds. Patriotism ran through his very vein. His firmness 
was pictured on his face. He was very strongly built and he possessed tireless 
energy. He shone equally whether he had to take the chair at meetings and 
lead them, or whether he had to do porter’s work. He would not be ashamed of 
carrying a load on the public roads. Night and day were the same to him when 
set to work. And none was more ready than he to sacrifice his all for the sake 
of the community. If Thambi Naidoo had not been rash and if he had been free 
from anger, this brave man could easily have assumed the leadership of the 
community in the Transvaal in the absence of Kachhalia. His irritability had not 
still worked for evil while the Transvaal struggle lasted, and his invaluable 
qualities had shown forth like jewels. But, later on, I heard that his anger and 
his rashness had proved to be his worst enemies, and eclipsed his good 
qualities. However that may be, the name of Thambi Naidoo must ever remain 
as one of the front rank in the history of Satyagraha in South Africa. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 142 The magistrate conducted each case separately, and ordered all the accused to 
leave the Transvaal within forty-eight hours in some cases and seven or 
fourteen days in others. 
The time limit expired on January 10, 1908 and the same day we were called 
upon to attend court for sentence. 
None of us had to offer any defence. All were to plead guilty to the charge of 
disobeying the order to leave the Transvaal within the stated period, issued by 
the Magistrate on failure to satisfy him that they were lawful holders of 
certificates of registration. 
I asked leave to make a short statement, and on its being granted, I said I 
thought there should be a distinction made between my case and those that 
were to follow. I had just heard from Pretoria that my compatriots there had 
been sentenced to three months’ imprisonment with hard labour, and had been 
fined a heavy amount, in lieu of payment of which they would receive a further 
period of three months’ hard labour. If these men had committed an offence, I 
had committed a greater offence and I therefore asked the Magistrate to 
impose upon me the heaviest penalty. The Magistrate, however, did not agree 
to my request and sentenced me to two months’ simple imprisonment. I had 
some slight feeling of awkwardness due to the fact that I was standing as an 
accused in the very Court where I had often appeared as counsel. But I well 
remember that I considered the former role as far more honourable than the 
latter and did not feel the slightest hesitation in entering the prisoner’s box. 
In the Court there were hundreds of Indians as well as brother members of the 
Bar in front of me. On the sentence being pronounced I was at once removed in 
custody and was then quite alone. The policeman asked me to sit on a bench 
kept there for prisoners, shut the door on me and went away. I was somewhat 
agitated and fell into deep thought. Home, the Courts, where I practiced, the 
public meeting, all these passed away like a dream, and I was now a prisoner. 
What would happen in two months? Would have to serve the full term?If the 
people courted imprisonment in large numbers, as they had promised, there 
would be no question of serving the full sentences. But if they failed to fill the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 143 prisons, two months would be as tedious as an age. These thoughts passed 
through my mind in less than one hundredth of the time that it has taken me to 
dictate them. And they filled me with shame. How vain I was! I, who had asked 
the people to consider the prisons as His Majesty’s hotels, the suffering 
consequent upon disobeying the Black Act as perfect bliss, and the sacrifice of 
one’s all and of life itself in resisting it as supreme enjoyment! where had all 
this knowledge vanished today? This second train of thought acted upon me as a 
bracing tonic, and I began to laugh at my own folly. I began to think what kind 
of imprisonment would be awarded to the others and whether they would be 
kept with me in the prison. But I was disturbed by the police officer who 
opened the gate and asked me to follow him, which I did. He then made me go 
before him, following me himself, took me go before him, following me 
himself, took me to the prisoners’ closed van and asked me to take my seat in 
it. I was driven to Johannesburg jail.  
In jail I was asked to put off my own private clothing.I knew that convicts were 
made naked in jail. We had all decided as Satyagrahis voluntarily to obey all 
jail regulations so long as they were not inconsistent with our self-respect or 
with our religious convictions. The clothes which were given to me to wear 
were very dirty. I did not like putting them on at all. It was not without pain 
that I reconciled myself to them from an idea that I must put up with some 
dirt. After the officers had recorded my name and address, I was taken to a 
large cell, and in a short time was joined by my compatriots who came laughing 
and told me how they had received the same sentence as myself, and what 
took place after I had been removed. I understood from them than when my 
case was over, the Indians, some of whom were excited, took out a procession 
with black flags in their hands. The police disturbed the procession and flogged 
some of its members. We were all happy at the thought that we were kept in 
the same jail and in the same cell. 
The cell door was locked at 6 o’clock. The door was not made of bars but was 
quite solid, there being high up in the wall a small quite solid, there being high Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 144 up in the wall a small aperture for ventilation, so that we felt as if we had been 
locked up in a safe. 
No wonder the jail authorities did not accord us the good treatment which they 
had meted out to Rama Sundara. As Rama Sundara was the first Satyagrahi 
prisoner, the authorities had no idea how he should be treated. Our batch was 
fairly large and further arrests were in contemplation. We were therefore kept 
in the Negro ward. In South Africa only two classes of convicts are recognized, 
namely Whites and Blacks, i.e. the Negroes, in the Indians were classed with 
Negroes. 
The next morning we found that prisoners without hard labour had the right to 
keep on their own private clothing, and if they would not exercise this right, 
they were given special jail clothing assigned to that class of prisoners. We 
decided that it was not right to put on our own clothing and that it was 
appropriate to take the jail uniform, and we informed the authorities 
accordingly. We were therefore given the clothes assigned to Negro convicts 
not punished with hard labour. But Negro prisoners sentenced to simple 
imprisonment are ever numerous and hence either was a shortage of simple 
imprisonment prisoners’ clothing as soon as other Indians sentenced to simple 
imprisonment began to arrive. As the Indians did not wish to stand upon 
ceremony in this matter, they readily accepted clothing assigned to hard labour 
prisoners. Some of those who came in later preferred to keep on their own 
clothing rather than put on the uniform of the hard labour convicts. I thought 
this improper, but did not care to insist upon their following the correct 
procedure in the matter. 
From the second or third day Satyagrahi prisoners began to arrive in large 
numbers. They had all courted arrest and were most of them hawkers. In South 
Africa every hawker, Black or White, has to take out a licence, always to carry 
it with him and show it to the police when asked to do so. Nearly every day 
some policeman could ask to see the licenses and arrest those who had jail 
after our arrests. In this the hawkers took the lead. It was easy for them to be 
arrested. They only had to refuse to show their licennces and that was enough Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 145 to ensure their arrest. In this way the number of Satyagrahi prisoners swelled to 
more than a hundred in one week. And as a few were sure to arrive every day, 
we received the daily budget of news without a newspaper. When Satyagrahis 
began to be arrested in large numbers, they were sentences to imprisonment 
with hard labour, either because the magistrates lost patience, or because, as 
we thought, they received some such instructions from the Government. Even 
today, I think we were right in our conjecture, as, if we leave out the first few 
cases in which simple imprisonment was awarded, never afterwards thought out 
the long drawn out struggle was there pronounced a sentences of simple 
imprisonment , even ladies having been punished with hard labour. If all the 
magistrates had not received the same orders or instructions, and if yet by 
mere coincidence they sentenced all men and women at all times to hard 
labour, that must be held to be almost a miracle. 
In Johannesburg jail prisoners not condemned to hard labour got ‘mealie pap’ 
in the morning. There was no salt in it, but each prisoner was given some salt 
of rice, four ounces of bread, one ounce of ghee and a little salt, and in the 
evening ‘mealie pap and some vegetables, chiefly potatoes of which two were 
given if they were small and only one of which two were given if they were 
small and only one if they were big in size. None of us were satisfied with this 
diet. The rice was cooked soft. We asked the prison medical officer for some 
condiments, and told him that condiments were allowed in the jails in India. 
“This is not India,’ was the stern answer. “There is no question of taste about 
prison diet and condiments therefore cannot be allowed.’ We asked for pulse 
on the ground that the regulation diet was lacking in muscle-building 
properties. ‘Prisoners must not indulge in arguments on medical grounds,’ 
replied the doctor. ‘You do get muscle-building food, as twice a week you are 
served boiled beans instead of maize.’ The doctor’s argument was sound if the 
human stomach was capable of extracting various elements out of various foods 
taken at various times in a week or fortnight. As a matter of fact he had no 
intention whatever of looking to our convenience. The Superintendent 
permitted us to cook our food ourselves. We elected Thambi Naidoo as our 
chef, and as such he had to fight many a battle on our behalf. If the vegetable Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 146 ration issued was short in weight, he would insist on getting full weight. On 
vegetables days which were two in a week we coked twice and on other days 
only once, as we were allowed to cook other things for the noon-day meal. We 
were somewhat better off after we began to cook our own food. 
But whether or not we succeeded in obtaining these conveniences, every oneof 
us was firm in his resolution of passing his term in jail in perfect happiness and 
peace. The number of Satyagrahi prisoners gradually rose to over 150. As we 
were all simple imprisonment convicts, we had no work to do except keeping 
the cells, etc. clean. We asked the Superintendent for work, and he replied: ‘I 
am sorry I cannot give you work, as, If I did I should be held to have commited 
an offence. But You can devote for some such exercise as drill, as we had 
observed even the Negro prisoners with hard labour being drilled in addition to 
their usual work. The Superintendent replied, ‘if your warder has time and if he 
gives you drill, I will not object to it; nor will I require him to do it, as he is 
hard worked as it is, and your arrival in unexpectedly large numbers has made 
his work harder still.’ The warder was a good man and this qualified permission 
was quite enough for him. He began to drill us every morning with great 
interest. This drill must be performed in the small yard before our cells and 
was therefore in the nature of a merry-go-round. When the warder finished the 
drill and went away, it was continued by a Pathan compatriot of ours named 
Nawabkhan, who made us all laugh with his quant pronunciation of English 
words of command. He rendered ‘Stand at ease’ as ‘sundlies’. We could not for 
the life of us understand what Hindustani word it was, but afterwards it 
dawned upon us that it was no HIndustani but only Nawabkhani English. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 147  
21. THE FIRST SETTLEMENT 
We had thus been in jail for a fortnight, when fresh arrivals brought the news 
that there were going on some negotiations about a compromise with the 
Government. After two or three days Mr. Albert Cartwright, editor of The 
Transvaal Leader, a Johannesburg daily, came to see me. 
All the daily papers then conducted in Johannesburg were the property of one 
or the other of the European owners of the gold mines, but except in cases 
where the interests of these magnates were at stake, the editors were 
unfettered in the expression of their own views on all public questions. Only 
very able and well known men were selected as editors. For instance the editor 
of The Daily Star had formerly been Private Secretary to Lord Milner, and later 
went to England to take Mr. Buckle’s place as editor of The Times Mr.Albert 
Cartwright of the Transvaal leader was as broad-mined as he was able. He had 
almost always supported the Indian cause in his columns. He and I had become 
good friends. He saw General Smuts after I was sent to jail. General Smuts 
welcomed his mediation. Mr. Cartwright thereupon met the met the Indian 
leaders, who said, ‘We know nothing about legal technicalities, and cannot 
possibly talk about compromise so long as Gandhi is in prison. We desire 
settlement, but if Government wants it while our men are in jail, you should 
see Gandhi. We will ratify any arrangement which he accepts.’ 
Mr. Cartwright thus came to see me and brought with him terms of settlement 
drafted or approved of by General Smuts. I did not like the vague language of 
the document, but was all the same prepared myself to put my signature to it 
with one alteration. However, I informed Mr. Cartwright, that I could not sign 
without consulting my fellow-prisoners, even if I took the consent of the Indians 
outside prison for granted. 
The substance of the proposed settlement was that the Indians should register 
voluntarily, and not under any law; that the details to be entered in the new 
certificates of registration should be settled by Government in consultation 
with the Indian community, and, that if the majority of the Indians underwent Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 148 voluntary registration, Government should repeal the Black act, and take steps 
with a view to legalize the voluntary registration. The draft did not make quite 
clear the condition which required Government to repeal the Black act, I 
therefore suggested a change calculated to place this beyond all doubt from my 
own standpoint. 
Mr. Cartwright did not like even this little addition and said, ‘General Smuts 
considers this draft to be final. I have approved of it myself, and I can assure 
you that if you all undergo re registration, the Black Act is bound to be 
repealed.’ 
I replied, ‘Whether or not there is a settlement, we shall always be grateful to 
you for your kindness and help. I should not like to suggest a single unnecessary 
alternation in the draft. I do not object to such language as would uphold the 
prestige go Government. But where I myself am doubtful about the meaning, I 
must certainly suggest a change of language, and if there is to be a settlement 
after all, both the parties must have the right to alter the draft.General Smuts 
need not confront us with an ultimatum, saying that these terms are final. He 
has already aimed one pistol in the shape of the Black Act at the Indians. What 
can he hope to gain by aiming a second?’ 
Mr. Cartwright had nothing to say against this argument, and he promised to 
place my suggestion for the change before General Smuts. 
I consulted my fellow-prisoners. They too did not like the language, but agreed 
to the settlement if General Smuts would accept the draft with my 
amendment. New-comers to jail had brought a message from the leaders 
outside, that I should accept any suitable compromise without waiting for their 
consent. I got Messers Leuing Quinn and Thambi Naidoo to sign the draft along 
with myself and handed It to Mr. Cartwright. 
The second or third day, on January 30, 1908, Mr. Vernon, the Superintendent 
of Police, Johannesburg, took me to Pretoria to meet General Smuts, with 
whom I had a good deal of talk. He told me what had passed between him and 
Mr. Cartwright. He congratulated me on the Indian community having remained 
firm even after my imprisonment, and said, ‘I could never entertain a dislike Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 149 for your people. You know I too am a barrister. I had some Indian fellow 
students in my time. But I must do my duty. The Europeans want this law, and 
you will agree with me, that these are mostly not Boers also, as I assure you 
that I will repeal the Asiatic Act as soon as most of you have undergone 
voluntary registration. When the bill legalizing such registration is drafted, I 
will send you a copy for your criticism. I do not wish there should be any 
recurrence of the trouble and I wish to respect the feelings of your people.’  
So saying General Smuts rose. I asked him, ‘Where am I to go? And what about 
the other prisoners?’ 
The General laughed and said, ‘You are free this very moment. I am ‘phoning to 
the prison officials to release the other prisoners tomorrow morning. But I must 
advise you not to go in for many meetings or demonstrations, as in that case 
Government will find itself in an awkward position.’ 
I replied, ‘You may rest assured, that there will not be a single meeting simply 
for the sake of it. But I will certainly have to hold meetings in order to explain 
to the community how the settlement was effected, what is its nature and 
scope, and how it has added tour responsibility.’ 
‘Of such meetings,’ said General Smuts, ‘you may have as many as you please. 
It is sufficient that you have understood what I desire in the matter.’ 
It was then seven o’clock in the evening. I had not a single farthing in my 
pocket. The Secretary of General Smuts gave me the railway fare to 
Johannesburg. There was no need to stop at Pretoria and announce the 
settlement to the Indians there. The leaders were all in Johannesburg, which 
was our headquarters. There was now only one more train for Johannesburg, 
and I was able to catch it. 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 150  
22. OPPOSITION AND ASSULT 
I reached Johannesburg at about 9 p.m. and went direc t to the Chairman Sheth 
Yusuf Mian. He knew that I had been taken to Pretoria, and was hence rather 
expecting me. Still it was a pleasant surprise for him and others to find me 
unaccompanied by a warder. I suggested that a meeting should be called at 
once with such attendance as was possible at a very short notice. The Chairman 
and other friends agreed with me. As most of the Indians lived in the same 
quarter, it was not difficult to send round notice of the proposed meeting. The 
Chairman’s house was near the mosque, and meetings were usually held on the 
grounds of the mosque. There was hence not much to be done by way of 
arrangement for the meeting. It was enough to have one light on the platform. 
The meeting was held that very night at about 11 or 12 p.m. The audience 
numbered nearly a thousand, in spite of the shortness of the notice and the 
late hour. 
Before the meeting was held, I had explained the terms of the settlement to 
the leaders present. A few opposed the settlement. But all of them understood 
the situation after they had heard me. Every one of them, however, was 
troubled by one doubt, ‘What if General Smuts broke faith with us? The Black 
Act might not be enforced but it would always hang over our heads like 
Damocles’ sword. If in the meanwhile we registered voluntarily, we would have 
knowingly played in the adversary’s hands, and surrendered the most powerful 
weapon in our possession for resisting the Act. The right order for the 
settlement was, that the Act should be repealed first and then we should be 
called upon to register voluntarily.’ 
I liked this argument. I felt proud of the keen common sense and high courage 
of those who advanced it, and saw that such was the stuff of which Satyagrahis 
were made. In answer to that argument and deserves serious consideration. 
There would be nothing like it, if we registered voluntarily only after the Act 
was repealed. But then it would not be in the nature of a compromise. 
Compromise means that both the parties make large concessions on all points Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 151 except where a principle is involved. Our principle is, that we would not submit 
to the Black Act, and therefore, would not, in virtue of it, do even such things 
as were otherwise unobjectionable; and to this principle we must adhere at all 
costs. The principle with the Government is, that in order to prevent the illegal 
entry of Indians into the Transvaal, it must get many Indians to take out non-
transferable permits with marks of identification and thus set the suspicions of 
the Europeans at rest and allay all their fears; and the Government can never 
give it up on their part. We have admitted this principle of the Government by 
our conduct up to date, and therefore even if we feel like resisting it we may 
not do so until we find fresh grounds for such a departure. Our struggle aimed 
not at the abrogation of this principle but at removing the stigma, which the 
Black Act sought to attach to the community. If, therefore, we now utilize the 
new and powerful force which has sprung up in the community for gaining a 
fresh point, it would ill become us, who claim to be Satyagrahis. Consequently, 
we cannot justly object to the present settlement. As for the argument that we 
must not surrender our weapons before the Act is repealed, it is easily 
answered. A Satyagrahi bids good-bye to fear. He is therefore never afraid of 
trusting the opponent. Even if the opponent plays him false twenty times, the 
Satyagrahi is ready to trust him for the twenty-first time, for an implicit trust 
in human nature is the very essence of his creed. Again to say that in trusting 
the Government we play into their hands is to betray an ignorance of the 
principles of Satyagraha. Suppose we register voluntarily, but the Government 
commits a breach of faith and fails to redeem its promise to repeal the Act. 
Could we not then resort to Satyagraha? If we refused to show at the proper 
time the certificates of registration we take out, our registration would count 
for nothing, and the Government could not distinguish between ourselves and 
the Indians who might enter the Transvaal surreptitiously. Therefore, whether 
there is or there is not any law in force, the Government cannot exercise 
control over us without our co-operation. The existence of a law means, that if 
we refuse to accept the restriction sought to be imposed through it by the 
Government, we are liable to punishment, and generally it so happens, that the 
fear of punishment leads men to submit to the restriction. But a Satyagrahi Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 152 differs from the generality of men in this, that if he submits to a restriction, he 
submits voluntarily, not because he is afraid of punishment, but because he 
thinks that such submission is essential to common weal. And such is precisely 
our position regarding registration, which cannot be affected by any breach of 
faith, however flagrant, on the part of the Government. We are the creators of 
this position of ours, and we alone can change it. We are fearless and free, so 
long as we have the weapon of Satyagraha in our hands. And if any thinks that 
the community may not be as not a Satyagrahi nor has he any understanding of 
Satyagraha. That would mean that the present strength of the community is not 
real strength but is in the nature of a momentary effervescences or 
intoxication, and if that is so, we do not deserve to win, and the fruits of 
victory will slip out of our hands even if we win. Suppose the Government first 
abrogates the act and we then register voluntarily. Suppose further that the 
Government afterwards enacts the same obnoxious law and compels the Indians 
to register. What can then prevent the Government from pursuing such a course 
of action? And if we are doubtful about our strength today, then too shall we be 
in an equally bad case. From whatever standpoint, therefore, we examine the 
settlement, it may be said that the community not only will not lose but will on 
the other hand gain by the compromise. And I am also of opinion, that when 
our opponents recognize our humility and sense of justice, they would give up 
or at least mitigate their opposition.’ 
I was thus able fully to satisfy the one or two of the small company who stuck a 
discordant note, but I did not then even dream of the storm which was to break 
out at the midnight meeting. I explained all the terms of the settlement to the 
meeting and said: 
‘The responsibility of the community is largely enhanced by this settlement. We 
must register voluntarily in order to show that we do not intend to bring a 
single Indian into the Transvaal surreptitiously or by fraud. If any one of us fails 
to register, he will not be punished at present; but that can only mean that the 
community does not accept the settlement. It is necessary, indeed, that you 
must here raise your hands as a mark of your agreeing to the settlement, but Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 153 that is not enough. As soon as the arrangements for fresh registration are 
completed, every one of us who raises his hand should take out a certificate of 
registration at once, register, to the community why they must register. And it 
is only when we have thus worthily fulfilled our part that we shall reap the real 
fruit of our victory.’ 
As soon as I finished my speech a Pathan friend stood up and greeted me with a 
volley of questions:  
‘Shall we have to give ten finger-prints under the settlement?’ 
‘Yes and no. My own view of the matter is, that all of us should give digit 
impressions without the least hesitation. But those, who have any conscientious 
objection to giving them or think it to be derogatory to their self-respect, will 
not be obliged to give those impressions.’ 
‘What will you do yourself?’ 
‘I have decided to give ten finger-prints. It may not be for me not to give them 
myself while advising others to do so.’ ‘You were writing a deal about ten 
finger-prints. Itwas you who told us that they were required only from 
criminals. It was you who said that the struggle centred round the finger prints. 
How all that fit in with your attitude today? ‘ 
‘Even now I fully adhere to everything that I have written before about finger-
prints. Even now I say that in India finger-prints are required from criminal 
tribes. I have said before and say even now, that it would be a sin in virtue of 
the Black Act to give even our signatures not to talk of finger-prints. It is true 
that I have, and I believe wisely, laid great stress on this requisition of finger-
prints. It was easier to rouse the community to a sense of the gravity of the 
situation by a reference to such a new and startling feature of the Act as the 
finger-prints than to minor items in which we had already yielded submission. 
And I saw from experience that the community grasped the situation at once. 
But circumstances have now changed. I say with all the force at my command, 
that what would have been a crime against the people yesterday is in the 
altered circumstances of today the hallmark of a gentleman. If you require me Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 154 to salute you by force and If I submit to you, I will have demeaned myself in the 
eyes of the public and in your eyes as well as in my own. But if I of my own 
accord salute you as a brother or fellow-man, the evinces my humility and 
gentlemanliness, and it will be counted to me as righteousness before the Great 
White Throne. That is how I advise the community to give the finger-prints.’ 
‘We have heard that you have betrayed the community and sold it to General 
Smuts for 15,000 pounds. We will never give the fingerprints now allow others 
to do so. I swear with Allah as my witness, that I will kill the man who takes the 
lead in applying for registration.’ 
‘I can understand the feelings of Pathan friends. I am sure that no one else 
believes me to be capable of selling the community. I have already said that 
fingerprints will not be demanded from those who have sworn not to give them. 
I will render all possible help to any Pathan or other who wishes to register 
without giving fingerprints, and I assure him that he will get the certificate all 
right without violence being done to his conscience. I must confess, however, 
that I do not like the threat of death which the friend had held out. I also 
believe that one may not swear to kill another in the name of the Most High. I 
therefore take it, that it is only in a momentary fit of passion that this friend 
has taken oath. However that may be, whether he carries out his threat, as the 
principal party responsible for this settlement and as servant of the community, 
it is my clear duty to take the lead in giving fingerprints, and I pray God that He 
graciously permit me so to do. Death is the appointed end of all life. To die by 
the hand of a brother, rather than by disease or in such other way, cannot 
before me a matter for sorrow. And if even in such a case I am free form the 
thoughts of anger or hatred against my assailant, I know that will rebound to 
my eternal welfare, and even the assailant will later on realize my perfect 
innocence.’ 
It is perhaps necessary to explain why these questions were asked. Although 
there were not entertained and feelings of hatred against those who had 
submitted to the Black Act, their action had been condemned in plain and 
strong terms on the public platform as well as in Indian Life with them Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 155 therefore was anything but pleasant. They never imagined that the bulk of the 
community would stand to their guns and make such a display of strength as to 
bring the Government to terms of compromise. But when over 150 Satyagrahis 
were already in prison and there was a talk about settlement, it was almost too 
much for the ‘blacklegs’ to bear, and there were among them some who even 
wished that there should be no settlement and would try to wreck it if it was 
effected. 
There were only a few Pathans living in the Transvaal, their total number 
hardly exceeding fifty. Some of them had come over as soldiers during the Boer 
War and they had settled in the country like many other Indian as well as 
European soldiers. Some of them were even my clients, and I was familiar with 
them otherwise too. The Pathans are an unsophisticated and credulous race. 
Brave they are as a matter of course. To kill and get killed is an ordinary thing 
in their in their eyes, and if they are angry with anyone, they will thrash him 
and sometimes even kill him. And in thematter they are no respecters of 
persons. They will behave even to a blood brother in an identical manner. Even 
though there were so few of them in the Transvaal, there would be a free fight 
whenever they quarreled among themselves, and in such cases I had often to 
play the part of a peace maker. A Pathan’s anger becomes particularly 
uncontrollable when he has to deal with anyone whom he takes to be a traitor. 
When he seeks justice he seeks it only through personal violence. These 
Pathans fully participated in the Satyagraha struggle; none of them had 
submitted to the Black Act. It was an easy thing to mislead them. It was quite 
possible to create a misunderstanding in their minds about the fingerprints and 
thus to inflame them. This single suggestion, viz., why should I ask them to give 
fingerprints if I was not corrupt? was enough to poison the Pathans’ ears. 
Again there was another party in the Transvaal which comprised such Indians as 
had entered the Transvaal surreptitiously without a permit or were interested 
in bringing others there secretly either without a permit at all or with a false 
permit. This party too knew that the settlement would be detrimental to their 
interest. None had to produce his permit so long as the struggle lasted, and Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 156 therefore this group could carry on their trade without fear and easily avoid 
going to jail during the struggle. The longer the struggle was protracted, the 
better for them. Thus this clique also could have instigated the Pathans. The 
reader will now see how the Pathans got thus excited all of a sudden.  
The Pathan’squestions, however, did not have any impression on the meeting. I 
had asked the meeting to vote on the settlement. The President and other 
leaders were firm. After this passage at arms with the Pathan, the president 
made a speech explaining the nature of the settlement and dwelling upon the 
necessity for endorsing it, and then proceeded to ascertain the sense of the 
meeting, which unanimously ratifiedthe settlement with the exception of a 
couple of Pathans present. 
I reached home at 2 or 3 a.m. Sleep was out of the question, as I had to rise 
early and go to jail to get the others released. I reached the jail at 7 a.m. The 
superintendent had received the necessary orders on the phone, and he was 
waiting for me. All the Satyagrahi prisoners were released in the course of one 
hour. The Chairman and other Indians were present to welcome them, and from 
jail all of us proceeded to the place of meeting where a second meeting was 
now held. That day a couple of subsequent days were passed in feasting and 
educating the community on the settlement. With the lapse of time, if on the 
one had the implications of the settlement became clearer misunderstandings 
on the other had also began to thicken. We have already discussed the chief 
causes of misunderstanding. Then again the letter we had written to General 
Smuts was open to misrepresentation. The difficulty I experienced in meeting 
the various objections which were thus raised was infinitely greater than what I 
had felt while the struggle, the only difficulties felt crop up in our relations 
with the adversary, and these are always easily overcome, for then all 
internecine strife and internal discord are either suspended altogether or at 
least they lose their prominence in face of the common danger. But when the 
fight is over, internal jealousies are again fully in play, and if the differences 
with the adversary have been amicably settled, many take to the easy and 
grateful task of picking holes in the settlement. And in a democratic body it is Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 157 only in the fitness of things that one has to provide satisfactory answers for the 
questions of everyone, big and small. Even in offering battle of the adversary 
one does not learn the valuable battle of the adversary one does not learn the 
valuable lessons which come home to oneself while thus dealing with 
misunderstandings and strivings between friends. There is a sort of intoxication 
and exultation in fighting the adversary. But misunderstandings and differences 
between friends are rare phenomena and are therefore all the more painful. 
Yet it is only on such occasions that one’s mettle is put to a real test. Such has 
been my experience without any exception, and I believe as it is only when 
passing through such ordeals that I have made the largest gain in things of the 
spirit. Many, who had not understood the real nature of the struggle while it 
was still going on, understood it fully in course of and after the settlement. 
Serious opposition was confined to the Pathans and did not travel beyond them. 
The Registrar of Asiatic was soon ready to issue registration certificates under 
the new voluntary arrangement. The form of the certificates was altogether 
changed, and had been settled in consultation with the Satyagrahis. 
On the morning of February 10, 1908, some of us got ready to go and take out 
certificates of registration. The supreme necessity of getting through the 
registration business with all possible expending had been fully impressed on 
the community, and it had been agreed, that the leaders should be the first to 
take out certificates on the first day, with a view to break down shyness, to see 
if the officers concerned discharged their duties with courtesy and generally to 
have an eye over all the arrangements. 
When I reached my office, which was also the office of the Satyagraha 
Association, I found Mir Alam and his companions standing outside the 
premises. Mir Alam was an old client of mine, and used to seek my advice in all 
his affairs. Many Pathans in the Transvaal employed labourers to manufacture 
straw or coir mattresses, which they sold at a good profit, and Mir Alam did the 
same. He was fully six feet in height and of a large and powerful build. Today 
for the first time I saw Mir Alam outside my office instead of inside it, and 
although his eyes met mine, he for the first time refrained from saluting me. I Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 158 saluted him and he saluted me in return. As usual I asked him, ‘How do you do?’ 
and my impression is that he said he was all right. But he did not today wear his 
usual smile on the face. I noticed his angry eyes and took a mental not of the 
fact. I thought that something was going to happen. I entered the office. The 
Chairman Mr. Yusuf Mian and other friend arrived and we set out for the Asiatic 
Office. Mir Alam and his companions followed us. 
The registration Office was at Von Brandis Square, less than a mile away from 
my office. On our way to it we had to pass through high roads. As we were 
going along Von Brandis Street, outside the premises of Messers Arnot and 
Gibson, not more three minutes’ walk from the Registration Office, Mir Alam 
accosted me and asked me, ‘Where are you going?’ 
‘I propose to take out a certificate of registration, giving the ten finger-prints,’ 
I replied. ‘If you will go with me, I will first get you a certificate, with an 
impression only of the two thumbs, and then I will take one for myself, giving 
the finger-prints.’ 
I had scarcely finished the last sentence when a heavy cudgel blow descended 
on my head from behind. I at once fainted with the words He Rama (O God!) on 
my lips, lay prostrate on the ground and had no notion of what followed. But 
Mir Alam and his companions gave more blows and kicks, some which were 
warded off by Yusuf Mian and Thambi Naidoo with the result that they too 
became a target for attack in their turn. The noise attracted some European 
passers-by to the scene. Mir Alam and his companions fled but were caught by 
the Europeans. The police arrived in the meanwhile and took them in custody. I 
was picked up and carried into Mr.J.C. Gibson’s private office. When I regained 
consciousness, I saw Mr. Doke bending over me. ‘How do you feel?’ he asked 
me. 
‘I am all right,’ I replied, ‘but there is pain in the teeth and the ribs. Where is 
Mir Alam?’ 
‘He has been arrested along with the rest.’ 
‘They should be released.’ Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 159 ‘That is all very well. But here you are in a stranger’s office with your lip and 
cheek badly lacerated. The police are ready to take you to the hospital, but if 
you will go to my place, Mrs. Doke and I will minister to your comforts as west 
we can.’ 
‘Yes, please take me to your place. Thank the police for their offer but tell 
them that I prefer to go with you.’ 
Mr. Chamney the Registrar of Asiatics too now arrived on the scene. I was taken 
in a carriage to this good clergyman’s residence in Smith Street and a doctor 
was called in. Meanwhile I said to Mr. Chamney : ‘I wished to come to your 
office, give ten finger-prints and take out the first certificate of registration, 
but God willed it otherwise. However I have now to request you to bring the 
papers and allow me to register at once. I hope that you will not let anyone 
else register before me.’ 
‘Where is the hurry about it?’ asked Mr. Chamney. ‘The doctor will be here 
soon. You please rest yourself and all will be well. I will issue certificates to 
others but keep your name at the head of the list.’ 
‘Not so,’ I replied.’ ‘I am pledged to take out the first certificate if I am alive 
and if it is acceptable to God. It is therefore that I insist upon the papers being 
brought here and now.’ 
Upon this Mr. Chamney went away to bring the papers. 
The second thing for me to do was to wire to the Attorney-General that I did 
not hold Mir Alam and others guilty for the assault committed upon me, that in 
any case I did not wish them to be prosecuted and that I hoped they would be 
discharged for my sake. But the Europeans of Johannesburg addressed a saying 
that whatever views Gandhi might hold as regards the punishment of criminals, 
they could not be given effect to in South Africa. Gandhi himself might not take 
any steps, but the assault was committed not in a private place but on the high 
roads and was therefore a public offence. Several Englishmen too were in a 
position to tender evidence and the offenders must be prosecuted. Upon this Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 160 the Attorney-general rearrested Mir Alam and one of his companions who were 
sentenced to three months’ hard labour. Only I was not summoned as a witness. 
But let us return to the sick room. Dr. Thwaites came in while Mr. Chamney was 
still away. He examined me and stitched up the wounds in the cheek and on the 
upper lip. He prescribed some medicine to be applied to the ribs and enjoined 
silence upon me so long as the stitches were not removed. He restricted my 
diet to liquids only. He said that none of the injuries was serious, that I should 
be able to leave my bed and take up my ordinary activities in a week, but that I 
should be careful not to undertake much physical strain for two months more. 
So saying he left. 
Thus speech was forbidden me, but I was still master of my hands. I addressed 
a short note as follows to the community through the Chairman and sent it for 
publication: 
‘I am well in the brotherly and sisterly hands of Mr. and Mrs. Doke. I hope to 
take up my duty shortly. 
‘Those who have committed the act did not know what they were doing. They 
thought that I was doing what was wrong. They have their redress in the only 
manner they know. I therefore request that no steps be taken against them. 
‘’Seeing that the assault was committed by a Musalman or Musalmans, the 
Hindus might probably feel hurt. If so, they would put themselves in the wrong 
before the world and their Maker. Rather let the blood spilt today cement the 
two communities indissolubly such is my heartfelt prayer. May God grant it.  
‘Assault or no assault, my advice remains the same. The large majority of 
Asiatics ought to give finger prints. Those who have real conscientious scruples 
will be exempted by the Government. To ask for more would be to show 
ourselves as children. 
‘The spirit of Satyagraha rightly understood should make the people fear none 
and nothing but God. No cowardly fear therefore should deter the vast majority 
of sober-minded Indians from doing their duty. The promise of repeal of the Act Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 161 against voluntary registration having been given, it is the sacred duty of every 
good Indian to help the government and the Colony to the uttermost.’ 
Mr. Chamney returned with the papers and I gave my finger-prints but not 
without pain. I then saw that tears stood in Mr. Chamney’s eyes. I had often to 
write bitterly against him, but this showed me how man’s heart may be 
softened by events. 
The reader will easily imagine that all this did not take more than a few 
minutes. Mr. Doke and his good wife were anxious that I should be perfectly at 
rest and peaceful, and were therefore pained to witness my mental activity 
after the assault. They were afraid that it might react in a manner prejudicial 
to my health. They, therefore, by making signs and similar devices, removed all 
persons from near my bed, and asked me not to write or do anything. I made a 
request in writing, that before and in order that I might lie down quietly, their 
daughter Olive, who was then only a little girl, should sing for me my favourite 
English hymn, ‘Lead kindly light.’ Mr. Doke liked this very much and acceded to 
my request with a sweet smile. He called Olive by signs and asked her to stand 
at the door and sing the hymn in a low tone. The whole scene passes before my 
eyes as I dictate this, and the melodious voice of little Olive reverberates in my 
ears. 
I have included in this chapter much that, I think and the reader too will think, 
is irrelevant to my subject. Yet I cannot close this chapter without adding one 
reminiscence, too sacred to be omitted. How shall I describe the service 
rendered to me by the Doke family? 
Mr. Joseph Doke was a Baptist minister then 46 years old and had been in New 
Zealand before he came to South Africa. Some six months before this assault, 
he came to my office and sent in his card. On seeing the word ‘Reverend’ 
before his name, I wrongly imagined that he had come, as some other 
clergymen did, to convert me to Christianity or to advise me to give up the 
struggle or perhaps to express patronizing sympathy with the movement. Mr. 
Doke entered, and we had not talked many minutes before I saw how sadly I 
had misjudged him and mentally apologized to him. I found him familiar with Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 162 all the facts of the struggle which were published in newspapers. He said, 
‘Please consider me as your friend in this struggle. I consider it my religious 
duty to render you such help as I can. If I learnt any lesson from the life of 
Jesus, it is this that one should share and lighten the load of those who are 
heavily laden.’ We thus got acquainted with each other, and every day marked 
an advance in our mutual affection and intimacy. The name of Mr. Doke will 
often recur in course of the present volume, but it was necessary to say a few 
words by way of introducing him to the reader before I describe the delicate 
attention I received at the hands of the Dokes. 
Day and night one or other member of the family would be waiting upon me. 
The house became a sort of caravanserai so long as I stayed there. All classes of 
Indians flocked to the place to inquire after my health and, when later 
permitted by the doctor, to see me, from the humble hawker basket in hand 
with dirty clothes and dusty boots right up to the Chairman of the Transvaal 
British Indian Association. Mr. Doke would receive all of them in his drawing 
room with uniform courtesy and consideration, and so long as I lived with the 
Dokes, all their time was occupied either with nursing me or with receiving the 
hundreds of people who looked in to see me. Even at night Mr. Doke would 
quietly peep twice or thrice into my room. While living under his hospitable 
roof, I never so much as felt that it was not my home, or that my nearest and 
dearest could have looked after me better than the Dokes. 
And it must not be supposed that Mr. Doke had not to suffer for according 
public support to the Indians in their struggle and for harbouring me under his 
roof. Mr. Doke was in charge of a Baptist church, and depended for his 
livelihood upon a congregation of Europeans, not all of whom entertained 
liberal views and among whom dislike of the Indians was perhaps as general as 
among other Europeans. But Mr. Doke was unmoved by it. I had discussed this 
delicate subject with him in the very beginning of our acquaintance. And he 
said, ‘My dear friend, what do you think of the religion of Jesus? I claim to be a 
humble follower of Him, who cheerfully mounted the cross for the faith that 
was in Him, and whose love was as wide as the world. I must take a public part Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 163 in your struggle if I am at all desirous of representing Christ to the Europeans 
who, you are afraid, will give me up as punishment for it. And I must not 
complain if they do thus give me up. My livelihood is indeed derived from them, 
but you certainly do not think that I am associated with them for living’s sake, 
or that they are my cherishers. My cherisher is God; they are but the 
instruments of His almighty will. It is one of the unwritten conditions of my 
connection with them, that none of them may interfere with my religious 
liberty. Please therefore stop worrying on my account. I am taking my place 
beside you in this struggle not to oblige the Indians but as a matter of duty. The 
fact, however, is that I have fully discussed this question with my dean. I gently 
informed him, that if he did not approve of my relations with the Indians, he 
might permit me to retire and engage another minister instead. But he not only 
asked me not to trouble myself about it but even spoke some words of 
encouragement. Again you must not imagine, your people. You can have no 
idea of the silent sympathy of many with you tribulations, and you will agree 
with me that I must know about it situated as I am.’ 
After this dear explanation, I never referred to the subject again. And later on 
when Mr. Doke died in the pursuit of his holy calling in Rhodesia, at a time 
when the Satyagraha struggle was still in progress, the Baptists called a 
meeting in their church, to which they invited the late Mr. Kachhalia and other 
Indians as well as myself, and which they asked me to address. 
About ten days afterwards I had recovered enough strength to move about 
fairly well, and I then took my leave of this godly family. The parting was a 
great wrench to me no less than to the Dokes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 164  
23. EUROPEAN SUPPORT 
As the number of Europeans of position, who actively sided with the Indians in 
their struggle, was fairly large, it will not perhaps, be out of place to introduce 
them here to the reader all at once, so that when their names occur later on in 
this narrative, they will not be strange to him, and I shall not have to stop in 
the midst of the narrative in order to introduce them. The order in which the 
names have been arranged is not the order of the merit of service rendered, 
nor that of the public estimation in which the bearers of the names were held. I 
mention the friends in order of the time when I got acquainted with them and 
in connection with the various branches of the struggle where they helped the 
Indians. 
The first name is that of Mr. Albert West, whose association with the 
community dated from before the struggle and whose association with me 
commenced earlier still. When I opened my office in Johannesburg, my wife 
was not with me. The reader will remember that in 1903 I received a cable 
from South Africa and suddenly left India, expecting to return home within a 
year. Mr. West used to frequent the vegetarian restaurant in Johannesburg 
where I regularly had my meals both morning and evening, and we thus became 
acquainted with each other. He was then conducting a printing press in 
partnership with another European. In 1904 a virulent plague broke out among 
the Indians in Johannesburg. I was fully engaged in nursing the patients, and my 
visits to the restaurant became irregular. Even when I went, I went there 
before the other guests in order to avoid any possible danger from their coming 
in contact with me. Mr. West became anxious when he did not find me there 
for two days in succession as he had read in the papers that I was attending to 
the plague patients. The third day, at 6 o’clock in the morning I was scarcely 
ready to go out when Mr. West knocked at my door. When I opened it, I saw Mr. 
West with his beaming face. 
‘I am so glad to see you,’ he exclaimed. ‘I had been worrying about you, not 
finding you at the restaurant. Do tell me if I can do anything for you.’ Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 165 ‘Will you nurse the patients?’ I asked jocularly. 
‘Why not? I am quite ready.’ 
Meanwhile I had thought out my plans, and said, ‘No other answer could be 
expected of you, but there are already many helping with the nursing, and 
besides, I propose to put still harder work. Madanjit is here on plague duty, and 
there is no one to look after the Indian Opinion press. If you go to Durban and 
take charge of the press, it will be really a great help. I cannot of course offer 
you any tempting terms. Ten pounds a month and half the profits if any is all 
that I can afford.’ 
‘That is rather a tough job. I must have any partner’s permission, and then 
there are some dues to be collected. But never mind. Will you wait till evening 
for my final answer?’ 
‘Yes, we meet in the park at 6 o’clock.’ 
So we met. Mr. West had obtained his partner’s permission. He entrusted me 
with the recovery of his dues, and left for Durban by the evening train the next 
day. In a month I had his report that not only was the press not profitable at all 
but it was actually a losing concern. There were large arrears to be collected 
but the books had been badly kept. Even the list of the names and addresses of 
subscribers was incomplete. There was also mismanagement in other respects. 
Mr. West did not write all this as a matter of complaint. As he did not care for 
profit, he assured me that he would not give up what he had undertaken, but 
gave me clearly to understand that the paper would not be paying its way for a 
long time to come. 
Shri Madanjit had come to Johannesburg to canvass subscribers for the paper as 
well as to confer with me as regards the management of the press. Every month 
I had to meet a small or large deficit, and I was therefore desirous of having a 
more definite idea of my possible liabilities. Madanjit had no experience of 
printing press business and I had no experience of the beginning, that it would 
be well to associate a trained hand with him. The plague broke out in the 
meantime, and as Madanjit was just the man from such a crisis, I put him on to Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 166 nursing. And I closed with West’s unexpected while the epidemic lasted, but for 
good. Hence his report on the prospects of the paper just referred to.  
The reader knows how at both paper and the press were removed to Phoenix, 
where West drew a monthly allowance of three pound instead of ten pound as 
previously arranged. West was himself fully agreeable to all these changes. I 
never observed in him the least anxiety as to how he would be able to maintain 
himself. I recognized in him a deeply religious spirit, although he was not a 
student of religion. He was a man of perfectly independent temperament. He 
would say what he thought of all things, and would not hesitate to call a spade 
a spade. He was quite simple in habits. He was unmarried when we first met, 
and I know that he lived a life of spotless purity. Some years later he went to 
England to see his parents and returned a married man. By my advice he 
brought with him his wife, mother in law and unmarried sister, who all lived in 
extreme simplicity and in every way fraternized with the Indians in Phoenix. 
Miss Ada West (or Devibehn as we used to call her) is now 35 years old, is still 
unmarried and leads a most pious life. She too rendered to the pioneers at 
Phoenix services of no mean order. At one time or another she looked after the 
little children taught them English, cooked in the common kitchen, swept the 
houses, kept accounts and did composing and other work in the press. 
Whatever task came to her. She never hesitated in doing it. She is not now in 
Phoenix, but that is because since my return to India the press has been unable 
to meet even her small personal expenditure. West’s mother in law is now over 
eighty years old. She is a fine hand at sewing, and used to help the settlement 
with her skill as a tailor. Everyone in Phoenix called her Granny and felt that 
she was really related so to him. I need scarcely say anything about Mrs. West. 
When many members of the Phoenix settlement were in jail, the West’s along 
with Maganlal Gandhi took over the whole management of the institution. West 
would see to the press and the paper; and in the absence of others and myself, 
dispatch to Gokhale the cables which were to be sent from Durban. When even 
West was arrested (though he was soon released), Gokhale got nervous and sent 
over Andrews and Pearson.  Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 167 Then there was Mr. Ritch. I have already written about him. He had joined my 
office before the struggle and proceeded to England for the bar with a view to 
filling my place when I was not available. He was the moving spirit of the South 
African British Indian Committee in London. 
The third was Mr. Polak, whose acquaintance like that of West I casually made 
in the restaurant. He likewise left at once the sub-editorship of The Transvaal 
Critic to join the staff of Indian Opinion. Everyone knows how he went to India 
and to England in connection with the struggle. When Ritch went to England, I 
called Polak from Phoenix to Johannesburg, where he became my articled clerk 
and then a full- fledged attorney. Later on he married. People in India are 
familiar with Mr. Polak, who not only never came in her husband’s way but was 
perfect helpmate to him during the struggle. The Polaks who did not see eye to 
eye with us in the Non-co-operation movement, but they are still serving India 
to the best of their family. 
The next was Mr. Hermann Kallenbach, whom too I came to before the 
struggle. He is a German, and had it not been for the Great War, he would be 
in India today. He is a man of strong feelings, wide sympathies and child like 
simplicity. He is an architect by profession, but there is no work, however 
lowly, which he would consider to be beneath dignity. When I broke up my 
Johannesburg establishment, I lived with him, but he would be hurt if I offered 
to pay him my share of the household expenses, and would plead that I was 
responsible for considerable savings in his domestic economy. This was indeed 
true. But this is not the place to describe my personal relations with Europeans 
friends. When we thought of accommodating the families of Satyagrahi 
prisoners in Johannesburg in one place, Kallenbach lent the use of his big farm 
without any rent. But more of that later. When Gokhale came to Johannesburg, 
the community put him up at Kalllenbach’s cottage which the illustrious guest 
liked very much. Kallenbach went with me as far as Zanzibar to see Gokhale 
off. He was arrested along with Polak and suffered imprisonment. Finally, when 
I left South Africa to see Gokhale in England, Kallenbach was with me. But 
when I returned to India, he was not permitted to go with me to India on Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 168 account of the war. He was like all other Germans interned in England. When 
the War over Kallenbach returned to Johannesburg and recommenced the 
practice of his profession. 
Let me now introduce the reader to a noble girl, I mean Miss Sonja Schlesin. I 
cannot resist the temptation of placing here on record Gokhale’s estimate of 
her character. He had wonderful power of judging men. I went with him from 
Delagoa Bay to Zanzibar, and the voyage gave us a fine opportunity of quite 
talks, Gokhale had come in contact with the Indian and European leaders in 
South Africa. And while minutely analyzing for me the characters of the 
principal persons of the drama, I perfectly remember that he gave the pride of 
place among them all, Europeans as well as Indians, to Miss Schlesin: ‘I have 
rarely come across such purity, single-minded devotion to work and great 
determination as I have seen in Miss Schlesin. I was simply astonished how she 
had sacrificed her all for the Indian cause without expecting any reward 
whatever. And when you add to all this her great ability and energy, these 
qualities combine to make he a priceless asset to your movement. I need hardly 
say it and yet Miss Dick, working with me as steno-typist, who was the very 
picture of loyalty and purity. Many a bitter experience has been my portion in 
life, but I have also had the good fortune to claim large number of Europeans 
and Indians of high character as my associates. Miss Dick left me when he 
married, and then Mr. Kallenbach introduced Miss Schlesin to me and said, ‘This 
girl has been entrusted to me by her mother. She is clever and honest, but she 
is very mischievous and impetuous. Perhaps she is even insolent. You keep her 
if you can manage her. I do not place her with you for the mere pay.’ I was 
ready to allow 20 pound a month to good steno-typist, but I had no idea of Miss 
Schlesin’s ability. Mr. Kallenbach proposed that I should pay her 6 pound a 
month to begin with, and I readily agreed. Miss Schlesin soon made me familiar 
with the mischievous part of herself. But in a month’s time she had achieved 
the conquest of my heart. She was ready to work at all times whether by day or 
at night. There was nothing difficult or impossible for her. She was then only 
sixteen years of age, but she captivated my clients as well as the follow 
Satyagrahis by her frankness and readiness to serve. This young girl soon Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 169 constituted herself the watchman and warder of the morality not only of my 
office but of the whole movement. Whenever she was in doubt as theethical 
propriety of any proposed step, she would freely discuss it with me and not rest 
till she was convinced of it. When all the leaders except Sheth Kachhalia were 
in jail, Miss Schlesin had control of large funds and was in charge of the 
accounts. She handled workers of various temperaments. Even Sheth Kachhalia 
would have recourse to her and seek her advice. Mr. Doke was then in charge of 
Indian Opinion. But even he, hoary-headed veteran as he was, would get the 
articles he wrote for Indian Opinion passed by her. And he once told me, ‘If 
Miss Schlesin had not been there, I do not know how I could have satisfied even 
my own self with my work. I cannot sufficiently appreciate the value of her 
assistance, and very often I have accepted the corrections or additions she 
suggested knowing them to be appropriate.’ Pathans, Patels, ex-indentured 
men, Indians of all classes and ages surrounded her, sought her advice and 
followed it. Europeans in South Africa would generally never travel in the same 
railway compartment as Indians, and in the Transvaal they are even prohibited 
from doing so. Yet Miss Schlesin would deliberately sit in the third class 
compartment for Indians like other Satyagrahis and even resist the guards who 
interfered with her. I feared and Miss Schlesin hoped that she might be arrested 
some day. But although the Transvaal Government were aware of her ability, 
her mastery over the ‘strategy’ of the movement, and the hold she had 
acquired over the Satyagrahis, they adhered to the policy and the chivalry of 
not arresting her. Miss Schlesin never asked for or desired an increase in her 
monthly allowance of 6 pound. I began giving her 10 pound when I came to 
know of some of her wants. This too she accepted with reluctance, and flatly 
declined to have anything more. ‘I do not need more, and if I take anything in 
excess of my necessities, I will have betrayed the principle which has attracted 
me to you,’ she would say, and silence me. The reader will perhaps ask what 
Miss Schlesin’s education was. She had passed the Intermediate examination of 
the Cape University, and obtained first class diploma in shorthand, etc. She 
graduated after the struggle was over, and is now head mistress in a 
Government Girls’ School in the Transvaal. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 170 Herbert Kitchin was an English electrician with a heart pure as crystal. He 
worked with us during the Boer War and was for some time editor of Indian 
Opinion. He was a lifelong brahmachari. 
The persons I have thus far mentioned were such as came in close contact with 
me. They could not be classed among the leading Europeans of the Transvaal. 
However, this latter class too was very largely helpful, and the most influential 
of such helpers was Mr. Hosken, ax-President of the Association of Chambers of 
Commerce of South Africa and a member of the Legislative Assembly of the 
Transvaal, whose acquaintance the reader has already made and who was 
Chairman of the Committee of European sympathizers with the Satyagraha 
movement. When the movement was in full swing, direct communications 
between Satyagrahis and the local Government were obliviously out of the 
question, not because of any objection on principle on the part of the 
Satyagrahis to deal directly with Government but because the latter would 
naturally not confer with the breakers of its law. And this Committee acted as 
mediator between the Indians and the Government. 
 I have already introduced Mr. Albert Cartwright to the reader. Then there was 
Rev.Charles Philips who joined and assisted us even as Mr. Doke did Mr. Philips 
had long been Congregational minister in the Transvaal. His good wife too did 
us much service. A third clergyman who had given up orders to take up the 
editorship of the Bloemfontein daily The Friend and who supported the Indian 
cause in his paper in the teeth of Europens opposition was Rev. Dewdeny Drew, 
one of the best speakers in South Africa. A similarly spontaneous helper was Mr. 
Vere Stent, editor of the The Pretoria News. A mass meeting of Europeans was 
once held in the Town Hall of Pretoria under the presidency of the Mayor to 
condemn the Indian movement and to support the Black Act. Mr. Vere Stent 
alone stood up in opposition to the overwhelming majority of anti-Indians and 
refused to sit down in spite of the president’s orders. The Europeans 
threatened to lay hands on him, yet he stood unmoved and defiant like a lion, 
and the meeting dispersed at last without passing its resolution. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 171 There were other Europeans whose names I could mention and who never 
missed an opportunity of doing us a good turn, although they did not formally 
join any association. But I propose to close this chapter with a few words about 
three ladies. One of these was Miss Hobhouse, the daughter of Lord Hobhouse, 
who at the time of the Boer War reached the Transvaal against the wishes of 
Lord Milner, and who single-handed moved among the Boer women, encouraged 
them and bade them to stand firm when Lord Kitchener has set up his famous 
or rather infamous ‘concentration camps’ in the Transvaal and the Free state. 
She believed the English policy in respect of the Boer War to be totally 
unrighteous, and therefore like the late Mr. Stead she wished and prayed to 
God for England’s defeat in the war. Having thus served the Boers she was 
shocked to learn that the same Boers, who had only recently resisted injustice 
with all their might, were now led into prejudice. The Boers looked up to her 
with great respect and affection. She was very intimate with General Botha, 
and did her best to commend to the Boers the policy of repealing the Black Act. 
The second lady was Miss Olive Schreiner, to whom I have already referred in a 
previous chapter. The name Schreiner is one to conjure with in South Africa, so 
much so that when Miss Schreiner married, her husband adopted her name so 
that (I was told) her relation with the Schreiners might not be forgotten to any 
false pride, as Miss Schreiner was as simple in habits and humble in spirit as she 
was learned. I had the privilege of being familiar with her. She knew no 
difference between her Negro servants and herself. Authoress of Dreams and 
many other works as she was, she never hesitated to cook, wash the pots or 
handle the broom. She held that far from affecting it adversely ability and 
made for a sense of proportion and discrimination in thought and language. This 
gifted lady lent to the Indian cause the whole weight of her influence over the 
Europeans of South Africa.  
The third lady was Miss Molteno, an aged member of that ancient family of 
South Africa, who also did her best for the Indians. 
The reader may ask what fruit all this sympathy of the Europeans bore. Well, 
this chapter has not been written to describe the practical consequences of Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 172 their sympathy. The work detailed above some of these friends bears witness to 
a portion of the result. The very nature of Satyagraha is such that the fruit of 
the movement is contained in the movement itself. Satyagraha is on self help, 
self-sacrifice and faith in God. One of my objects in enumeration the names of 
Europeans helpers are to mark the Satyagrahis’ gratefulness to them. This 
history would be justly considered incomplete without such mention. I have not 
tried to make the list exhaustive, but have tendered the Indians’ thanks to all 
in selecting a few for especial mention. Secondly, as a Satyagrahi I hold to the 
faith that all activity pursued with a pure heart is bound to bear fruit, whether 
or not such fruit is visible to us. And last but not the least, I have tried to show 
that all truthful movements spontaneously attract to themselves all manner of 
pure and disinterested help. If it is not clear already, I should like to make it 
clear that no other effort whatever was made during the struggle to enlist 
Europeans sympathy beyond the effort, if effort it can be called, involved in 
adherence to truth and Truth alone. The European friends were attracted by 
the inherent power of the movement itself. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 173  
24. FURTHER INTERNAL DIFFICULTIES 
We have some idea of our internal difficulties in Cha pter XXII. When I was 
assaulted in Johannesburg, my family lived in Phoenix and were naturally 
anxious about me. But it was not possible for them to expend money on the 
journey from Phoenix to Johannesburg. It was therefore necessary for me to 
see them after my recovery. 
I was often on the move between the Transvaal and Natal in connection with 
my work. From the letters of Natal friends. I was aware that Natal too the 
settlement had been grossly misunderstood. And I had received a sheaf of 
correspondence addressed to Indian Opinion in which adverse criticism was 
passed on the settlement. Although the Satyagraha struggle was still confined 
to the Transvaal Indians, we must seek the support and enlist the sympathies of 
the Natal Indians also. The Transvaal struggle was not a mere local affair the 
battle on behalf of all the Indians in South Africa. And therefore also I must go 
to Durban and remove the misunderstandings prevalent there. So I took the 
first opportunity to run up to Durban. 
A public meeting of the Indians was called in Durban. Some friends had warned 
me beforehand that I would be attacked at this meeting and that I should 
therefore not attend it at all or at least take steps for defending myself. But 
neither of the two coursed was open to me. If a servant when called by his 
master fails to respond through fear, he forfeits his title to the name of 
servant. Nor does he deserve the name if he is afraid of the master’s 
punishment. Service of the public for service’s sake is like walking on the 
sword’s edge. If a servant is ready enough for praise he may not flee in the face 
of blame. I therefore presented myself at the meeting at the appointed time. I 
explained to the meeting how the settlement had been effected, and also 
answered the questions put by the audience. The meeting was held at 8 o’clock 
in the evening. The proceedings were nearly over when a Pathan rushed to the 
platform with a big stick. The lights were put out at the same time. I grasped 
the situation at once. Sheth Daud Muhamad the chairman stood up on the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 174 chairman’s table and tried to quell the disturbance. Some of those on the 
platform surrounded me to defend my person. The friends who feared an 
assault had come to the place prepared for eventualities. One of them had a 
revolver in his pocket and he tried a blank shot. Meanwhile Parsi Rustomji who 
had noticed the gathering cloud and informed Superintendent Alexander, who 
sent a police party. The police made away for me through the crowd and took 
me to Parsi Rustomji’s place. 
The next day Parsi Rustomji brought all the Pathans of Durban together in the 
morning, and asked them to place before me all their complaints against me. I 
met them and tried to conciliate them, but with little success. They had 
preconceived notion that I had betrayed it was useless reasoning with them. 
The canker of suspicion cannot be cured by arguments or explanations. 
I left Durban for Phoenix the same day. The friends who had guarded me the 
previous night would not let me alone, and informed me that they intended to 
accompany me to Phoenix. I said, ‘I cannot prevent you if you will come in 
spite of me. But Phoenix is a jungle. And what will you do if we the only 
dwellers in it do not give you even food?’ One of the friends replied, ‘That 
won’t frighten us. We are well able to look after ourselves. And so long as we 
are a-soldiering, who is there to prevent us from robbing your pantry?’ We thus 
made a merry party for Phoenix. 
The leader of this self-appointed guard was Jack Mooborn, a Natal-born 
Tamilian well known among the Indians as attained boxer. He and his 
companions believed that no man was a match for him in that branch of sport. 
In South Africa I had for many years been in the habit of sleeping in the open at 
all times except when there was rain. I was not prepared now to change the 
habit, and the self-constituted guard decided to keep watch all night. Though I 
had tried to laugh these men out of their purpose, I must confess that I was 
weal enough to feel safer for their presence. I wonder if I could have slept with 
the same ease if the guard had not been there. I suppose I should have been 
startled by some noise or other. I believe that I have an unflinching faith in 
God. For many years I have accorded intellectual assent to the proposition that Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 175 death is only a big change in life and nothing more, and should be welcome 
whenever it arrives. I have deliberately made a supreme attempt to cast out 
from my heart all fear whatsoever including the fear of death. Still I remember 
occasions in my life when I have not rejoiced at the thought of approaching 
death as one might rejoice at the thought of approaching death as one might 
rejoice at the prospect of meeting a long lost friend. Thus man often remains 
weal notwithstanding all his efforts to be strong, a knowledge which stops all 
the head and does not penetrate into the heart is of but little use in the critical 
times of living experience. Then again the strength of the spirit within mostly 
evaporates when a person gets and accepts support from outside. A Satyagrahi 
must be always on his guard against such temptations. 
While in Phoenix I did jus done thing. I wrote a great deal with a view to 
removing misunderstandings’ about the compromise, including an imaginary 
dialogue for Indian Opinion in which I disposed of in ample detail the objections 
advanced and criticism passed against the settlement. I believe that this 
dialogue produced a good effect. It was found that the Transvaal Indians whose 
misunderstanding of the settlement, if persistent, would have led to really 
disastrous results, did not long misunderstand it. It was only for the Transvaal 
Indians to accept or to reject the settlement. They were on their trial as well 
as myself as their leader and servant. In the end there were hardly any Indians 
who had not registered themselves voluntarily. There was such a rush of the 
applications for registration that the officers concerned were hard pressed with 
work, and in a very short time the Indians had fulfilled to admit this, and I 
could see that misunderstanding, though of an acute nature, was quite limited 
in its extent. There was no doubt a great deal of stir when some Pathans 
violently took the law into their own hands. But such violent stir when 
analyzed, often turns out to have no bottom at all and is equally often turns 
out to have no bottom at all and is equally often only temporary. And yet it is a 
power in the world today as we are apt to be unnerved in the face of violence. 
If however we calmly think about it, we shall find that there is no reason for 
nervousness. Just suppose that Mir Alam and his friends, instead of only 
wounding, had actually destroyed my body. And suppose also that the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 176 community had deliberately remained calm and unperturbed, and forgiven the 
offenders perceiving that according to their lights they could not behave 
otherwise than they did. Far from injuring the community, such a noble 
attitude would have greatly benefited them. All misunderstanding would have 
had their eyes opened to the error of their ways. As for me, nothing better can 
happen to a Satyagrahi than meeting death all unsought in the very act of 
Satyagraha, i.e., pursing Truth. all these propositions are true only of a struggle 
like the Satyagraha movement, where there is no room for hatred, where self-
reliance is the order of the day, where no one has to look expectantly at 
another, where there are no leaders and hence no followers, or where all are 
leaders and all are followers, so that the death of a fighter, however eminent, 
makes not for slackness but on the other hand intensifies the struggle.  
Such is the pure and essential nature of Satyagraha, not realized in practice, 
because not every one of us has shed hatred. In actual practice the secret of 
Satyagraha is not understood by all, and the many are apt unintelligently to 
follow the few. Again as Tolstoy observed, the Transvaal struggle was the first 
attempt at applying the principle of Satyagraha to masses or bodies of men. I 
do not know any historical example of pure mass Satyagraha. I cannot however 
formulate of history is limited. But as a matter of fact we have nothing to do 
with historical precedents. Granted the fundamental principles of Satyagraha, 
it will be seen that the consequences I have described are bound to follow as 
night the day. It will not do to dismiss such a valuable force with the remark 
that it is difficult or impossible of application. Brute force has been the ruling 
factor in the world for thousands of years, and mankind has been reaping its 
bitter harvest all along, as he who runs may read. There is little hope of 
anything good coming out it in the future. If light can come out of darkness, 
then alone can love emerge from hatred. 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 177  
25. GENERAL SMUTS’ BREACH OF FAITH (?) 
The reader has seen something of the internal difficu lties, in describing which I 
had to draw largely upon my own life story, but that could not be avoided, as 
my own difficulties regarding Satyagraha became equally the difficulties of the 
Satyagraha. We now return to the external situation. 
I am ashamed of writing the caption of this chapter as well as the chapter 
itself, for it deals with the obliquity of human nature. Already in 1908 General 
Smuts ranked as the ablest leader in South Africa, and today he takes a high 
place among the politicians of the British Empire, and even of the world. I have 
no doubt about his great abilities. General Smuts is as able a general and 
administrator as he is a lawyer. Many other politicians have come and gone in 
South Africa, but from 1907 up to date the reins of Government have 
practically been held throughout by this gentleman,  and even today he holds a 
unique position in the country. It is now nine years since I left South Africa I do 
not know what epithet the people of South Africa now bestow upon General 
Smuts. His Christian name is Jan, and South Africa used to call him ‘slim 
Janny’. Many English friends had asked me to beware of General Smuts, as he 
was a very clever man a trimmer whose words were intelligible only to himself 
and often of a kind that either party could interpret them in a sense favouable 
to himself. Indeed on a suitable occasion he would lay aside the interpretations 
of both the parties, put a fresh interpretation upon them, carry it out and 
support it by such clever arguments that the parties for the time would be led 
to imagine that they were wrong themselves and General Smuts was right in 
construing the words as he did. As regards the events, I am now going to 
describe, we believed and said, when they happened, that General Smuts had 
played us false. Even today, I look upon the incident as a breach of faith from 
the Indian community’s standpoint. However I have placed a mark of 
interrogation after the phrase, as in point of fact the General’s action did not 
perhaps amount to an intentional breach of faith. It could not be described as 
breach of faith if the intention was absent. My experience of General Smuts in Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 178 1913-14 did not then seem bitter and does not seem so theme today, when I 
can think of the past events with a greater sense of detachment. It is quite 
possible that in behaving to the Indians as he did in 1908 General Smuts was not 
guilty of a deliberate breach of faith. 
These prefatory words were necessary in justice to General Smuts, as well as in 
defence of the use of the phrase ‘breach of faith’ in connection with his name 
and of what I am going to say in the present chapter. 
We have seen in the last chapter how the Indians registered voluntarily to the 
satisfaction of the Transvaal Government. The Government must now repeal 
the Black act, and if they did, the Satyagraha struggle would come to an end. 
This did not mean the end of the entire mass of anti-Indian legislation in the 
country or the redress of all the Indian grievances, for which the Indians must 
still continue their constitutional agitation. Satyagraha was directed solely to 
the scattering of the new and ominous cloud on the horizon in the shape of the 
Black Act, which if accepted by the Indians, would have humiliated them and 
prepared the way for their final extinction first in the Transvaal and then 
throughout South Africa. But instead of repealing the Black Act, General Smuts 
took a fresh step forward. He maintained the Black Act on the statute book and 
introduced in the legislature measure, validating the voluntary registration 
effected and the certificated issued subsequent to the date fixed by the 
Government in terms of that Act. Taking the holders of the voluntary 
registration certificates out of its operation, and making further provision for 
the registration of Asiatics. Thus there came into force two concurrent pieces 
of legislation with one and the same object, and freshly arriving Indians as well 
as even later applications for registration were still subject to the Black Act. 
I was astounded when I read the Bill. I did not know how I would face the 
community. Here was excellent food for the Pathan friend who had severely 
criticized me at the midnight meeting. But I must say that far from shaking it, 
this blow made my faith in Satyagraha stronger than ever. I called a meeting of 
our Committee and explained the new situation to them. Some of the members 
tauntingly said, ‘There you are. We have often been telling you that you are Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 179 very credulous, and believe in everything that any one says. It would not 
matter much if you were so simple in your private affairs, but the community 
has to suffer for your credulity in public matters. It is very difficult now to 
rouse the same spirit as actuated our people before. You know what stuff we 
Indians are made of men whose momentary enthusiasm must be taken at the 
flood. If you neglect the temporary tide, you are done for.’ 
There was no bitterness in these taunting words. Such things had been 
addressed to me on other occasions. I replied with a smile: ‘Well, what you call 
my credulity is part and parcel of myself. It is not credulity but trust, and it is 
the duty of every one of us, yours as well as mine, to trust our fellowmen. And 
even granting that it is really a defect with me, you must take me as you find 
me with my defects no less than with my qualities. But I cannot concede that 
the enthusiasm of the community is a mere temporary effervescence. You must 
remember that you, as well as I, are members of the community. I should 
consider it an insult if you thus characterized my enthusiasm. I take it that you 
too regard yourselves as exceptions to the general rule you seek to formulate. 
But if you don’t, you do the community the injustice of imaging that others are 
as weak-kneed as yourselves. In great struggles like ours there is always a tide 
and ebb. However clear may be your understanding with the adversary what is 
there to prevent him from breaking faith? There are many among us who pass 
promissory notes to others. What can be clearer and more free from doubt than 
a man’s putting his signature to a document? Yet suits must be filed against 
them; they will oppose the suits and offer all kinds of defence. At last there are 
decrees and writs of attachment which take a long time and cost great trouble 
to execute. Who can guarantee against the petition of such flagrant behavior? I 
would therefore advise you patiently to deal with the problem before us. We 
have to consider what we can do in case the struggle has to be resumed, that is 
to say, what each Satyagrahi can do absolutely regardless of the conduct of 
others. Personally I am inclined to think, that if only we are true to ourselves, 
others will not be found wanting, and even if they are inclined to weakness, 
they will be strengthened by our example.’ Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 180 I believe this was enough to conciliate the well-intentioned skeptics who were 
doubtful about the resumption of the struggle. About this time Mr. Kachhalia 
began to show his mettle and come to the front. On every point he would 
announce his considered opinion in the fewest words possible and then stick to 
it through thick and thin. I do not remember a single occasion on which he 
betrayed weakness or doubt about the final result. A time came when Yusuf 
Mian was not ready to continue at the helm in troubled waters. We all with one 
voice acclaimed Kachhalia as our captain and from that time forward to the 
end he held unflinchingly to his responsible post. He fearlessly put up with 
hardships which would have daunted almost any other man in his place. As the 
struggle advanced, there came a stage when going to jail was a perfectly easy 
task for some and a mean of getting well-earned rest, whereas it was infinitely 
more difficult to remain outside, minutely to look into all things, to make 
various arrangements and to deal with all sorts and conditions of men. 
Later on the European creditors of Kachalia caught his as in a noose. Many 
Indian traders are entirely dependent in their trade on European firms which 
sell them lakhs of rupees worth of goods on credit on mere personal security. 
That Europeans should repose such trust in Indian traders is an excellent proof 
of the general honesty of Indian trade. kachhalia likewise owed large sums to 
many Europeans firms, which asked him at once to meet their dues, being 
instigated thereto directly or indirectly by the Government. The firms gave 
Kachhalia to understand that they would not press for immediate payment if he 
left the Satyagraha movement. But if he did not, they were afraid of losing 
their money as he might be arrested any time by the Government, and 
therefore demanded immediate satisfaction in cash. Kachhalia bravely replied, 
that his participation in the Indian struggle was his personal affair, which had 
religion, the honour of his community and his own self religion, the honour of 
his community and his self respect were bound up with the struggle. He 
thanked his creditors for the support they had extended to him, but refused to 
attach any undue importance to that support or indeed to his trade. Their 
money was perfectly safe with him, and as long as long as he was alive he 
would repay them in full at any cost. But if anything happened to him, his stock Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 181 as well as the book debts owing to him were at their disposal. He therefore 
wished that his were at their disposal. He therefore wished that his creditors 
would continue to trust him as before. This was a perfectly fair argument, and 
Kachhalia’s firmness was an additional reason for his creditors to trust him, but 
on this occasion it failed to impress them. We can rouse from his slumbers a 
man who is really asleep, but not him who only makes a pretence of sleep all 
the while that he is awake, and so it was with these European traders, whose 
sole object was to bring undue pressure to bear upon Kachhalia. Otherwise 
their money was perfectly safe. 
A meeting of the creditors was held in my office on January 22, 1909. I told 
them clearly that the pressure to which they were subjecting Kachhalia was 
purely political and unworthy of merchants, and they were incensed at my 
remark. I showed they Kachhalia Sheth’s balance sheet and proved that they 
could have their 20s. in the pound. Again if the creditors wanted to sell the 
business to someone else, Kachhalia was ready to hand over the goods and the 
book debts to the purchaser. If this did not suit them, the creditors could take 
over the stock in Kachhalia’s shop at cost price, and if any part of their dues 
still remained unsatisfied, they were free to take over book debts due to him 
sufficient to cover the deficit. The reader can see that in agreeing to this 
arrangement the European merchants had nothing to lose. I had on may 
previous occasions effected such arrangements with the creditors of some of 
my clients who were hard pressed. But the merchants at this juncture did not 
seek justice. They were out to bend Kachhalia. Kachhalia would not bend, 
bankruptcy proceedings were instituted against him, and he was declared an 
insolvent, though his estate showed a large excess of assets over liabilities. 
Far from being a blot upon his escutcheon this insolvency was perfectly 
honourable to him. It enhanced his prestige among the community and all 
congratulated him upon his firmness and courage. But such heroism is rarely 
found. The man in the street cannot understand how insolvency can cease to be 
insolvency, cease to be a disgrace and become an honour and an ornament, but 
Kachhalia realized it at once. Many traders had submitted to the Black Act Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 182 merely from a fear of insolvency. Kachhalia could have warded off the 
insolvency if he had wished, not by leaving the struggle, that was out of the 
question, but by borrowing from his many Indian friends who would gladly have 
helped him over the crisis. But it would not have been becoming in him to have 
saved his trade by such means. The danger of being any day clapped into goal 
he shared in common with all Satyagrahis. It would therefore be hardly proper 
for him to borrow from a fellow Satyagrahi to pay his European creditors. But 
among his friends there were ‘blacklegs’ also whose help was available. Indeed 
one or two of them actually offered assistance. But to accept their offer would 
have been tantamount to an admission that there was wisdom in submitting to 
the obnoxious Act. He therefore decided to decline their proffered aid. 
Again we thought that if Kachhalia allowed himself to be declared an insolvent, 
his insolvency would serve as a shield for others, for if not in all, at least in an 
overwhelmingly large majority of cases of insolvency, the creditor stands to 
lose something. He is quite pleased if he realized 10s. in the pound, and 
considers 15s.quite as good as 20s. in the pound. For big traders in South Africa 
generally reap a profit not of 6. ¼ but of 25 percent. They therefore consider 
15s. as good as full payment. But as 20s. in the pound is hardly ever realized 
from a bankrupt’s estate, creditors are not anxious to reduce their debtor to a 
state of insolvency. As soon, therefore, as Kachhalia was declared an insolvent, 
there was every likelihood that the European traders would cease to threaten 
other Satyagrahi traders who were their debtors. And that was exactly what 
happened. The Europeans wanted to compel Kachhalia either to give up the 
struggle or else to pay them in full in cash. They failed to achieve any of these 
two objects, and the actual result was the reserve of what they had expected. 
They were dumb founded by this first case of a respectable Indian trader 
welcoming insolvency and were quite ever afterwards. In a year’s time the 
creditors realized 20s. in the pound from Kachhalia Sheth’s stock in trade, and 
this was the first case in South Africa to my knowledge in which creditors were 
paid in full form the insolvent debtor’s estate. Thus even while the struggle 
was in progress, Kachhalia commanded great espect among the European 
merchans, who showed their readiness to advance to him any amount of goods Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 183 in spite of his leading the movement. But Kachhalia was every day gaining in 
strength and in an intelligent appreciation of the struggle. No one could now 
tell how long the struggle would last. We had therefore resolved after the 
insolvency proceedings that the Sheth should not make any large commitments 
in trade during the continuance of the movement, but confine his operations 
within such moderate limits as would suffice to provide him with his daily 
bread. He therefore did not avail himself of the European merchants’ offer. 
I need scarcely say that all these incidents in the life of Kachhalia Sheth did not 
happen soon after the Committee meeting referred to above, but I have found 
place for them here in the shape of a connected narrative. Chronologically, 
Kachhalia became Chairman some item after the resumption of the struggle 
9September 10, 1908) and his insolvency came about five months later. 
But to return to the Committee meeting. When the meeting was over, I wrote a 
letter to General Smuts, saying that his new bill constituted a breach of the 
compromise, and drawing his attention to the following passage in his 
Richmond speech delivered within a week of the settlement: ‘The Indians’ 
second contention was that they would never register until the law had been 
repealed. He had told them that the law would not be repealed so long as there 
was an Asiatic in the country who had not registered. Until every Indian in the 
country had not registered the law would not be repealed.’ Politicians do not 
reply at all to questions which land them in difficulty, or if they do, they resort 
to circumlocution. General Smuts was a past master of this art. You may write 
to him as often as you please, you make any number of speeches that you do 
can draw him out. The law of courtesy which requires a gentleman to reply to 
letters received, could not bind General Smuts, and I did not receive any 
satisfactory reply to my letters. 
I met Albert Cartwright who had been our mediators. He was deeply shocked 
and explained, ‘Really I cannot understand this man at all. I perfectly 
remember that he promised to repeal the Asiatic Act, I will do my best, but you 
know that nothing can move General Smuts when he has once taken up a stand. 
Newspaper articles are as nothing to him. So I am afraid I may not be of much Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 184 help to you.’ I also met Mr. Hosken who wrote to General Smuts but who 
received only a very unsatisfactory reply. I wrote articles in Indian Opinion 
under the captain of ‘Foul Play’, but what was that to the redoubtable 
General? One may apply any bitter epithets one likes to a philosopher or a 
heartless man but in vain. They will follow the even tenor of their way. I do not 
know which of these two appelations would fit General Smuts. I must admit 
that there is a sort of philosophy about his attitude. When I was corresponding 
with him and writing in the paper against him, I remember I had taken General 
Smuts to be a heartless man. But this was only the beginning of the struggle, 
only its second year, while it was to last as long as eight years, in course of 
which I had many occasions of meeting him. From our subsequent talks I often 
felt that the general belief in South Africa about General Smuts’ cunning did 
him perhaps less than justice. I am however sure of two things. First, he has 
some principles in politics, which are not quite immoral. Secondly, there is 
room in his politics for cunning and on occasions for perversion of truth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 185  
26. RERSUMPTION OF THE STRUGGLE 
If on the one hand we were trying to induce General Sm uts to fulfill his part of 
the settlement, we were on the other hand enthusiastically engaged in 
‘educating’ the community. We found the people everywhere ready to resume 
the struggle and to go to jail. Meetings were held in every place, where we 
explained the correspondence which was being carried on with the 
Government. The weekly diary in Indian Opinion kept the Indians fully abreast 
of current events, and they were warned of the impending failure of the 
voluntary registration, and asked to hold themselves in readiness to burn the 
certificates if the Black Act was not repealed after all, and thus let the 
Government note that the community was fearless and firm and ready to go to 
prison. Certificates were collected from every place with a view to making a 
bonfire of them.  
The Government bill we have referred to in the previous chapter was about to 
pass through the Legislature, to which a petition was presented on behalf of 
the Indians but in vain. At last an ‘ultimatum’ was sent to the government by 
the Satyagrahis. The word was not the Satyagrahis’ but of General Smuts who 
thus chose to style the letter they had addressed to him signifying the 
determination of the community. The General said, ‘The people who have 
offered such a threat to the Government have no idea of its power. I am only 
sorry that some agitators are trying to inflame poor Indians who will be ruined 
if they succumb to their blandishments.’ As the newspaper reporters wrote on 
this occasion, many members of the Transvaal Assembly reddened with rage at 
this ‘ultimatum’ and unanimously and enthusiastically passed the bill 
introduced by General Smuts. 
The so-called ultimatum may be thus summarized: ‘The point of the agreement 
between the Indians and General Smuts clearly was that if the Indians 
registered voluntarily, he on his part should bring forward in the Legislature a 
bill to validate such registration and to repeal the Asiatic Act. It is well known 
that the Indians have registered voluntarily to the satisfaction of the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 186 Government, and therefore the Asiatic Act must be repealed. The community 
has sent many communications to General Smuts and taken all possible legal 
steps to obtain redress but thus far to no purpose. At a time when the bill is 
passing through the Legislature, it is up to the leaders to apprise the 
Government of the discontent and strong feeling prevalent in the community. 
We regret to state, that if the Asiatic Act is not repealed in terms of the 
settlement, and if the Asiatic Act is not repealed in terms of the settlement, 
and if Government, decision to that effect is not communicated to the Indians 
before a specific date, the certificates collected by the Indians would be burnt, 
and they would humbly but firmly take the consequences.’ 
One reason why this letter was held to be an ultimatum was that it prescribed a 
time limit for reply. Another reason was that the Europeans looked upon the 
Indians as savages. If the Europeans had considered the Indians to be their 
equals, they would have found this letter perfectly courteous and would have 
found this letter perfectly courteous and would have given it most serious 
consideration. But the fact that the Europeans thought Indians to write such a 
letter. The fact that the Europeans thought Indians to be barbarians was a 
sufficient reason for the Indians to write such a letter. The Indians must either 
confess to their being barbarians and consent to be suppressed as such, or else 
they must take active steps in repudiation of the charge of barbarism. This 
letter was the first so such steps. If there had not been behind the letter and 
iron determination to act up to it, it would have been held impertinence, and 
the Indians would have proved themselves to be a thoughtless and foolish race. 
The reader will perhaps point out that the charge of barbarism was repudiated 
in 1906 when the Satyagraha pledge was taken. And if so, there was nothing 
new about this letter which might warrant my giving it so much importance and 
dating the denial of the charge from it. This is true so far as it goes; but on 
thinking a little more deeply, it will appear that the repudiation really began 
with this letter. It should be remembered that the Satyagraha pledge came in 
almost by accident, and the subsequent imprisonments followed as an 
inevitable corollary. The community then gained largely in stature but Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 187 unconsciously. But when this letter was written, there was a deliberate 
intention of claiming full knowledge and high prestige. Now as well as before 
the object aimed at was the repeal of the Black Act. But there was change in 
the style of language used, in the methods of work selected and in other things 
besides. When a slave salutes a master and a friend salutes a friend, the form is 
the same in either case, but there is a world of difference between the two, 
which enables detached observer to recognize the slave and the friend at once. 
There was much discussion among ourselves when the ultimatum was 
forwarded. World not the demand for reply within a stated period be 
considered impudent? Might it not be that it would stiffen the Government and 
lead them to reject our terms which otherwise they might have accepted? 
Would it not the sufficient indirectly to announce the community’s decision to 
the Government? After giving due weight to all these considerations we 
unanimously came to the conclusion that we must do what we thought to be 
right and proper for us to do. We must run the risk of government refusing in a 
huff what otherwise they might have granted. If we do not admit our inferiority 
as human beings in any sense whatever and if we believe that we possess the 
capacity for unlimited suffering for any length of time, we must adopt a 
straightforward course without hesitation. 
The reader will perhaps see that there was some novelty and distinction about 
the step now taken, which had its reverberation in the Legislature and in 
European circles outside. Some congratulated the Indians on their courage 
while others got very angry, and asked for condign punishment to be awarded 
to the Indians for their insolence. Either section acknowledged the novelty of 
the Indians’ fresh move by its conduct. This letter created greater stir than 
even the commencement of the Satyagraha movement, which too was a novelty 
when it was started. The reason is obvious. When Satyagraha was started, no 
one knew what the Indians were capable of, and therefore neither such a letter 
nor the language in which it was couched would have been fitting for that 
initial stage. But now the community had had its baptism of fire. Everyone had 
seen that the Indians had the capacity of suffering the hardships incidental to Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 188 an attempt to get their wrong righted, and therefore the language of the 
‘ultimatum’ appeared in the light of a natural growth and not at all 
inappropriate in the circumstances. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 189  
27. A BONFIRE OF CERTIFICATES 
The ultimatum was to expire on the same day that the new Asiatic Bill was to 
be carried through the Legislature. A meeting had been called some two hours 
after the expiry of the time limit to perform the public ceremony of burning 
the certificates. The Satyagraha Committee through that the meeting would 
not be fruitless even if quite unexpectedly perhaps a favorable reply was 
received from the Government, as in that case the meeting could be utilized 
for announcing the government’s favorable decision to the community. 
The committee however believed that the Government would not reply to the 
ultimatum at all. We had all reached the place of meeting early, and arranged 
for the Government’s reply by wire, if any, to be brought promptly to the 
meeting, which was held at four o’clock on the grounds of Hamidia Mosque at 
Johannesburg (August 16, 1908). Every inch of space available was taken up by 
Indians of all classes. The Negroes of South Africa take their meals in iron 
cauldrons resting on four legs. One such cauldron of the largest size available in 
the market had been requisitioned from an Indian trader’s shop and set up on a 
platform in a corner of the grounds in order to burn the certificates. 
As the business of the meeting was about to commence, a volunteer arrived on 
a cycle with a telegram from the Government in which they regretted the 
determination of the Indian community and announced their inability to change 
their line of action. The telegram was read to the audience which received it 
with cheers, as if they were glad that the auspicious opportunity of burning the 
certificates did not after all slip out of their hands as it would have if the 
Government had complied with the demands formulated in the ultimatum. It is 
difficult to pronounce any categorical opinion on the propriety or the reverse of 
such a feeling of gladness without a knowledge of the motives which prompted 
each of the audience who greeted the Government reply with applause. This 
much however can be said, that these cheers were a happy sigh of the 
enthusiasm of the meeting. The Indians had now some consciousness of their 
strength. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 190 The meeting began. The chairman put the meeting on their guard and 
explained the whole situation to them. Appropriate resolutions were adopted. I 
clearly detailed the various stages of the protracted negotiations and said, ‘If 
there is any Indian who has handed his certificate to be burnt but wants it to be 
returned to him, let him step forward and have it. Merely burning the 
certificates is no crime, and will not enable those who court imprisonment to 
win it. By burning the certificates we only declare our solemn resolution never 
to submit to the Black Act and divest ourselves of the power of even showing 
the certificates. But it is open to anyone to take a copy tomorrow of the 
certificate that may be burned to ashes today, and if there are any persons 
here who contemplate such a cowardly act or doubt their own ability to stand 
the ordeal, there is still time for them to have their certificates back, and 
these can be given back to them. No one need be ashamed of getting his 
certificate back just now, as in doing so he will be exhibiting a certain kind of 
courage. But it would be not only shameful but also detrimental to the best 
interests of the community to get a copy of the certificate afterwards.Again let 
us take note that this is going to be a protracted struggle.We know that some 
of us have fallen out of the marching army, and the burden of those who 
remain has been made heavier to that extent. I would advise you to ponder 
over all these considerations and only then to take the plunge proposed today.’ 
Even during my speech there were voices saying, ‘We do not want the 
certificates back, burn them.’ Finally, I suggested that if anyone wanted to 
oppose the resolution, he should come forward, but no one stood up. Mir Alam 
too was present at this meeting. He announced that he had done wrong to 
assault me as he did, and to the great joy of the audience, handed his original 
certificate to be burnt, as he had not taken a voluntary certificate. I took hold 
of his hand, pressed it with joy, and assured him once more that I had never 
harboured in my mind any resentment against him. 
The Committee had already received upwards of 2,000 certificates to be burnt. 
These were all thrown into the cauldron, saturated with paraffin and set ablaze 
by Mr. Yusuf Mian. The whole assembly rose to their feet and made the place Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 191 resound with the echoes of their continuous cheers during the burning process. 
Some of those who had still withheld their certificates brought them in 
numbers to the platform, and these too were consigned to the flames. When 
asked why he handed his certificate only at the last movement, one of these 
friends said that he did so as it was more appropriate and would create a 
greater impression on the onlookers. Another frankly admitted his want of 
courage and a feeling that the certificates might not be burnt after all. But he 
could not possibly withhold the certificate after he had seen the bonfire and 
gave it up, from an idea that the fate of all might well be his own fate too. 
Such frankness was a matter of frequent experience during the struggle. 
The reporters of English newspapers present at the meeting were profoundly 
impressed with the whole scene and gave graphic descriptions of the meeting in 
their papers. A descriptions of the meeting was sent to The daily Mail (London) 
by its Johannesburg correspondent, in course of which he compared the act of 
the Indians in burning their certificates with that of the Boston Tea Party. I do 
not think this comparison did more than justice to the Indians, seeing that if 
the whole might of the British Empire was ranged against the hundreds of 
thousands of able Europeans in America, here in South Africa a helpless body of 
13,000 Indians had challenged the powerful Government of the Transvaal. The 
Indians’ only weapon was a faith in the righteousness of their own cause and in 
God. There is no doubt that this weapon is all-sufficient and all powerful for 
the devout, but so long as that is not the view of the man in the street, 13,000 
unarmed Indians might appear insignificant before the well-armed Europeans of 
America. As God is the strength of the weak, it is as well that world despises 
them.  
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 192  
28. CHARGE OF FORCING FRESH ISSUE 
During the same year in which Black Act was passed Ge neral Smuts carried 
through the Legislature another bill called the Transvaal Immigrants Restriction 
Bill (Act of 15 of 1907), which was ostensibly of general application but was 
chiefly aimed at the Indians. This Act generally followed the lines of similar 
legislation in Natal, but it treated a prohibited immigrants those who could pass 
education tests but were ineligible for registration under the Asiatic Act, and 
was thus indirectly made an instrument for preventing the entry of a single 
Indian newcomer. 
It was absolutely essential for the Indians to resist this fresh inroad on their 
rights, but the question was whether it should be made a plank in the 
Satyagraha struggle. The community was not bound as to when and regarding 
what subjects they should offer Satyagraha, in deciding what subjects they 
should offer Satyagraha, in deciding which question they must only not 
transgress the limits prescribed by wisdom and appreciation of their own 
capacity. Satyagraha offered on every occasion seasonable or otherwise would 
be corrupted unto Duragraha. And if anyone takes to Satyagraha without having 
measured his own strength and afterwards sustains a defeat, he not only 
disgraces himself but he also brings the matchless weapon of Satyagraha into 
disrepute by his folly. 
The Satyagraha Committee saw that the Indians’ Satyagraha was being offered 
only against the Black Act, and that if the Black Act was once repealed, the 
Immigration Restriction Act would lose the sting to which I have referred. Still 
if the Indians did not take any steps regarding the Immigration Act from an idea 
that a separate movement against it was unnecessary, their silence might be 
misconstrued as implying their consent to the total prohibition of Indian 
immigration in the future. The Immigration Act too must therefore be opposed, 
and the only question was: Should this also be included in the Satyagraha 
struggle? The community’s view was that it was their duty to include in the 
Satyagraha any fresh attacks on their rights made while the struggle was in Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 193 progress. If they did not feel strong enough to do so that was altogether a 
different matter. The leaders came to the conclusion that their lack or 
deficiency of strength should not be made a pretext for letting the Immigration 
Act alone, and that therefore this Act too must be covered by the Satyagraha 
struggle. 
Correspondence was therefore carried on with the Government on this subject. 
We could not thereby induce General Smuts to agree to a change in the law, 
but it provided him with a fresh handle for vilifying the Community and really 
speaking myself. General Smuts knew that many more Europeans, besides those 
who were publicly helping us, were privately sympathetic to our movement, 
and he naturally wished that their sympathy should be alienated if possible. He 
therefore charged me with raising a fresh point, and he told as well as wrote to 
our supporters that they did not know me as he did. If he yielded an inch, I 
would ask for an ell and therefore it was that he was not repealing the Asiatic 
Act. When Satyagraha was started, there was no question whatever about fresh 
immigrants. Now when he was legislating to prevent the fresh entry of any 
more Indians in the interest of the Transvaal, there too I had threatened 
Satyagraha. He could not any more put up with this ‘cunning’. I might do my 
worst, and every Indian might be ruined, but he would not repeal the Asiatic 
Act, nor would the Transvaal Government give up the policy they had adopted 
regarding the Indians, and in this just attitude they were entitled to the 
support of all Europeans. 
A little reflection will show how totally unjust and immoral this argument was. 
When there was nothing like the Immigrations Restriction act at all in 
existence, how were the Indians or myself to oppose it? General Smuts talked 
glibly about his experience of what he called my ‘cunning’ and yet he could not 
cite a single case in point in support of his statement. And I do not remember 
to have ever resorted to cunning during all those years that I lived in South 
Africa. I may now go even farther and say without the least hesitation that I 
have never had recourse to cunning in all my life. I believe that cunning is not 
only morally wrong but also politically inexpedient, and have therefore always Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 194 discountenanced its use even from the practical standpoint. It is hardly 
necessary for me to defend myself. I would even be ashamed of defending 
myself before the class of readers for whom this is written. If even now they 
have not seen that I am free from cunning, nothing that I could write in self-
defence could convince them of that fact.I have penned these few sentences 
only with a view to give the reader an idea of the difficulties which were 
encountered during the Satyagraha struggle and of the imminent danger to the 
movement if the Indians even by a hair’s breadth swerved from the strait and 
narrow path. The rope-dancer, balancing himself upon a rope suspended at a 
height of twenty feet, must concentrate his attention upon the rope, and the 
least little error in so doing means death for him, no matter on which side he 
falls. My eight years’ experience of Satyagraha in South Africa has taught me 
that a Satyagrahi has to be if possible even more single-minded than the rope-
dancer. The friends before whom General Smuts leveled this charge at me 
knew me well, and therefore the charge had an effect over them just the 
opposite of what General Smuts had desired. They not only did not give me up 
or the movement but grew even more zealous in supporting us, and the Indians 
saw later on that they would have come in for no end of trouble if their 
Satyagraha had not been extended to the Immigration Act also. 
My experience has taught me that a law of progression applies to every 
righteous struggle. But in the case of Satyagraha the law amounts to an axiom. 
As the Ganga advances, other streams flow into it, and hence at the mouth it 
grows so wide that neither bank is to be seen and a person sailing upon the 
river cannot make out where the river ends and the sea begins. So also as a 
Satyagraha struggle progresses onward, many another element helps to swell its 
current, and there is a constant growth in the results to which it leads. This is 
really inevitable, and is bound up with the first principles of Satyagraha. For in 
Satyagraha the minimum is also the maximum, and as it is the irreducible 
minimum, there is no question of retreat, and the only movement possible is an 
advance. In other struggles, even when they are righteous, the demand is first 
pitched a little higher so as to admit of future reduction and hence the law of 
progression does not apply to all of them without exception. But I must explain Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 195 how the law of progression comes into play when the minimum is also the 
maximum as in Satyagraha. The Ganga does not leave its course in search of 
tributaries. Even so does the Satyagrahi not leave his path which is sharp as the 
sword’s edge. But as the tributaries spontaneously join the Ganga as it 
advances, so it is with the river that is Satyagraha. Seeing that the Immigration 
Act was included in the Satyagraha, some Indians ignorant of the principles of 
Satyagraha insisted upon the whole mass of the Anti-Indian legislation in the 
Transvaal being similarly treated. Others again suggested a mobilization of 
Indians all over South Africa and the offering of Satyagraha against all anti-
Indian legislation in Natal, the Cape Colony, the Orange Free State, etc., while 
the Transvaal struggle was on. Both the suggestions involved a breach of 
principle. I distinctly said, that it would be dishonest now, having seen the 
opportunity, to take up a position which was not in view when Satyagraha was 
started. No matter how strong we were, the present struggle must close when 
the demands for which it was commenced were accepted. I am confident, that 
if we had not adhered to this principle, instead of winning, we would not only 
have lost all along the line, but also forfeited the sympathy which had been 
enlisted in our favour. On the other hand if the adversary himself creates new 
difficulties for us while the struggle is in progress, they become automatically 
included in it. A Satyagrahi, without being false to his faith, cannot disregard 
new difficulties which confront him while he is pursuing his own course The 
adversary is not a Satyagrahi, Satyagraha against Satyagraha is impossible, and 
is not bound by any limit of maximum or minimum. He can therefore try if he 
wishes to frighten the Satyagrahi by raising novel issues. But the Satyagrahi has 
renounced all fear, tackles by Satyagraha the later difficulties as well as the 
former and trusts that it will help him to hold his own against all odds. 
Therefore as a Satyagraha struggle is prolonged, that is to say by the adversary, 
it is the adversary who stands to lose from his own standpoint, and it is the 
Satyagrahi who stands to gain. We shall come across other illustrations of the 
working of this law in the later stages of this struggle. 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 196  
29. SORABJI SHAPURJI ADAJANIA 
Now as Satyagraha was made to embrace the Immigration  act as well, 
Satyagrahis had to test the right of educated Indians to enter the Transvaal. 
The Committee decided that the test should not be made through any ordinary 
Indian. The idea was that some Indian, who did not come within the four 
corners of the definition of a prohibited immigrant in the new Act in so far as 
the definition was acceptable to the community, should enter the Transvaal 
and go to jail. We had thus to show that Satyagraha is a force containing within 
itself seeds of progressive self-restraint. There was a section in the Act to the 
effect that any person who was not conversant with a European language 
should be treated as a prohibited immigrant. The Committee therefore 
proposed that some Indian, who knew English but who had not been to the 
Transvaal before should enter the country. Several young Indians volunteered 
for the purpose, out of whom Sorabji Shapurji Adajania was selected.  
Sorabji was a Parsi. There were not perhaps more than a hundred Parsis in the 
whole of South Africa. I held in South Africa the same views about Parsis as I 
have expressed in India. There are not more than a hundred thousand Parses in 
the world, and this alone speaks volumes for their high character that such a 
small community has long preserved its prestige, clung to its religion and 
proved itself second to none in the world in point of charity. But Sorabji turned 
out to be pure gold. I was but slightly acquainted with him when he joined the 
struggle. His letters as regards participation in Satyagraha left a good 
impression on me. As I am a lover of the great qualities of the Parsis, I was not 
and I am not unaware of some of their defects as a community. I was therefore 
doubtful whether Sorabji would be able to stand to his guns in critical times. 
But it was a rule with me not to attach any weight to my own doubts where the 
party concerned himself asserted the contrary. I therefore recommended to the 
Committee that they should take Sorabji at his word, and eventually Sorabji 
proved himself a first class Satyagrahi. He not only was one of the Satyagrahis 
who suffered the longest terms of imprisonment, but also made such deep Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 197 study of the struggle that his views commanded respectful hearing from all. His 
advise always betrayed firmness, wisdom, charity and deliberation. He was 
slow to form an opinion as well as to change an opinion once formed. He was as 
much of an Indian as of a Parsi, and was quite free from the ban of narrow 
communalism. After the struggle was over Doctor Mehta offered a scholarship 
in order to enable some good Satyagrahi to proceed to England for bar. I was 
charged with the selection. There were two or three deserving candidates, but 
all the friends felt that there was none who could approach Sorabji in maturity 
of judgement and ripeness of wisdom, and he was selected accordingly. The 
idea was, that on his return to South Africa he should take my place and serve 
the community. Sorabji went to England with the blessings of the community, 
and was duly called to the bar. He had already come in contact with Gokhale in 
South Africa, and his relations with him became closer in England. Sorabji 
captivated Gokhale who asked him to join the Servants of India Society when he 
returned to India. Sorabji became extremely popular among the students. He 
would share the sorrows of all, and his soul was not tarnished by the luxury and 
the artificiality in England. When he went to England, he was above thirty, and 
he had only a working knowledge of English. But difficulties vanish at the touch 
of man’s perseverance. Sorabji lived the pure life of a student and passed his 
examinations. The bar examinations in my time were easy. Barristers nowadays 
have to study comparatively very much harder. But Sorabji knew not what it 
was to be defeated. When the ambulance corps was established in England, he 
was one of the pioneers as also one of those who remained in it till the last. 
This corps too had to offer Satyagraha in which many members fell back but 
Sorabji was at the head of those who would not give in. Let me state in passing 
that this Satyagraha of the ambulance corps was also crowned with victory. 
After being called to the bar in England Sorabji returned to Johannesburg 
where he began to practice law as well as to serve the community. Every letter 
I received from South Africa was full of praise for Sorabji: ‘He is as simple in 
habits as ever, and free from the slightest trace of vanity. He mixes with all, 
rich as well as poor.’ But God seems to be as cruel as He is merciful Sorabji 
caught galloping phthisis and died in a few months, leaving the Indians whose Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 198 love he had freshly acquired to mourn his loss. Thus within a very short period 
God bereft the community of two outstanding personalities, Kachhalia and 
Sorabji. If I were asked to choose between the two, I would be at a loss to 
decide. In fact, each was supreme in his own field. And Sorabji was as good an 
Indian as he was a good Parsi, even as Kachhalia was as good an Indian as he 
was a good Musalman. 
Thus Sorabji entered the Transvaal, having previously informed the Government 
of his intention to test his right to remain in the country under the Immigrants 
Registration Act. The Government were not at all prepared for this and could 
not at once decide what to do with Sorabji, who publicly crossed the border 
and entered the country. The Immigration Restriction Officer knew him. Sorabji 
told him that he was deliberately entering the Transvaal for a test case and 
asked him to examine him in English or to arrest him just as he pleased. The 
officer replied that there was no question of examining him as he was aware of 
his knowledge of English. He had no orders to arrest him. Sorabji might enter 
the country and the Government, if they wished, would arrest him where he 
went. 
Thus contrary to our expectation Sorabji reached Johannesburg and we 
welcomed him in our midst. No one had hoped that the Government would 
permit him to proceed even an inch beyond the frontier station of to Volksrust. 
Very often, it so happens that when we take our steps deliberately and 
fearlessly, the government is not ready to oppose us. The reason for this lies in 
the very nature of government. A government officer does not ordinarily make 
his department so much his own as to arrange his ideas on every subject 
beforehand and make preparations accordingly. Again, the officer has not one 
but many things to attend to, and his mind is divided between them. Thirdly, 
the official suffers from the intoxication of power, is thus apt to be careless 
and believes that it is child’s play for the authorities to deal with any 
movement whatever. On the other hand, the public worker knows his ideal as 
well as the means to achieve his end, and if he has definite plans, he is 
perfectly ready to carry them out, and his work is the only subject of his Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 199 thoughts day and night. If therefore he takes the right steps with decision, he is 
always in advance of the government. Many movements fail, not because 
governments are endowed with extraordinary power but because the leaders 
are lacking in the qualities just referred to. 
In short, whether through the negligence or the set design of the Government 
Sorabji reached as far as Johannesburg, and the local officer had neither any 
idea of his duty in a case like this nor any instructions from his duty in a case 
like this nor any instructions from his superiors on the point. Sorabji’s arrival 
increased our enthusiasm, and some young men thought that the government 
were defeated and would soon come to terms. They saw their mistake very 
soon, however. They even realized that a settlement could perhaps be 
purchased only by the self-devotion of many a young man. 
Sorabji informed the Police Superintendent, Johnnesburg, about his arrival and 
let him know that he believed himself entitled to remain in the Transvaal in 
terms of the new Immigration Act, as he had ordinary knowledge of English, in 
respect of which he was ready to submit to an examination by the officer if he 
so desired. No reply to this letter was received, or rather the reply came after 
some days in the form of summons. 
Sorabji’s case came before the Court on July 8, 1908. The court house was 
packed full of Indian spectators. Before the case began, we held meeting of the 
Indians present on the grounds of the Court and Sorabji made a fighting speech, 
in which he announced his readiness to go to jail as often as necessary for 
victory and to brave all dangers and risks. In the meanwhile, I had got fairly 
familiar with Sorabji and assured myself that he would do credit to the 
community. The Magistrate took up the case in due course. I defended Sorabji, 
and at once asked for his discharge on the ground of the summons being 
defective. The public Prosecutor also made an argument, but on the 9th the 
Court upheld my contention and discharged Sorabji who, however, immediately 
received warning to appear before the Court next day, Friday, July 10, 1908. 
On the 10th, the Magistrate ordered Sorabji to leave the ordered Sorabji to 
leave the Transvaal within seven days. After the Court’s order was served upon Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 200 him, Sorabji informed Superintendent J. A. G. Vernon that it was not his desire 
to leave. He was accordingly brought to the Court once more, on the 20th, 
charged with failing to obey the Magistrate’s order, and sentenced to a month’s 
imprisonment with hard labour. The Government, however, did not arrest the 
local Indians as they saw that the more arrests were the higher did the Indians’ 
spirit rise. Again Indians were sometimes discharged thanks to legal 
technicalities in the cases instituted against them and this also served to 
redouble the ardour of the community. Government had carried through the 
Legislature all the laws they wanted. Many Indians had indeed burnt the 
certificates but they had proved their right to remain in the country by their 
registration. Government therefore saw no sense in prosecuting them simply to 
send them to jail, and thought that the workers would cool down finding no 
outlet for their energies in view of the masterly inactivity of the Government. 
But they were reckoning without their host. The Indians took fresh steps to test 
the Government’s patience, which was soon exhausted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 201  
30. SHETH DAUD MAHOMED ETC. ENTER THE STRUGGLE 
When the Indians saw through the Government’s game of  tiring them out by 
fabian tactics they felt bound to take further steps. A Satyagrahi is never tired 
so long as he has the capacity to suffer. The Indians were therefore in a 
position to upset the calculations of the Government. 
There were several Indians in Natal who possessed ancient rights of domicile in 
the Transvaal. They had no need to enter the Transvaal for trade, but the 
community held that they had the right of entry. They also had some 
knowledge of English. Again there was no breach of the principles of Satyagraha 
in educated Indians like Sorabji entering the Transvaal. We therefore decided 
that two classes of Indians should enter the Transvaal; first, those who had 
previously been domiciled in the country, and secondly, those who had 
received English education. 
Of these Sheth Daud Mahomed and Parsi Rustomji were big traders, and 
Surendra Medh, Pragji Khandubhai Desai, Ratansi Mulji Sodha, Harilal Gandhi 
and others were ‘educated’ men. Daud Sheth came in spite of his wife being 
dangerously ill.  
Let me introduce Sheth Daud Mahomed to the reader. He was president of the 
Natal Indian Congress and one of the oldest Indian traders that came to South 
Africa. He was a Sunni Vora from Surat. I have seen but few Indians in South 
Africa who equalled him in tact. He had excellent powers of understanding. He 
had not had much literary education but he spoke English and Dutch well. He 
was skilful in his business intercourse with European traders. His liberality was 
widely known. About fifty guests would dine with him every day. He was one of 
the chief contributors to Indian collections. He had the priceless jewel of a son 
who far surpassed him in character. The boy’s heart was pure as crystal. Daud 
Sheth never came in the way of his son’s aspirations. Indeed, it would be no 
exaggeration to say, that the father almost worshipped the son. He wished that 
none of his own defects should reappear in the boy and had sent him to England 
for education. But Daud Sheth lost this treasure of a son in his prime. Phthisis Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 202 claimed Husen for its victim. This was a sore wound that never healed. With 
Husen died the high hopes which the Indians had cherished about him. He was a 
most truthful lad, and Hindu and Musalman were to him as the left and the 
right eye. Even Daud Sheth is now no more with us. Who is there upon whom 
Death does not lay his hands?  
I have already introduced Parsi Rustomji to the reader. The names of several 
other friends who joined this ‘Asiatic invasion’ have been left out as I am 
writing this without consulting any papers, and I hope they will excuse me for 
it. I am not writing these chapters to immortalize names but to explain the 
secret of Satyagraha, and to show how it succeeded, what obstacles beset its 
path and how they were removed. Even where I have mentioned names I have 
done so in order to point out to the reader how men who might be considered 
illiterate distinguished themselves in South Africa, how Hindus, Musalmans, 
parsis and Christians there worked harmoniously together and how traders 
‘educated’ men and others fulfilled their duty. Where a man of high merit has 
been mentioned, praise has been bestowed not upon him but only upon his 
merit. 
When Daud Sheth thus arrived on the frontiers of the Transvaal with his 
Satyagrahi ‘army’, the Government was ready to meet him. The Government 
would become an object of ridicule if it allowed such a large troop to enter the 
Transvaal, and was therefore bound to arrest them. So they were arrested, and 
on August 18, 1908 brought before the Magistrate who ordered them to leave 
the Transvaal within seven days. They disobeyed the order of course, were 
rearrested at Pretoria on the 28th and deported without trial. They re-entered 
the Transvaal on the 31st and finally on September 8 were sentenced at 
Volksrust to a fine of fifty pounds or three months’ imprisonment with hard 
labour. Needless to say, they cheerfully elected to go to goal. 
The Transvaal Indians were now in high spirits. If they would not compel the 
release of their Natal compatriots, they must certainly share their 
imprisonment. They therefore cast about for means which would land them in 
jail. There were several ways in which they could have their heart’s desire. If a Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 203 domiciled Indian did not show his registration certificate, he would not be given 
a trading licence and it would be an offence on his part if he traded without 
licence. Again, one must show the certificate if one wanted to enter the 
Transvaal from Natal, and would be arrested if one had none to show. The 
certificates had already been burnt and the line was therefore clear. The 
Indians employed both these methods. Some began to hawk without a license 
while others were arrested for not showing certificates upon entering the 
Transvaal. 
The movement was now in full swing. Everyone was on his trial. Other Natal 
Indians followed Sheth Daud Mahomed’s example. There were many arrests in 
Johannesburg also. Things came to such a pass that anyone who wished could 
get himself arrested. Jails began to be filled ‘invaders’ from Natal getting three 
months and the Transvaal hawkers anything from four days to three months and 
the Transvaal hawkers anything from four days to three months.  
Among those who thus courted arrest was our ‘Imam Saheb’, Imam Abdul Kadar 
Bavazir, who was arrested for hawking without a licence and sentenced on July 
21, 1908 to imprisonment for four days with hard labour. Imam Saheb’s health 
was so delicate that people laughed when they heard of his courting arrest. 
Some people came to me and asked me not to take Imam Saheb for fear he 
might bring discredit upon the community. I disregarded this warning. It was 
none of my business to gauge the strength or weakness of Imam Saheb. Imam 
Saheb never walked barefooted, was fond of the good things of the earth, had a 
Malay wife, kept a well-furnished house and went about in a horse carriage. 
Very true, but who could read the depths of his mind? After he was released, 
Imam Saheb went to jail again, lived there as an ideal prisoner and took his 
meals after a spell of hard labour. At home he would have new dishes and 
delicacies every day; in jail he took mealie pap and thanked God for it. Not 
only was he not defeated, but he became simple in habits. As a prisoner he 
broke stones, worked as a sweeper and stood in a line with other prisoners. At 
Phoenix he fetched water and even set types in the press. Everyone at the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 204 Phoenix ashram was bound to acquire the art of typesetting. Imam Sahib learnt 
typesetting to the best of his ability. Nowadays he is doing his bit in India. 
But there were many such who experienced self-purification in jail.  
Joseph Royeppen barrister-at-law, a graduate of Cambridge University had 
been born in Natal of parents who were indentured labourers, but had fully 
adopted the European style of living. He would not go barefooted even in his 
house, unlike Imam Sahib who must wash his feet before prayers and must also 
pray barefooted. Royeppen left his law books, took up a basket of vegetable 
and was arrested as an unlicensed hawker. He too suffered prisonment. ‘But 
should I travel third class? asked Royeppen. ‘If you travel first or second how 
can I ask any of the rest to travel third? Who in jail is going to recognize the 
barrister in you?’ I replied, and that was enough to satisfy Royeppen. 
Many lads sixteen years old went to jail. One Mohanlal Manji Ghelani was only 
fourteen. 
The jail authorities left no stone unturned to harass the Indians, who were 
given scavenger’s work, but they did it with a smile on their face. They were 
asked to break stones, and they broke stones with the name of Allah or Rama 
on their lips. They were made to dig tanks and put upon pickaxe work in stony 
ground. Their hands became hardened with the work. Some of them even 
fainted under unbearable hardships, but they did not know what it was to be 
beaten. 
One must not suppose, that there were no internal jealousies or quarrels in jail. 
Food constitutes the eternal apple of discord, but we avoided bickerings even 
over food. 
I too was arrested again. At one time there were as many as seventy-five Indian 
prisoners in Volksrust jails. We cooked our own food. I became the cook as only 
I could adjudicate on the conflicting claims to the ration supplied. Thanks to 
their love for me my companions took without a murmur the half-cooked 
porridge I prepared without sugar. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 205 Government thought that if they separated me from the other prisoners it 
might perhaps chasten me as well as the others. They therefore took me to 
Pretoria jail where I was confined in a solitary cell reserved for dangerous 
prisoners. I was taken out only twice a day for exercise. In Pretoria jail no ghi 
was provided to the Indians, unlike as in Volksrust. But I do not propose here to 
deal with our hardships in jail, for which the curious may turn to the account of 
my experiences of jail life in South Africa.  
But yet the Indians would not take a defeat. Government was in a quandary. 
How many Indians could be sent to jail after all? Then it meant additional 
expenditure. The Government began to cast about for other means of dealing 
with the situation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 206  
31. DEPORTATIONS 
The obnoxious Acts provided for three kinds of punish ment, viz., fine, 
imprisonment and deportation. The Courts were empowered simultaneously to 
award all the punishments, and all magistrates were given jurisdiction to 
impose the maximum penalties. At first deporting meant taking the ‘culprit’ 
into the limits of Natal, the Orange Free State or Portuguess East Africa beyond 
the Transvaal frontier and leaving him there. As for instance the Indians who 
crossed over from Natal were taken beyond the limits of Volksrust station and 
there left to their own devices. Deportation of this kind was a farce pure and 
simple, as it involved only a little inconvenience, and instead of disheartening 
them it only encouraged the Indians still further. 
The local Government therefore had to find out fresh means of harassing the 
Indians. The jails were already overcrowded. The Government thought that the 
Indians would be thoroughly demoralized and would surrender at discretion if 
they could be deported to India. There was some ground for this belief of the 
Government who accordingly sent a large batch of Indians to India. These 
deportees suffered great hardships. They had nothing to eat except what 
Government chose to provide for them on the steamers, and all of them were 
sent as deck passengers. Again some of them had their landed as well as other 
property and their business in South Africa, many had their families there, 
while other s were, also in debt. Not many men would be ready to lose their all 
and turn into perfect bankrupts. 
All this notwithstanding many Indians remained perfectly firm. Many more 
however weakened and ceased to court arrest, although they did not weaken to 
the extent of getting duplicates of the burnt certificates. Some few were even 
terrorized into registering afresh. 
Still there was a considerable number of stalwarts who were so brave that some 
of them, I believe, would have mounted the gallows with a smile on their face. 
And if they cared little for life, they cared still less for property. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 207 But many of those who were deported to India were poor and simple folk who 
had joined the movement from mere faith. That these should be oppressed so 
heavily was almost too much to bear. However it was difficult to see our way to 
assist them. Our funds were meagre, and then there was the danger of losing 
the fight altogether if we proceeded to give monetary help. Not a single person 
was permitted to join the movement from pecuniary inducements; for 
otherwise the movement would have been choked up by men coming in on the 
strength of such selfish hopes. We felt it was incumbent upon us, however, to 
help the deportees with our sympathies. 
I have seen from experience that money cannot go as far as fellow-feeling, kind 
words and kind looks can. If a man, who is eager to get riches, gets the riches 
from another but without sympathy, he will give him up in the long run. On the 
other hand, one who has been conquered by love is ready to encounter no end 
of difficulties with him who has given him his love. 
We therefore resolved to do for the deportees all that kindness could do. We 
comforted them with the promise that proper arrangements would be made for 
them in India. The reader must remember that many of them were ex-
indentured laboures, and had no relations in India. Some were even born in 
South Africa, and to all India was something like a strange land. It would be 
sheer cruelty if these helpless people upon being landed in India were left to 
shift for themselves. We therefore assured them that all suitable arrangements 
would be made for them in India.  
But this was not enough. The deportees could not be comforted so long as 
someone was not sent with them to be their companion and guide. This was the 
first batch of deportees, and their steamer was to start in a few hours. There 
was not much time for making a selection. I thought of P.K. Naidoo, one of my 
coworkers, and asked him : 
‘Will you escort these poor brothers to India?’ 
‘Why not?’ 
‘But the steamer is starting just now.’ Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 208 ‘Let it.’ 
‘What about your clothes? And food?’ 
‘As for clothes, the suit I have on will suffice, and I will get the food from the 
steamer all right.’ 
This was almost agreeable surprise for me. The conversation took place at Parsi 
Rustomji’s. There and then I procured some clothes and blankets for Naidoo 
and sent him on. 
‘Take care and look after these brothers on the way. See first to their comforts 
and then to your own. I am cabling to Shri Natesan at Madras, and you must 
follow his instructions.’ 
‘I will try to prove myself a true soldier.’ so saying P.K. Naidoo left for the pier. 
Victory must be certain with such valiant fighters, I said to myself. Naidoo was 
born in South Africa and had never been to India before. I gave him a letter of 
recommendation to Shri Natesan and also sent a cablegram. 
In those days Shri Natesan perhaps stood alone in India as a student of the 
grievances of Indians abroad, their valued helper, and a systematic and well-
informed exponent of their case. I had regular correspondence with him. When 
the deportees reached Madras, Shri Natesan rendered them full assistance. He 
found his task easier for the presence of an able man like Naidoo among the 
deportees. He made local collection and did not allow the deportees to feel for 
a moment that they had been deported.  
These deportations by the Transvaal Government were as illegal as they were 
cruel. People are generally unaware that governments often deliberately 
violate their own laws. In face of emergency there is no time for undertaking 
fresh legislation. Governments therefore break the laws and do what they 
please. Afterwards they either enact new laws or else make the people forget 
their breach of the law. 
The Indians started a powerful agitation against this lawlessness of the local 
government, which was adversely commented upon in India too so that the 
Government every day found it more and more difficult to deport poor Indians. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 209 The Indians took all possible legal steps and successfully appealed against the 
deportations, with the result that Government had to stop the practice of 
deporting to India. 
But the policy of deportations was not without its effect upon the Satyagrahi 
‘army’. Not all could overcome the fear of being deported to India. Many more 
fell away, and only the real fighters remained. 
This was not the only step taken by the Government to break the spirit of the 
community. As I have started in the last chapter, Government had done their 
utmost to harass the Satyagrahi prisoners, who were put to all manner of tasks 
including breaking stones. But that was not all. At first all prisoners were kept 
together. Now the Government adopted the policy of separating them, and 
accorded harsh treatment to them in every jail. Winter in the Transvaal is very 
severe; the cold is so bitter that one’s hands are almost frozen while working in 
the morning. Winter therefore was a hard time for the prisoners, some of whom 
were kept in a road camp where no one could even go and see them. One of 
these prisoners was a young Satyagrahi eighteen years old of the name of 
Swami Nagappan, who observed the jail rules and did the task entrusted to 
him. Early in the mornings he was taken to work on the roads where he 
contracted double pneumonia of which he died after he was released (July 7, 
1909). Nagappan’s companions say that he thought of the struggle and struggle 
alone till he breathed his last. He never repented of going to jail and embraced 
death for his country’s sake as he would embrace a friend. Nagappan was 
‘illiterate’ according to our standards. He spoke English and Zulu from 
experience. Perhaps he also wrote broken English, but he was by no means an 
educated man. Still if we consider his fortitude, his patience, his patriotism, his 
firmness unto death, there is nothing left which we might desire him to 
possess. The Satyagraha movement went on successfully though it was not 
joined by any highly educated men, but where would it have been without 
soldiers like Nagappan? 
As Nagappan died of ill-treatment in jail, the hardships of deportation proved 
to be the death of Narayanaswami (October 16, 1910). Still the community Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 210 stood unmoved; only weaklings slipped away. But even the weaklings had done 
their best. Let us not despise them. Those who march forward are generally apt 
to look down upon those who fall back and to consider themselves very brave 
fellows, where as often the facts are just the reverse. If a man who can afford 
to contribute fifty rupees subscribes only twenty-five and if he who can afford 
to pay only five must be held to be a more generous donor than the other who 
gives five times as much. Yet very often he who contributes twenty-five is 
needlessly elated at the false notion of his superiority over the contributor of 
five rupees. In the same way, if a man who falls back through weakness has 
done his utmost, he is really superior to another who leaves him behind but has 
not put his whole soul into the march. Therefore even those, who slipped away 
when they found things too hot for them, did render service to the community. 
A time now came when greater calls were made on our patience and courage. 
But the Transvaal Indians were not found wanting even so. The stalwarts who 
held to their posts were equal to the service required of them. 
Thus day by day the trial grew more and more severe for the Indians. 
Government became more and more violent in proportion to the strength put 
forth by the community. There are always special prisons where dangerous 
prisoners or prisoners whom Government wants to bend are kept, and so there 
were in the Transvaal. One of these was Diepkloof Convict Prison, where there 
was a harsh jailer, and where the labour exacted from prisoners was also hard. 
And yet there were Indians who successfully performed their allotted task. But 
though they were prepared to work, they would not put up with the insult 
offered to them by the jailer and therefore went on hunger strike. They 
solemnly declared that they would take no food until either the jailer was 
removed from the prison, or else they themselves were transferred to another 
prison. This was a perfectly legitimate strike. The strikers were quite honest 
and not likely to take food secretly. The reader must remember that there was 
not much room in the Transvaal for such public agitation as a case of this 
nature would evoke in India. Again jail regulations in the Transvaal were 
particularly drastic. Outsiders did not seek interviews with prisoners even on 
occasions of this nature. A Satyagrahi, when once he found himself in jail, had Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 211 generally to shift for himself. The struggle was on behalf of the poor and was 
conducted as a poor men’s movement. And therefore the vow which these 
strikers took was fraught with great risk. However, they were firm and 
succeeded in getting themselves transferred to another prison after a seven 
days’ fast. As hunger strikes were a rarity in those days, these Satyagrahis are 
entitled to special credit as pioneers (November 1910). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 212  
32. A SECOND DEPUTATION 
Thus the Satyagrahis were being imprisoned or deporte d. There was sometimes 
a lull and then a storm, but both the parties had somewhat weakened. The 
Government saw that they could not hope to subdue the Satyagrahi stalwarts 
by sending them to jail, and the policy of deportations had only put themselves 
in a false position. The Government also lost some cases which were taken to 
the courts. The Indians on their part were not in a position to put up a strong 
fight. There was not a sufficient number of Satyagrahis for the purpose. Some 
Indians were war-weary, while others had become entirely defeatist and 
therefore looked upon the staunch Satyagrahis as so many fools. The ‘fools’ 
however knew themselves to be wise and had full faith in God, in their cause 
and in the righteousness of the means they had selected to promote it. They 
were confident that great is Truth and it shall prevail in the end. 
Meanwhile, there was continuous movement in South African politics. The Boers 
and the British were anxious to secure a higher status by effecting a union of 
the various Colonies in the sub-continent. General Hertzog stood for a total 
breach of the British connection while others preferred to keep up a nominal 
association with the British Empire. Englishmen would never agree to a total 
secession, and yet higher status in view could only be attained through the 
British Parliament. The Boers and the British in South Africa therefore decided 
that a deputation should visit England on their behalf and present their case 
before the British Cabinet. 
The Indians observed that in case of a union of the colonies their last state 
would be worse than their first. All the Colonies were ever desirous of 
suppressing the Indians, and it was clear in view of their anti-Indian tendency 
that it would go very hard with the community when they came closer 
together. In order that not a single avenue might remain unexplored, the 
Indians resolved to send once again a deputation to England, although there 
was every likelihood of their small voice being drowned in the loud roar of 
British and Boer lions. On this occasion Sheth Haji Habib, a Memon gentleman Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 213 from Porbandar, was appointed as my colleague on the deputation. The Sheth 
carried on a long established trade in the Transvaal and was a man of wide 
experience. He had not received English education, yet he easily understood 
English, Dutch, Zulu and other languages. His sympathies were with the 
Satyagrahis but he could not be described as a full Satyagrahi himself. Mr. 
Meriiiman the famous veteran statesman of South Africa was our fellow-
passenger on board s.s. Kenilworth Castle, which took us to England, leaving 
Cape town on June 23, 1909. He was going with a view to the unification of the 
Colonies. General Smuts and others were already in England. A separate 
deputation of the Indians in Natal also visited England about this time in 
connection with their special grievances. 
At this time, Lord Crewe was Secretary of State for the Colonies and Lord 
Morley Secretary of State for India. There were many discussions, and we 
interviewed a large number of people. There was hardly a journalist or member 
of either House whom it was possible to meet but whom we did not meet. Lord 
Ampthill rendered us invaluable help. He used to meet Mr. Merriman, General 
Botha and others and at last he brought a message from the General. Said he: 
‘General Botha appreciates your feelings in the matter, and he willing to grant 
your minor demands. But he is not ready to repeal the Asiatic Act or to amend 
the Immigrants Restrictions Act. He also refuses to remove the colour bar which 
has been set up in the law of the land. To maintain the racial bar is a matter of 
principle with the General and even if he felt like doing away with it the South 
African Europeans would never listen to him. General Smuts is of the same 
mind as General Botha, and this is their final decision and final offer. If you ask 
for more you will only be inviting trouble for yourself as well as for your 
people. Therefore whatever you do, do it after giving due consideration to this 
attitude of the Boer leaders. General Botha has asked me to tell you this and 
give you an idea of your responsibility?’ 
And after delivering the message Lord Ampthill said, ‘You see that General 
Botha concedes all your practical demands, and in this work-a-day world we 
must always give and take. We cannot have everything that we desire. I would Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 214 therefore strongly advise you to close with this offer. If you wish to fight for 
principle’s sake, you may do so later on. You and the Sheth think over this and 
let me have your reply at your convenience.’ 
Upon hearing this I looked to Sheth Haji Habib who said, ‘Tell him from me that 
I accept General Botha’a offer on behalf of the conciliation party. If he makes 
these confessions, we will be satisfied for the present and later on struggle for 
principal. I do not like the community to suffer and more. The party I represent 
constitutes the majority of the community, and it also holds the major portion 
of the community’s wealth.’ 
I translated the Sheth’s sentences word by word, and then on behalf of the 
Satyagrahis I said: ‘We are both highly obliged to you for the trouble you have 
taken. My colleague is right when he says that he represents a numerically and 
financially stronger section. The Indians for whom I speak are comparatively 
poor and inferior in numbers, but they are resolute unto death. They are 
fighting not only for practical relief but for principle as well. If they must give 
up either of the two, they will jettison the former and fight for the latter. We 
have an idea of General Botha’s might, but we attach still greater weight to our 
pledge, and therefore we are ready to face the worst in the act of abiding by 
it. We will be patient in the confidence that if we stick to our solemn 
resolution, God in Whose name we have made it will set to its fulfillment. 
‘I can grasp your position fully. You have done much for us. We will not take it 
ill if you now withhold your support from a handful of Satyagrahis. Nor will we 
forget the debt of gratitude under which you have laid us. But we trust that you 
will excuse us for our inability to accept your advice. You may certainly tell 
General Botha how the Sheth and myself have received his offer and inform him 
that the Satyagrahis though in a minority will observe their pledge and hope in 
the end to soften his heart by their self-suffering and to induce him to repeal 
the Asiatic Act.’ 
Lord Ampthill replied: 
‘You must not suppose that I will give you up. I too must play the gentleman’s 
part. Englishmen are willing at once to relinquish any task they have Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 215 undertaken. Yours is a righteous struggle, and you are fighting with clean 
weapons. How possibly can I give you up? But you can realize my delicate 
position. The suffering, if any, must be borne by you alone, and therefore it is 
my duty to advise you to accept any settlement possible in the circumstances. 
But if you, who have to suffer, are prepared to undergo any amount of suffering 
for principle’s sake, I must not only come in your way but even congratulate 
you. I will therefore continue as President of your Committee and help you to 
the best of my ability. Btu you must remember that I am but a junior member 
of the House of Lord’s, and do not command much influence. However, you 
may be rest assured that what little influence I possess will be continually 
exerted on your behalf.’ 
We were both pleased to hear these words of encouragement. 
One delightful feature of this interview has perhaps not escaped the reader. As 
I have already observed Sheth Haji Habib and myself held divergent views, and 
yet there was such friendship and mutual confidence between us, that the 
Sheth did not hesitate to communicate his difference of opinion through me. 
He relied upon me to present his case to Lord Ampthill all right. 
I will close this chapter with a not quite relevant paragraph. During my stay in 
England I had occasion to talk with many Indian anarchists. My booklet Indian 
Home Rule written during my return voyage to South Africa on board s.s. 
Kildonan Castle (November 1909) and published soon afterwards in Indian 
Opinion had its birth from the necessity of having to meet their arguments as 
well as to solve the difficulties of Indians in South Africa who held similar 
views. I had also discussed the main points of the book with Lord Ampthill in 
order that he might not feel for one moment that I had misused his name and 
his help for my work in South Africa by suppressing my views. This discussion 
with Lord Ampthill has always remained imprinted on my memory. He found 
time to meet me in spite of illness in his family, and although he did not agree 
with my views as expressed in Hind Swaraj, he accorded his support to our 
struggle till the last, and my relations with him were always cordial. 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 216  
33. TOLSTOY FARM - I 
The deputation which now returned from England did no t bring good news. But 
I did not mind what conclusions the community world draw from our 
conversations with Lord Ampthill. I knew who would stand by us till the end. My 
ideas about Satyagraha had now matured and I had realized its universality as 
well as its excellence. I was therefore perfectly at ease. Hind Swaraj was 
written in order to demonstrate the sublimity of Satyagraha and that book is a 
true measure of my faith in its efficacy. I was perfectly indifferent to the 
numerical strength of the fighters on our side.  
But I was not free from anxiety on the score of finance. It was indeed hard to 
prosecute a long protracted struggle without funds. I did not realize them as 
clearly as I do now that a struggle can be carried on without funds, that money 
very often spoils a righteous fight and that God never gives a Satyagrahi or 
mumukshu1 anything beyond his strict needs. But I had faith in God who did not 
even then desert me but raised me from me from the slough of despondency. If 
on the one hand I had to tell the Indians on our landing in South Africa that our 
mission had failed, on the other hand God relieved me from the financial 
difficulty. As I set my foot in Cape Town I received a cable from England that 
Mr. (afterwards Sir) Ratanji Jamshedji Tata had given Rs. 25,000 to the 
Satyagraha funds. This sum amply sufficed for our immediate needs and we 
forged ahead. 
But this or even the largest possible gift of money could not by itself help 
forward Satyagraha struggle, a fight on behalf of Truth consisting chiefly in 
self-purification and self-reliance. A Satyagraha struggle is impossible without 
capital in the shape of character. As a splendid palace deserted by its inmates 
looks like a ruin, so does a man without character, all his material belongings 
notwithstanding. The Satyagrahis now saw that no one could tell how long the 
struggle would last. On the one hand there were the Boer generals determined 
not to yield even an inch of ground and on the other there was a handful of 
Satyagrahis pledged to fight unto death or victory. It was like a war between Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 217 ants and the elephant who could crush thousands of them under each of his 
feet. The Satyagrahis could not impose a time limit upon their Satyagraha. 
Whether it lasted one year or many, it was all the same to them. For them the 
struggle itself was victory. Fighting meant imprisonment or deportation for 
them. But what about their families in the meanwhile? No one would engage as 
an employee a man who was constantly going to jail and when he was released, 
how was he to maintain himself as well as those dependent on him? Where was 
he to lodge and where was his house rent to come from? Even a Satyagrahi may 
be excused if he feels troubled at heart from want of his daily bread. There 
cannot be many in the world who would fight the good fight in spite of being 
compelled to condemn their nearest and dearest to the same starvation which 
they suffered in their own person. 
Till now the families of jail-going Satyagrahis were maintained by a system of 
monthly allowances in cash according to their need. It would not have done to 
grant an equal sum to all. A Satyagrahi who had a family of five persons 
dependent upon him could not be placed on a par with another who was a 
brahmachari without any family responsibilities. Nor was it possible to recruit 
only brahamachari is for our ‘army’. The principle generally observed was, that 
only each family was asked to name the minimum amount adequate to their 
needs and was paid accordingly on trust. There was considerable room here for 
fraud, of which some rogues might not fail to take advantage. Others who were 
honest but who were accustomed to live in a particular style naturally expected 
such help as would enable them to keep it up. I saw that at this rate the 
movement could not be conducted for any length of time. There was always the 
risk of injustice being done to the unscrupulous. There was only one solution 
for this difficulty, namely, that all the families should be kept at one place and 
should become members of a sort of co-operative commonwealth. Thus there 
would be no scope for fraud, nor would there be injustice to any. Public funds 
would be largely saved and the families of Satyagrahis wouldbe trained to live a 
new and simple life in harmony with one another. Indians belonging to various 
provinces and professing diverse faiths would have an opportunity of living 
together. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 218 But where was the place suitable for a settlement of this nature? To live in a 
city would have been like straining at a gnat and swallowing a camel. The 
house rent alone would perhaps amount to the same sum as the food bill, and it 
would not be easy to live simple life amidst the varied distractions of a city. 
Again in a city it would be impossible to find a place where many families could 
prosecute useful industry in their own homes. It was therefore clear that the 
place selected should be neither too far from nor too near a city. There was of 
course Phoenix, where Indian Opinion was being printed and where there was 
some cultivation being carried on. Phoenix was convenient in many other way, 
but it was three hundred miles away from Johannesburg and to be reached by a 
journey of thirty hours. It was therefore difficult and expensive to take the 
families such a distance and bring them back again. Besides, the families would 
not be ready to leave their homes for such a far off place, and even if they 
were ready it seemed impossible to send them as well as the Satyagrahi 
prisoners on their release. 
The place required then must be in the Transvaal and near Johannesburg. Mr. 
Kallenbach, whose acquaintance the reader has already made, bought a farm of 
about 1,100 acres and gave the use of it to Satyagrahis free of any rent or 
charge(May 30, 1910). Upon the farm there were nearly one thousand fruit 
bearing trees and a small house at the foot of a hill with accommodation for 
half-a-dozen persons. Water was supplied from two wells as wells as from a 
spring. The nearest railway station, Lawley, was about a mile from the farm 
and Johannesburg was twenty-one miles distant. We decided to build houses 
upon this Farm and to invite the families of Satyagrahis to settle there. 
 
1. Pilgrim bound for the eternal city.-V.G.D  
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 219  
34. TOLSTOY FARM-II 
Upon the Farm oranges, apricots and plums grew in suc h abundance that during 
the season the Satyagrahis could have their fill of the fruit and yet have a 
surplus. 
The spring was about 500 yards away from our quarters and the water had to be 
fetched on carrying poles. 
Here we insisted that we should not have any servants either for the household 
work or as far as might be even for the farming and building operations. 
Everything therefore from cooking to scavenging was done with our own hands. 
As regards accommodation for families, we resolved from the first that the men 
and women should be housed separately. The houses therefore were to be built 
in two separately. The houses therefore were to be built in two separate 
blocks, each at some distance from the other. For the time it was considered 
sufficient to provide accommodation for ten women and sixty men.Then again 
we had to erect a house for Mr. Kallenbach and by its side a school house, as 
well as a workshop for carpentry, show making, etc.  
The settlers hailed from Gujarat, Tamilnad, Andhradesh and North India, and 
there were Hindus, Musalmans, Parsis and Christians among them. About forty 
of them were young men, two or three old men, five women and twenty to 
thirty children of whom four or five were girls. 
The Christian and other women were meat-eaters. Mr. Kallenbach and I thought 
it desirable to exclude meat from the firm. But how could we ask people, who 
had no scruples in the matter, who had been habituated to taking meat since 
childhood and who were coming over here in their days of adversity, to give up 
meat even temporarily? But if they were given meat, would not that swell our 
cost of living? Again should those who were accustomed to take beef be given 
that too? How many separate kitchens must be run in that case? What was my 
duty on this point? Having been instrumental in giving monetary help to these 
families, I had already given my support to meat-eaters as well as beef-eating. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 220 If I made a rule that meat-eaters should not be helped, I would have to 
prosecute the Satyagraha struggle through vegetarians only, which was absurd 
as the movement had been organized on behalf of all classes of Indians. I did 
not take long clearly to visualize my duty in these circumstances. If the 
Christians and Musalmans asked even for beef, that too must be provided for 
them. To refuse them admission to the Farm was absolutely of the question.  
But where love is, there God is also. The Musalman friends had already granted 
me permission to have a purely vegetarian kitchen. I had now to approach 
Christian sisters whose husbands or sons were in jail. I had often come in such 
intimate contact with the Christian friends who were now in jail and who had 
on similar occasions consented to having a vegetarian dietary.But this was the 
first time that I had to deal at close quarters with their families in their 
absence. I represented to the sisters the difficulty of housing accommodation 
as well as of finance and my own deep rooted sentiment in the matter. At the 
same time I assured them that even beef would be provided for them if they 
wanted it. The sisters kindly consented not to have meat, and cooking 
department was placed in their charge. I with or without another man was 
detailed to assist them. My presence acted as a check upon petty bickering. 
The food was to be the simplest possible. The time as well as the number of 
meals was fixed. There was to be one single Kitchen, and all were to dine in a 
single row. Everyone was to see to the cleaning of his own dish and other 
things. The common pots were to be cleaned by different parties in turn. I must 
state that Satyagrahis lived on Tolstoy Farm for a long time, but neither the 
women nor the men ever asked for meat. Drink, smoking, etc. were of course 
totally prohibited.  
As I have already stated, we wanted to be self-reliant as far as possible even in 
erecting buildings. Our architect was Mr. Kallenbach of course, and he got hold 
of a European mason. A Gujarati carpenter, Narayandas Damania, volunteered 
his services free of charge and brought other carpenters to work at reduced 
rates. As regards unskilled labour, the settlers worked with their own hands. 
Some of us who had supple limbs literally worked wonders. A fine Satyagrahi of Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 221 the name of Vihari did half of the carpenter’s work. The lion-like Thambi 
Naidoo was in charge of sanitation and marketing for which he had to go to 
Johannesburg. 
One of the settlers was Pragji Khandubhai Desai who had never been 
accustomed to discomfort all his life, but who had here to put up with bitter 
cold, a hot sun and sharp rains. In the beginning we lived in tents for about two 
months while the buildings were under construction. The structures were all of 
corrugated iron and therefore did not take long to raise. The timber too could 
be had ready-made in all sizes required. All we had to do was to cut it to 
measure. There were not many doors or windows to be prepared. Hence it was 
that quite a number of buildings could be erected within such a short space of 
time. But all this labour was a heavy tax on Pragji’s physical constitution. The 
work on the Farm was certainly harder than in jail. One day Pragji actually 
fainted thanks to fatigue and heat. But he was not the man to give in. He fully 
trained up his body here, and in the end he stood abreast as a good worker with 
the best of us. 
Then there was Joseph Royeppen a barrister free from a barrister’s pride. He 
could not undertake very hard work. It was difficult for him to take down loads 
from the railway train and to haul them on the cart, but he did it as best he 
could. 
The weak became strong on Tolstoy Farm and labour proved to be a tonic for 
all.  
Everyone had to go to Johannesburg on some errand or other. Children liked to 
go there just for the fun of it. I also had to go there on business. We therefore 
made a rule that we could go there by rail only on the public business of our 
little commonwealth, and then too travel third class. Anyone who wanted to go 
on a pleasure trip must go on foot, and carry home-made provisions with him. 
No one might spend anything on his food in the city. Had it not been for these 
drastic rules, the money saved by living in a rural locality would have been 
wasted in railway fares and city picnics. The provisions carried were of the 
simplest: home-baked bread made from coarse wheat flour ground at home, Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 222 from which the bran was not removed, groundnut butter also prepared at 
home, and home-made marmalade. We had purchased an iron hand-mill for 
grinding wheat. Groundnut butter was made by roasting and then grinding 
groundnuts, and was four times cheaper than ordinary butter. As for the 
oranges, we had plenty of them on the Farm. We scarcely used cow’s milk on 
the Farm and generally managed with condensed milk.  
But to return to the trips. Anyone who wished to go to Johannesburg went 
there on foot once or twice a week and returned the same day. As I have 
already stated, it was a journey of 21 miles and back. We savedhundreds of 
rupees by this one rule of going on foot, and those who thus went walking were 
much benefited. Some newly acquired the habit of walking. The general 
practice was that the sojourner should rise at two o’clock and start at half past 
two. He would reach Johannesburg in six to seven hours. The record for the 
minimum time taken on the journey was 4 hours 18 minutes. 
The reader must not imagine that this discipline operated upon the settlers at 
all as a hardship. On the other hand it was accepted cheerfully. It would have 
been impossible to have a single settler if force had been employed. The 
youngsters thoroughly enjoyed the work on the Farm and the errands to the 
city. It was difficult to prevent them from playing their planks while engaged in 
work. No more work was given to them than what they willingly and cheerfully 
rendered, and I never found that the work thus done was unsatisfactory either 
in quantity or in quality. 
A paragraph may be devoted to our sanitary arrangements. In spite of the large 
number of settlers, one could not find refuse of dirt anywhere on the Firm. All 
rubbish was buried in trenches sunk for the purpose. No water was permitted to 
be thrown on the roads. All waste water wascollected in buckets and used to 
water the trees. Leavings of food and vegetable refuse were utilized as 
manure. A square pit one foot and a half deep was sunk near the house to 
receive the night soil, which was fully covered with the excavated earth and 
which therefore did not give out any smell. There were no files, and no one 
would imagine that night soil had been buried there. We were thus not only Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 223 spared a nuisance but the source of possible nuisance was converted into 
invaluable manure for the Farm. If night soil was properly utilized, we would 
get manure worth lakhs of rupees and also secure immunity from a number of 
diseases. By our bad habits we spoil our scared river banks and furnish 
excellent breeding grounds for flies with the result that the very flies which 
through our criminal negligence settle upon uncovered night soil defile our 
bodies after we have bathed. A small spade is the means of salvation from a 
great nuisance. Leaving night soil, cleaning the nose or spitting on the road is 
as in against God as well as humanity, and betrays, and betrays a sad want of 
consideration for others. The man who does not cover his waste deserves a 
heavy penalty even if he lives in a forest. 
The work before us was to make the Farm a busy hive of industry, thus to save 
money and in the end to make the families self-supporting. If we achieved this 
goal, we could battle with the Transvaal Government for an indefinite period. 
We had to spend some money on shoes. The use of shoes in a hot climate is 
harmful, as all the perspiration is absorbed by the feet which thus grow tender. 
No socks were needed in the Transvaal as in India, but we thought that the feel 
must be protected against thorns, stones and the like. We therefore 
determined to learn to make sandals. There is at Marian hill near Pine town a 
monastery of German catholic monks called the Trappists, where industries of 
this nature are carried on Mr. Kallenbach went there and acquired the art of 
making sandals. After he returned, he taught it to me and I in my turn to other 
workers. Thus several young men learnt how to manufacture sandals, and we 
commenced selling them to friends. I need scarcely say that many of my pupils 
easily surpassed me in the art. Another handicraft introduced was that of 
carpentry. Having founded a sort of village we needed all manner of things 
large and small from benches to boxes, and we made them all ourselves. The 
selfless carpenters already referred to helped us for several months. Mr. 
Kallenbach was the head of the carpentry department, and as such every 
moment gave us the evidence of his mastery and exactitude. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 224 A school was indispensable for the youngsters and the children. This was the 
most difficult of our tasks and we never achieved complete success in this 
matter till the very last. The burden of teaching work was largely borne by Mr. 
Kallenbach and myself. The school could be held only in the afternoon, when 
both of us were thoroughly exhausted by our morning labour, and so were our 
pupils. The teachers therefore would often be dozing as well as the taught. We 
would sprinkle water on the eyes, and by playing with the children try to pull 
them up and to pull up ourselves, but sometimes in vain. The body 
peremptorily demanded rest and would not take a denial. But this was only one 
and the least of our many difficulties. For the classes were conducted in spite 
of these dozing. What were we to teach pupils who spoke three languages, 
Gujarati, Tamil or Telugu, and how? I was anxious to make these languages the 
medium of instruction. I knew a little Tamil but no Telugu. What could one 
teacher do in these circumstances? I tried to use some of the young men as 
teachers, but the experiment was not altogether a success. Pragji’s services 
were of course requisitioned. Some of the youngsters were very mischievous 
and lazy and were always on bad terms with their books. A teacher could not 
expect to make much headway with such pupils. Again we could not be regular 
in our teaching. Business sometimes took Mr. Kallenbach as well as me to 
Johannesburg. 
Religious teaching presented another tough problem. I would like Musalmans to 
read the Koran, and Parsis the Avesta. There were one Khoja child, whose 
father had laid upon me the responsibility of teaching him a small pothi of that 
sect. I collected books bearing on Islam and Zoroastriansim. I wrote out the 
fundamental doctrines of Hinduism according to my lights, I forget now 
whether it was for my own children or for the Tolstoy Farmers. If this document 
was now in my possession, I should have inserted it here as a landmark in my 
spiritual progress. But I have thrown away or burnt many such things in my life. 
I destroyed such papers as I felt it was not necessary to preserve them or as the 
scope of my activities was extended. I am not sorry for this, as to have 
preserved all of them would have compelled to keep cabinets and boxes, which 
would have been an eyesore to one who has taken the vow of poverty. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 225 But this teaching experiment was not fruitless. The children were saved from 
the infection of intolerance, and learnt to view one another’s religions and 
customs with a large-hearted charity. They learnt how to live together with 
blood-brothers. They imbibed the lessons of mutual service, courtesy and 
industry. And from what little I know about the late activities of some of the 
education which they received there has not been in vain. Even if imperfect, it 
was thoughtful and religious experiment, and among the sweetest 
reminiscences’ of Tolstoy Farm, the reminiscences of this teaching experiment 
are no less sweet than the rest. 
But another chapter must be devoted to these reminiscences. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 226  
35. TOLSTOY FARM - III 
In this chapter I propose to string together a number  of Tolstoy Farm 
reminiscences which are rather disjoined and for which therefore I must crave 
the reader’s indulgence. 
A teacher hardly ever had to teach the kind of heterogeneous class that fell to 
my lot, containing as it did pupils of all ages and both the sexes, from boys and 
girls of about 7 years of age to young men of twenty and young girls 12 or 13 
years old. Some of the boys were wild and mischievous. 
What was I to teach this ill-assorted group? How was I to be all things to all 
pupils? Again in what language should I talk to all for them? The Tamil and 
Telugu children knew their own mother-tongue or English and a little Dutch. I 
could speak to the only in English. I divided the class into two sections, the 
Gujarati section to be talked to in Gujarati and the rest in English. As the 
principal part of the teaching. I arranged to tell or read to them some 
interesting stories. I also proposed to bring them into close mutual contact and 
to lead them to cultivate a spirit of friendship and service. Then there was to 
be imparted some general knowledge of history and geography and in some 
cases of arithmetic. Writing was also taught, and so were some bhajans which 
formed part of our prayers, and to which therefore I tried to attract the Tamil 
children as well. 
The boys and girls met freely. My experiment of coeducation on Tolstoy Farm 
was the most fearless of its type. I dare not today allow, or train children to 
enjoy, the liberty which I had granted the Tolstoy Farm class. I have often felt 
that my mind them used to be more innocent than it is now, and that was due 
perhaps to my ignorance. Since then I have had bitter experiences, and have 
sometimes burnt my fingers badly. Persons whom I took to be thoroughly 
innocent have turned out corrupt. I have observed the roots of evil deep down 
in my own nature; and timidity has claimed me for its own.  Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 227 I do not repent having made the experiment. My conscience bears witness that 
it did not do any harm. But as a child who has burnt himself with hot milk blows 
even into when my present attitude is one of extra caution. 
A man cannot borrow faith in courage from others. The doubter is marked out 
of destruction, as the Gita puts it. My faith and courage were at their highest in 
Tolstoy Farm. I have been praying to God to permit me to re-attain that height, 
but the prayer has not yet been heard, for the number of such suppliants 
before the Great White Throne is legion. The only consolation is that God has as 
many years as there are suppliants. I therefore repose full faith in Him and 
know that my prayer will be accepted when I have fitted myself for such grace. 
This was my experiment. I sent the boys reputed to be mischievous and the 
innocent young girls to bathe in the same spot at the same time. I had fully 
explained the duty of self-restraint to the children, who were all familiar with 
my Satyagraha doctrine, I knew and so did the children, that I loved them with 
a mother’s love. The reader will remember the spring at some distance from 
the Kitchen. Was it a folly to let the children meet there for bath and yet to 
expect them to be innocent? My eye always followed the girls as a mother’s eye 
would follow a daughter. The time was fixed when all the boys and all the girls 
went together for a bath. There was an element of safety in the fact that they 
went in a body. Solitude was always avoided. Generally I also would be at the 
spring at the same time. 
All of us slept in an open verandah. The boys and the girls would spread 
themselves around me. There was hardly a distance of three feet between any 
two beds. Some care was exercised in arranging the order of the beds, but any 
amount of such care would have been futile in the case of a wicked mind. I now 
see that God alone safeguarded the honour of these boys and girls. I made the 
experiment from a belief that boys and girls could thus live together without 
harm, and the parents with their boundless faith in me allowed me to make it. 
One day one of the young men made fun of two girls, and the girls themselves 
or some child brought me the information. The news made me tremble. I made 
inquiries and found that the report was true. I remonstrated with the young Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 228 men, but that was not enough. I wished the two girls to have some sign on their 
person as a warning to every young man that no evil eye might be cast upon 
them, and as a lesson to every girl that no one dare assail their purity. The 
passionate Ravana could not so much as touch Sita with evil intent while Rama 
was thousands of miles away. What mark should the girls bear so as to give 
them a sense of security and at the same time to sterilize the sinner’s eye? This 
question kept me awake for the night. In the morning. I gently suggested to the 
girls that they might let me cut off their fine long hair. On the Farm we shaved 
and cut the hair of one another, and we therefore kept scissors and clipping 
machines. At first, the girls would not listen to me. I had already explained the 
situation to the elderly women who could not bear to think of my suggestion 
but yet quite understood my motive, and they were both of them noble girls. 
One of them is alas! now no more. She was very bright and intelligent. The 
other is living and the mistress of a house hold of her own. They came round 
after all, and at once the very hand that is narrating this incident set to cut off 
their hair. And afterwards analyzed and explained my procedure before my 
class, with excellent results, I never heard of a joke again. The girls in question 
did not lose in any case; goodness knows how much they gained. I hoped the 
young men still remember this incident and keep their eyes from sin. 
Experiments such as I have placed on record are not meant for imitation. Any 
teacher who imitated them would be incurring grave risk. I have here taken 
note of them only to show how far a man can go in certain circumstances and 
to stress the purity of the Satyagraha struggle. This very purity was a guarantee 
of its victory. Before launching on such experiments, a teacher has to be both 
father and mother to his pupils and to be prepared for all eventualities 
whatever, and only the hardest penance can fit him to conduct them.  
This act of mine was not without its effect on the entire life of the settlers on 
the Farm. As we had intended to cut down expenses to the barest minimum, we 
changed our dress also. In the cities, the Indian men including the Satyagrahis 
put on European dress. Such elaborate clothing was not needed on the Farm. 
We had all become labourers and therefore put on labourers’ dress but in the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 229 European style, viz. workingmen’s trousers and shirts, which were imitated 
from prisoners’ uniform. We all used cheap trousers and shirts which could be 
had ready made out of coarse blue cloth. Most of the ladies were good hands at 
sewing and took charge of the tailoring department. 
As far food we generally had rice, dal, vegetable and rotlis with porridge 
occasionally superadded. All this was served in a single dish, which was not 
really a dish, but a kind of bowl such as is supplied to prisoners in jail. We had 
made wooden spoons on the Farm ourselves. There were three meals in the 
day. We had bread and home-made wheaten ‘coffee’1 at six o’clock in the 
morning, rice, dal and vegetable at eleven, and wheat pap and milk, or bread 
and ‘coffee’ at half past five in the evening. After the evening meal we had 
prayers at seven or half past seven. At prayers we sang bhajans and sometimes 
had readings from the Ramayana or books on Islam. The bhajans were in 
English, Hindi and Gujarati. Sometimes we had one bhajan (Hymn) from each of 
the three languages and sometimes only one. Every one retired at 9 o’clock. 
Many observed the Ekadashi fast on the Farm. We were joined there by Shri 
P.K. Kotval who had much experience of fasting, and some of us followed him 
to keep the chaturmas. Ramzan also arrived in the meanwhile. There were 
Musalman youngsters among us, and we felt we must encourage them to keep 
the fasts. We arranged for them to have meals in the evening as well as in the 
early morning. Porridge etc. were prepared for them in the evening. There was 
no meal of course, nor did anyone ask for it. To keep the Musalman friends 
company the rest of us had only one meal a day in the evening. As a rule we 
finished our evening meal before sunset; so the only difference was that the 
others finished their supper about when the Musalman boys commenced theirs. 
These boys were so courteous that they did not put anyone to extra trouble 
although they were observing fasts, and the fact that the non-muslim children 
supported them in the matter of fasting left a good impression on all. I do not 
remember that there ever was a quarrel much less a split, between the Hindu 
and the Musalman boys on the score of religion. On the other hand I know that Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 230 although staunch in their own beliefs, they all treated one another with respect 
and assisted one another in their respective religious observances.  
Although we were living far from the amenities of city life, we did not keep 
even the commonest applications against the possible attacks of illness. I had in 
those days as much faith in the nature cure of disease as I had in the innocence 
of children. I felt that there should not be disease as we lived a simple life, but 
if there was, I was confident of dealing with it. My booklet on health is a note-
book of my experiments and of my living faith in those days. I was proud 
enough to believe that illness for me was out of the question. I held that all 
kinds of disease could be cured by earth and water treatment, fasting or 
changes in diet. There was not a single case of illness on the Farm, in which we 
used drugs or called in a doctor. There was an old man from North India 70 
years of age who suffered from asthma and cough, but whom I cured simply by 
changes in diet and water treatment. But I have now lost the courage, and in 
view of any two serious illnesses I feel that I have forfeited even the right, to 
make such experiments.  
Gokhale arrived in South Africa while we were still living on the Farm. His tour 
must be described in another chapter, but I will place here on record a half 
sweet, half bitter reminiscence. The reader has now some idea of the sort of 
life we were leading. There was no cot on the Farm, but we borrowed one of 
Gokhale. There was no room where he could enjoy full privacy. For sitting 
accommodation we had nothing beyond the benches in our school. Even so, how 
could we resist the temptation of bringing Gokhale in spite of his delicate 
health to the Farm? And how could he help seeing it, either? I was foolish 
enough to imagine that Gokhale would be able to mile and a half from the 
station to the Farm. I had asked him beforehand, and he had agreed to 
everything without bestowing any thought upon it, thanks to his simplicity and 
overwhelming confidence in me. It rained that day, as fate would have it, and I 
was not in a position suddenly to make any special arrangement. I have never 
forgotten the trouble to which I put Gokhale that day in my ignorant affection. 
The hardship was too much for him to bear and he caught a chill. We could not Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 231 take him to the kitchen and dining hall. He had been put up in Mr. kallenbach’s 
room. His dinner would get cold we brought it from the kitchen to his room. I 
prepared special soap, and kotval special bread for him, but these could not be 
taken to him hot. We managed as best we could. Gokhale uttered not a 
syllable, but I understood from his face what a fully had committed. When 
Gokhale came to know that all of us slept on the floor, he removed the cot 
which had been brought for him and had his own bed too spread on the floor. 
This whole night was a night of repentance for me. Gokhale had a rule in life, 
which seemed to me a bad rule. He would not permit anyone expect a servant 
to wait upon him. He had no servant with him during this tour. Mr. Kallenbach 
and I entreated him to let us massage his feet. But he would not let us even 
touch him, and half jocularly, half angrily said: ‘You all seem to think that you 
have born to suffer hardships and discomforts, and people like myself have 
been born to be pampered by you. You must suffer today the punishment for 
this extremism of yours. I will not let you even touch me. Do you think that you 
will go out to attend to nature’s needs and at the same time keep a commode 
for me? I will bear any amount of hardship but I will humble your pride.’ These 
words were to us like a thunderbolt, and deeply grieved Mr. Kallenbach and 
me. The only consolation was, that Gokhale wore a smile on his face all the 
while. Krishna no doubt was often deeply offended by Arjuna, ‘unknowing of 
His majesty and careless in the fondness of his love,’ but he soon forgot such 
incidents. Gokhale remembered only our will to serve, though he did not accord 
us the high privilege of serving him. The deeply affectionate letter he wrote me 
from Mombasa is still imprinted upon my heart. Gokhale bore everything 
cheerfully, but till the last never accepted the service which it was in our 
power to render. He had to take the food etc., from our hands, but that he 
could not help. 
The next morning he allowed no rest either to himself or to us. He corrected all 
his speeches which we proposed to publish in book form. When he had to write 
anything, he was in the habit of walking to and from and thinking it out. He had 
to write a small letter and I thought that he would soon have done with it. But 
no. As I twitted him upon it, he read me a little homily: ‘You do not know my Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 232 ways of life. I will not do even the least little thing in a hurry. I will think about 
it and consider the central area. I will next deliberate as to the language suited 
to the subject and then set to write. If everyone did as I do, what a huge saving 
of time would there be? And the nation would be saved from the avalanche of 
half-baked ideas which now threatens to overwhelm her.’ 
As the reminiscences of Tolstoy Farm would be incomplete without an account 
of Gokhale’s visit thereto, so would they be if I omitted to say something about 
the character and conduct of Mr. Kallenbach. It was really a wonder how he 
lived on Tolstoy farm among our people as if he were one of us. Gokhale was 
not the man to be attracted by ordinary things. But even he felt strongly drawn 
to the revolutionary change in Kallenbach’s life. Kallenbach had been brought 
up in the lap of luxury and had never known what privation was. In fact, 
indulgence had been his religion. He had had his fill of all the pleasures of life, 
and he had never hesitated to secure for his comfort everything that money 
could buy. 
It was no commonplace for such a man to live, move and have his being on 
Tolstoy farm, and to become one with the Indian settlers. This was an 
agreeable surprise for the Indians. Some Europeans classed Kallenbach either as 
a fool or a lunatic, while others honoured him for his spirit of renunciation. 
Kallenbach never felt his renunciation to be painful. In fact, he enjoyed it even 
more than he had enjoyed the pleasures of life before. He would be 
transported with rapture while describing the bliss of a simple life, and for a 
moment his hearers would be tempted to go in for it. He mixed so lovingly with 
the young as well as the old, that separation from him even for a short time 
left a clearly felt void in their lives. Mr. Kallenbach was very fond of fruit trees 
and therefore he reserved gardening as his own portfolio. Every morning he 
would engage children as well as grown-up people in tending the fruit trees. He 
would make them work hard, but he had such a cheerful temper and smiling 
face, that everyone loved to work with him. Whenever a party of tourists left 
the Farm for Johannesburg at 2 a.m., Mr. Kallanbach would always be one of 
them.  Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 233 Mr. Kallenbach and I had frequent talks on religion, which usually centered on 
fundamentals like non-violence or love, truth, and the like. When I said that it 
was a sin to kill snakes and such other animals, Mr. Kallenbach was shocked to 
hear it as well as my numerous other European friends. But in the end he 
admitted the truth of that principle in the abstract. At the very beginning of 
my intercourse with him, Mr. Kallenbach had seen the propriety and the duty of 
carrying out in practice every principle of which he was convinced 
intellectually, and therefore he had been able to effect momentous changes in 
his life without a moment’s hesitation. Now if it was improper to kill serpents 
and the like, we must cultivate their friendship, thought Mr. Kallenbach. He 
therefore first collected books on snakes in order to identify different species 
of reptiles. He there read that not all snakes are poisonous and some of them 
actually serve as protectors of field crops. He taught us all to recognize 
different kinds of snakes and at last tamed a huge cobra which was found on 
the Farm. Mr. Kallenbach fed it every day with his own hands. I gently argued 
with him: ‘Although you do all this in a friendly spirit, your friendliness may not 
be quite clear to the cobra, especially as your kindness is not unalloyed with 
fear. Neither you nor I have the courage to play with it if was free, and what 
we should really cultivate is courage of that stamp. Therefore, though there is 
friendliness, there is not love in this act of taming the cobra. Our behavior 
should be such that the cobra can see through it. We see every day that all 
animals grasp at once whether the other party loves or fears them. Again you 
do not think the cobra to be venomous, and have imprisoned it in order to 
study its ways and habits. This is a kind of self-indulgence for which there 
should be no room in the case of real friendship.’ 
My argument appealed to Mr. Kallenbach, but he could not bring himself all at 
once to release the cobra. I did not exercise any pressure upon him. I too was 
taking interest in the life of the cobra, and the children, of course, enjoyed it 
immensely. No one was allowed to harass the cobra, which however was casting 
about for some means of escape. Whether the door of the cage was 
inadvertently left open, or whether the cobra managed to open it, in a couple 
of days Mr. Kallenbach found the cage empty as he one morning proceeded to Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 234 call upon his friend. Mr. Kallenbach was glad of it and so was I. But thanks to 
this taming experiment, snakes became a frequent subject of our talk. Mr. 
Kallenbach brought to the Farm a poor and disabled German names Allbreht 
who was so hump-backed that he could not walk without supporting himself on 
a stick. Albrecht had boundless courage, and being an educated man, took deep 
interest in recondite problems. He too had become one with the Indian settlers 
and mixed freely with all. He began fearlessly to play with snakes. He would 
bring young snakes in his hand and let them play on his palm. If our stay on 
Tolstoy Farm had been further prolonged, goodness knows what would have 
been the upshot of Albrecht’s adventures. 
As a result of these experiments we did not fear snakes as much as we 
otherwise might have, but it must not be supposed that no one on the Farm 
feared serpents or that there was a total prohibition against killing them. To 
have a conviction that there is violence or sin in a certain course of conduct is 
one thing; to have the power of acting up to that conviction is quite another. A 
person who fears snakes and who is not ready to resign his own life cannot 
avoid killing snakes in case of emergency. I remembered one such incident, 
which occurred on the Farm. The reader must already have seen that the Farm 
was pretty well infested with snakes. There was no human population on the 
Farm when we occupied it, and it had been in this deserted condition for some 
time. One day a snake was found in Mr. Kallenbach’s own room at such a place 
that it seemed impossible to drive it away or to catch it. One of the students 
saw it, and calling me there, asked me what was to be done. He wanted my 
permission, to kill it. He could have killed it without such permission, but the 
settlers, whether students or others, would not generally take such a step 
without consulting me. I saw that it was my duty to permit the student to kill 
the snake, and I permitted him. Even as I am writing this, I do not feel that I 
did anything wrong in granting the permission. I had not the courage to seize 
the serpent with the hand or otherwise to remove the danger to the settlers, 
and I have not cultivated such courage to this day.  Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 235 Needless to say, there was on the farm an ebb and flow of Satyagrahis, some of 
whom would be expecting to go to prison while others had been released from 
it. Once it so happened that there arrived at the Farm two Satyagrahis who had 
been released by the Magistrate on personal recognizance and who had to 
attend the court the next day to receive the sentence. They were engrossed in 
talk, while time was up for the last train they must catch, and it was a question 
whether they would succeed in taking that train. They were both young men 
and good athletes. They ran for all that they were worth along with some of us 
who wanted to see them off. While still on the way, I heard the whistle of the 
train as it steamed into the station. When there was a second whistle indicating 
its departure, we had reached the precincts of the station. The young men 
increased their speed every moment, and I lagged behind them. The train 
started. Fortunately, the station master saw them running up and stopped the 
moving train, thus enabling them to take it after all. I tendered my thanks to 
the station master when I reached the station. Two points emerge out of this 
incident; first, the eagerness of the Satyagrahis in seeking jail and in fulfilling 
their promises, and secondly, the sweet relations cultivated by the Satyagrahis 
with the local officers. If the young men had missed that train, they could not 
have attendedthe court the next day. No surety had been required of them, nor 
had they been asked to deposit any money with the court. They had been 
released only on the word of gentlemen. The Satyagrahis had acquired such 
prestige that magistrates did not think necessary to ask them for bail as they 
were courting jail. The young Satyagrahis therefore were deeply pained at the 
prospect of missing the train, and ran as swiftly as the wind. At the 
commencement of the struggle Satyagrahis were somewhat harassed by 
officials, and the jail authorities in some places were unduly severe. But as the 
movement advanced we found that the bitterness of the officials was softened 
and in some cases even changed to sweetness. And where there was long 
continued intercourse with them, they even began to assist is like the station 
master I have referred to. The reader must not imagine that Satyagrahis bribed 
these officials in any shape or form in order to secure amenities from them. 
The Satyagrahis never thought of purchasing such irregular facilities. But where Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 236 facilities were offered through courtesy, they were freely accepted, and the 
Satyagrahis had been enjoying such facilities in many places. If a station master 
is ill-disposed, he can harass passengers in a variety of ways, keeping himself 
all the while within the four corners of the rules and regulations. No complaint 
can be preferred against such harassment. On the other hand of if the official is 
well disposed, he can grant many facilities without violating the rules. All such 
facilities we had been able to secure from the stationmaster, Lawler, and the 
because of the courtesy, the patience and the capacity for self-suffering of the 
Satyagrahis. 
It will not perhaps be amiss here to take note of an irrelevant incident. I have 
been fond for about the last thirty-five years of making experiments in dietetics 
from the religious, economic and hygienic standpoints. This predilection for 
food reform still persists. People around me would naturally be influenced by 
my experiments. ‘Side by side with dietetics, I made experiments in treating 
diseases with natural curative agents only such as earth and water and without 
recourse to drugs. When I practiced as barrister, cordial relations were 
established with my clients so that we looked upon one another almost as 
members of the same family. The clients therefore made me a partner in their 
joys and sorrows. Some of them sought my advice being familiar with my 
experiments in nature cure. Stray patients of this class would sometimes arrive 
at Tolstoy Farm. One of these was Lutavan, an aged client who first came from 
North India as an indentured labourer. He was over seventy years old and 
suffered from chronic asthma and cough. He had given long trials to vaidyaas’ 
powders and doctors’ mixtures. In those days I had boundless faith in the 
efficacy of my indeed to treat him but to try my experiments upon him if he 
lived on the farm and observed all my conditions. Lutavan complied with my 
conditions. One of these was that he should give up tobacco to which he was 
strongly addicted. I made him fast for 24 hours. At noon every day I 
commenced giving him a kuhne bath in the sun, as the weather then was not 
extra warm. For food he had a little rice, some olive oil, honey, and along with 
honey, porridge and sweet oranges sometimes and at other times grapes and 
wheaten coffee. Salt and all condiments whatever were avoided. Lutavan slept Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 237 in the same building as myself but in the inner apartment. For bed everyone 
was given two blankets, one for spreading and the other for covering purposes, 
and a wooden pillow. A week passed. There was an accession of energy in 
Lutavan’s body. His asthma and cough gave less trouble, but he had more fits 
at night than by day. I suspected he was smoking secretly, and I asked him if he 
did. Lutavan said he did not. A couple of days passed and as still there was no 
improvement, I determined to watch Lutavan secretly. Everyone slept on the 
floor, and the place was full of snakes. Mr. Kallenbach had therefore given me 
an electric torch and kept one himself. I always slept with this torch by my 
side. One night I resolved to lie in the bed awake. My bed was spread on the 
verandah just near the door. Lutavan slept inside but also near the door. 
Lutavan coughed at midnight, lighted a cigarette and began to smoke. I slowly 
went up to his bed and switched on the torch. Lutavan understood everything 
and became nervous. He ceased smoking, stood up and touched my feet. ‘I 
have done a great wrong,’ he said. ‘I will never smoke again henceforth. I have 
deceived you. Please excuse me.’ So saying he almost began to sob. I consoled 
him and said that it was in his interest not to smoke. His cough should have 
been cured according to my calculations, and when I found that he was still 
suffering from it, I had suspected that he was smoking secretly. Lutavan gave 
up smoking. His asthma and cough grew less severe in two or three days, and in 
a month he was perfectly cured. He was now full of vigour and took his leave of 
us. 
The station master’s son, a child of two years, had an attack typhoid. This 
gentleman too knew about my curative methods, and sought my advice. On the 
first day I gave the child no food at all, and from the second day onwards only 
half a banana well mashed with a spoonful of olive oil and a few drops of sweet 
orange juice. At night I applied a cold mud poultice to the child’s abdomen, 
and in this case too my treatment was successful. It is possible that the 
doctor’s diagnosis was not a case of typhoid. 
I made many such experiments on the Farm, and I do not remember to have 
failed in even a single case. But today I would not venture to employ the same Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 238 treatment. I would now shudder to have to give banana and olive oil in a case 
of typhoid. In 1918, I had an attack of dysentery myself and I failed to cure it. 
And I cannot say to this very day, whether it is due to my want of self-
confidence or to the difference in climate that the same treatment which was 
effective in South Africa Is not equally successful in India. But this I know that 
the home treatment of disease and the simplicity of our life on Tolstoy farm 
were responsible for a saving of at least two to three lakhs of public money. 
The settlers learned to look upon one another as members of the same family, 
the Satyagrahis secured a pure place of refuge, little scope was left for 
dishonesty or hypocrisy and the wheat was separated from the tares. The 
dietetic experiments thus far detailed were made from a hygienic standpoint, 
but I conducted a most important experiment upon myself which was purely 
spiritual in its nature. 
I had pondered deeply and read widely over the question whether as 
vegetarians we had any right to take milk. But when I was living on the farm, 
some book or newspaper fell into my hands, in which I read about the inhuman 
treatment accorded to cows in Calcutta in order to extract the last drop of milk 
from them, and came across a description of the cruel and terrible process of 
phuka. I was once discussing with Mr. Kallenbach the necessity for talking milk, 
and in course of the discussion, I told him about this horrible practice, pointed 
out several other spiritual advantages flowing from the rejection of milk, and 
observed that it was desirable to give up milk it was possible. Mr. Kallenbach 
with his usual spirit of a knight-errant was ready at once to launch upon the 
experiment of doing without milk, as he highly approved of my observations. 
The same day both he and I gave up milk, and in the end we came to restrict 
ourselves to a diet of fresh and dried fruit, having eschewed all cooked food as 
well. I may not here go into the later history of this experiment or tell how it 
ended, but I may say this, that during five years of a purely fruitarian life I 
never felt weak, nor did I suffer from any disease. Again during the same period 
I possessed the fullest capacity for bodily labour, so much so that one day I 
walked 55 miles on foot, and 40 miles was an ordinary day’s journey for me. I 
am firmly of opinion that this experiment yielded excellent spiritual results. It Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 239 was always been a matter of regret for me that I was compelled somewhat to 
modify my fruitarian diet, and if I were free from my political preoccupations, 
even at this age of my life and at a risk to my body I would revert to it today 
further to explore its spiritual possibilities. The lack of spiritual insight in 
doctors and vaidyas has also been an obstacle in my path. 
But I must now close this chapter of pleasant and important reminiscences. 
Such dangerous experiments could have their place only in a struggle of which 
self-purification was the very essence. Tolstoy Farm proved to be a centre of 
spiritual purification and penance for the final campaign. I have serious doubts 
as to whether the struggle could have been prosecuted for eight years, whether 
we could have secured larger funds, and whether the thousands of men who 
participated in the last phase of the struggle would have borne their share in it, 
if there had been no Tolstoy Farm. Tolstoy Farm was never placed in the 
limelight, yet an institution which deserved in attracted public sympathy to 
itself. The Indians saw that the Tolstoy Farmers were doing what they looked 
upon in the light of hardship. This public confidence was a great asset to the 
movement when it was organized afresh on a large scale in 1913. One can never 
tell whether such assets give an account of themselves, and if yes, when. But I 
do not entertain and would ask the reader not to entertain, a shadow of a 
doubt that such latent assets do in God’s good time become patent. 
 
1. A harmless and nutritious substitute for tea, coffee or cocoa can be prepared as 
follows. Even connoisseurs of coffee have failed to perceive any difference in taste 
between coffee and this substitute. Bake well-cleaned wheat on the fire, until it has 
turned quite red and begun to grow dark in colour. Then powder it like coffee. Take a 
spoonful of this powder in a cup and pour boiling water over it. Preferably keep it over the 
fire for a minute, and add milk and sugar to taste, but it can be taken without them also’ 
from the author’s Gujarati booklet on health, Chapter V. Indian Opinion, XI-10, March 8, 
1913. 
V.G.D. 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 240  
36. GOKHALE’S TOUR 
Thus the Satyagrahis were pursuing the even tenor of their life on Tolstoy 
Fa
rm, and preparing for whatever the future had in store for them. They did 
not know, nor did they care, when the struggle would end. They were only 
under one pledge namely to refuse submission to the Black Act and to suffer 
whatever hardships were involved in such disobedience. For a fighter the fight 
itself is victory for he takes delight in it alone. And as it rests with him to 
prosecute the fight, he believes that victory or defeat, pleasure or pain, 
depends upon himself. There is no such word in his dictionary as pain or defeat. 
In the words of the Gita, pleasure and pain, victory and defeat are the same to 
him. 
Stray Satyagrahis now and then went to jail. But when there was no occasion 
for going to jail, anyone who observed the external activities of the Farm could 
hardly believe that Satyagrahis were living there or that they were preparing 
for a struggle. When a sceptic happened to visit the farm, if a friend he would 
pity us, and if a critic he would censure us. ‘These fellows,’ he would remark, 
‘have grown lazy and are therefore eating the bread of idleness in this secluded 
spot. Thus are sick of going to jail and are therefore enjoying themselves in this 
fruit garden away from the din and roar of cities.’ How could it be explained to 
this critic that a Satyagrahi cannot go to jail by violating the moral law, that his 
preparation for ‘war’ , and that the Satyagrahi, bestowing no thought on human 
help, relies upon God as his sole refuge? Finally there happened, or God 
brought to pass, events which no one had expected. Help also arrived which 
was equally unforeseen. The ordeal came all unexpected and in the end there 
was achieved a tangible victory which he who ran could read. 
I had been requesting Gokhale and other leaders to go to South Africa and to 
study the condition of the Indian settlers on the spot. But I doubted whether 
any of them would really come over. Mr. Ritch had been trying to have some 
Indian leader visit the subcontinent. But who would dare to go when the 
struggle was at a very low ebb? Gokhale was in England in 1911. He was a Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 241 student of the struggle in South Africa. He had initiated debates in the 
Legislative Council of India and moved a resolution (February 25, 1910) in 
favour of prohibiting the recruitment of indentured labour for Natal, which was 
carried. I was in communication with him all along. He conferred with the 
Secretary of State for India and informed him of his intention to proceed to 
South Africa and acquaint himself with the facts of the case at first hand. The 
minister approved of Gokhale’s mission. Gokhale wrote to me asking me to 
arrange programme for a six weeks’ tour and indicating the latest date when he 
must leave South Africa. We were simply overjoyed. No Indian leader had been 
to South Africa before or for that matter to any other place outside Indian 
where Indians had emigrated, with a view to examine their condition. We 
therefore realized the importance of the visit of a great leader like Gokhale 
and determined to accord him a reception which even princes might envy and 
to take him to the principal cities of South Africa. Satyagrahis and other Indians 
alike cheerfully set about making grand preparations of welcome. Europeans 
were also invited to join and did generally join the reception. We also resolved 
that public meetings should be held in Town Halls wherever possible and the 
Mayor of the place should generally occupy the chair if he consented to do so. 
We undertook to decorate the principal stations on the railway line and 
succeeded in securing the necessary permission in most cases. Such permission 
is not usually granted. But our grand preparations impressed the authorities, 
who evinced as much sympathy in the matter as they could. For instance, in 
Johannesburg alone the decorations at Park station took us about a fortnight, 
including, as they did, a large ornamental arch of welcome designed by Mr. 
Kallenbach. 
In England itself Gokhale had a foretaste of what South Africa was alike. The 
secretary of State for India had informed the Union Government of Gokhale’s 
high rank, his position in the Empire, etc. But who would think of booking his 
passage or reserving a good cabin for him? Gokhale had such delicate health 
that he needed a comfortable cabin where he could enjoy some privacy. The 
authorities of the Steamship Company roundly stated that there was no such 
cabin. I do not quite remember whether it was Gokhale or some friend of his Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 242 who informed the India Office about this. A letter was addressed from the India 
office to the directors of the Company and the best cabin was placed at 
Gokhale’s disposal while none was available before. Good came out of this 
initial evil. The captain of the steamer received instructions to treat Gokhale 
well, and consequently he had a happy and peaceful voyage to South Africa. 
Gokhale was as jolly and humorous as he was serious. He participated in the 
carious games and amusements on the steamer, and thus became very popular 
among his fellow-passengers. The Union Government offered Gokhale their 
hospitality during his stay at Pretoria and placed the State railway saloon at his 
disposal. He consulted me on the point and then accepted the offer.  
Gokhale landed at Cape Town on October 22, 1912. His health was very much 
more delicate than I had expected. He restricted himself to a particular diet, 
and he could not endure much fatigue. The programme I had framed was much 
too heavy for him, and therefore cut it down as far as possible. I deeply 
repented of my folly in drawing up an onerous programme without consulting 
him. Some changes were made, but much had to be left as it was. I had not 
grasped the necessity of securing absolute privacy for Gokhale, and I had the 
greatest difficulty in securing it. Still I must in all humility state in the interests 
of truth that as I was fond of and proficient in waiting upon the sick and the 
elderly,, as soon as I had realized my folly I revised all the arrangements so as 
to be able to give Gokhale great privacy and peace. I acted as his secretary 
throughout the tour. The volunteers, one of whom was Mr. Kallenbach, were 
wide awake, and I do not think Gokhale underwent any discomfort or hardship 
for want of hardship for want of help. It was clear that we should have a great 
meeting in Cape Town. I have already written about the Schreiners. I requested 
Senetar W. P. Schreiner, the head of that illustrious family, to take the chair on 
the occasion and he was good enough to consent. There was a big meeting 
attended by a large number of Indians and Europeans. Mr. Schreiner welcomed 
Gokhale in well-chosen words and expressed his sympathy with the Indians of 
South Africa. Gokhale made a speech, concise, full of sound judgement, from 
but courteous, which pleased the Indians and fascinated the Europeans. In fact Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 243 Gokhale won the hearts of the variegated people of South Africa on the very 
day that he set foot on South African soil. 
From Cape Town Gokhale was to go Johannesburg by a railway journey of two 
days. The Transvaal was the field of battle. As we went from Cape Town, the 
first large frontier station of the Transvaal was Klerksdorp. As each of these 
places had a considerable population of Indians, Gokhale had to stop and 
attend a meeting at Klerksdorp, as well as at the intermediate stations of 
Potchefstroom and Krugersdorp, between Klerksdorp and Johannesburg. He 
therefore left Klerksdorp by a special train. The Mayors of these places 
presided at the meetings, and at none of the stations did the train halt longer 
than one or two hours. The train reached Johannesburg punctually to the 
minute. On the platform there was a dais specially erected for the occasion and 
covered with rich carpets. Along with other Europeans there was present Mr. 
Ellis the Mayor of Johannesburg who placed his car at Gokhale’s disposal during 
his stay in the Golden City. An address was presented to Gokhale on the station 
itself. Addresses had of course been presented to him everywhere. The 
Johannesburg address was engraved on a solid heart-shaped plate of gold form 
the Rand mounted on Rhodesian teak. On the plate was a map of India and 
Ceylon and It was flanked on either side by two gold tablets, one bearing an 
illustration of the Taj Mahal and the other a characteristic Indian scene. Indian 
scences were also beautifully carved on the wood work. Introducing all present 
to Gokhale, reading the address, the reply, and receiving other addresses which 
were taken as read, all this did not take more than twenty minutes. The 
address was short enough to be read in five minutes. Gokhale’s reply did not 
occupy more than another five minutes. The volunteers maintained such 
excellent order, that there were no more persons on the platform than it was 
expected easily to accommodate. There was no noise. There was a huge crowd 
outside; yet no one was at all hampered in coming and going. 
Gokhale was put up in a fine for use belonging to Mr. Kallenbach perched on a 
hill-top five miles from Johannesburg. Gokhale liked the place immensely as 
the scenery there was pleasant, the atmosphere soothing, and the house Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 244 through simple was full of art. A special office was hired in the city for Gokhale 
to receive all visitors, where there were three rooms, a private chamber for 
Gokhale, a drawing room, and a waiting room for visitors. Gokhale was taken to 
make private calls upon some distinguished men in the city. A private meeting 
of leading Europeans was organized so as to give Gokhale a thorough 
understanding of their standpoint. Besides this, a banquet was held in 
Gokhale’s honour to which were invited 400 persons including about 150 
Europeans. Indians were admitted by tickets, costing a guinea each, an 
arrangement which enabled us to meet the expenses of the banquet. The menu 
was purely vegetarian and there were no wines. The cooking was attended to 
by volunteers. It is difficult to give an adequate idea of this here. Hindus and 
Musalmans in South Africa do not observe restrictions as to inter dinning. But 
the vegetarians do not take meat. Some of the Indians were Christians, with 
whom I was as intimate as with the rest. These Christians are mostly the 
descendants of indentured labourers and many of them make their living by 
serving in hotels as waiters. It was with the assistance of these latter that 
culinary arrangements could be made on such a large scale with about 15 items 
on the bill of fare. It was a novel and wonderful experience for the Europeans 
of South Africa to sit at dinner with so many Indians on the same table, to have 
a purely vegetarian menu and to do without wines altogether. For many of 
them all the three features were new while two features were new for all.  
To this gathering Gokhale addressed his longest and most important speech in 
South Africa. In preparing this speech, he subjected us to a very full 
examination. He declared that it had been his lifelong practice not to disregard 
the standpoint of local men and even to try to meet it as far as it was to put 
this on paper and undertake not to be offended even if he did not utilize a 
single word or idea from my draft, which should be neither too short nor too 
long, and yet which should not omit a single point of any consequence. I may 
say at once that Gokhale did not make any use of my language at all. Indeed I 
would never expect such a master of the English language as Gokhale adopted 
my ideas into his utterances. Indeed Gokhale’s train of thought was such, that 
one could never tell whether or not any room had there been allowed to one’s Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 245 own ideas. I listened to every speech made by Gokhale, but I do not remember 
a single occasion when I could have wished that he had not expressed a certain 
idea or had omitted a certain adjective. The cleanness, firmness and urbanity 
of Gokhale’s utterances flowed from his indefatigable labour and unswerving 
devotion to truth. 
In Johannesburg we also had to hold a mass meeting of Indians only. I have 
always insisted on speaking either in the mother tongue or else in Hindustani, 
the lingua franca of India, and thanks to this insistence, I have had much 
facility in establishing close relations with the Indians in South Africa. I was 
therefore anxious that Gokhale too should speak to the Indians in Hindustani. I 
was aware of Gokhale’s views on the subject. Broken Hindi would not do for 
him, and therefore he would speak either in Marathi or in English. It seemed 
artificial to him to speak in Marathi in South Africa and even if he did speak in 
Marathi, his speech would have to be translated into Hindustani for the benefit 
of Gujarati and North Indian members of the audience. And that being so, 
where was the harm if he spoke in English? Fortunately for me, I had one 
argument which Gokhale would accept as conclusive in favour of his making a 
Marathi speech. There were many Konkani Musalmans as well as a few 
Maharashtra Hindus in Johannesburg, all of whom were cager to hear Gokhale 
to speak Marathi, and who had asked me to request Gokhale to speak in their 
mother tongue. I told Gokhale that these friends would be highly pleased if he 
spoke in Marathi and I would translate his Marathi into Hindustani. Gokhale 
burst into laughter and said, ‘I have quite fathomed your knowledge of 
Hindustani, an accomplishment upon which you cannot exactly be 
congratulated. But now you propose to translate Marathi and Hindustani. May I 
know where you acquired such profound knowledge of Marathi?’ I replied, 
‘What is true of my Hindustani is equally true of my Marathi. I cannot speak a 
single word of Marathi, but I am confident of gathering the purport of your 
Marathi speech on a subject, which I am familiar. In any case you will see that I 
do not misinterpret you to the people. There are others well versed in Marathi, 
who could act as your interpreters. But you will not perhaps approve of such 
arrangement. So please bear with me and do speak in Marathi. I too am Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 246 desirous of hearing of your Marathi speech in common with the Konkani friend.’ 
‘You will always have your own way,’ said Gokhale. ‘And there is no help for 
me as I am here at your mercy.’ So saying Gokhale fell in with my suggestion, 
and from this point onwards right up to Zanzibar he always spoke in Marathi at 
similar meetings and I served as translator by special appointment to him. I do 
not know if I was able to bring Gokhale round to the view, that rather than 
speak in perfect idiomatic English it was more desirable to speak as far as may 
be in the mother tongue and even in broken Hindi. But I do know that if only to 
please me, he spoke in Marathi in South Africa. After he had made some 
speeches, I could see that he too was gratified by the results of the 
experiments. Gokhale by his conduct on many occasions in South Africa showed 
that there was merit in pleasing one’s followers in cases not involving a 
question of principle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 247  
37. GOKHALE’S TOUR  
(
Conducted)  
After Johannesburg Gokhale visited Natal and then proceeded to Pretoria, 
where he was put up by the Union Government at the Transvaal Hotel. Here he 
was to meet the ministers of the Government, including General Botha and 
General Smuts. It was my usual practice to inform Gokhale of all engagements 
fixed for the day, early in the morning or on the previous evening if he so 
desired. The coming interview with the Union ministers was a most important 
affair. We came to her conclusion that I should not go with Gokhale, nor indeed 
even offer to go. My presence would raise a sort of barrier between Gokhale 
and the ministers, who would be handicapped in speaking out without any 
reserve about what they considered to be the mistakes of the local Indians 
including my own. Then again they could not with an easy mind make any 
statement of future policy if they wished to make it. As for all these reasons 
Gokhale must go alone, it added largely to his burden of responsibility. What 
was to be done if Gokhale inadvertently committed some mistake of fact, or if 
he had nothing to say as regards some fact which had not been first brought to 
his notice, but which was first put to him by the ministers, or if he was called 
upon to accept some arrangement on behalf of the Indians in theabsence of any 
one of their responsible leaders? But Gokhale resolved this difficulty at once. 
He asked me to prepare a summary historical statement of the condition of the 
Indians up to date, and also to put down in writing how far they were prepared 
to go. And Gokhale said that he would admit his ignorance if anything outside 
its ‘brief’ cropped up at the interview, and ceased to worry. If now only 
remained for me to prepare the statement and for him to read it. However it 
was impossible for me to narrate the vicissitudes of the Indians’ history in four 
Colonies ranging over a period of 18 years except by writing ten or twenty 
pages at the least, and there was hardly left any time for Gokhale to look over 
it. Again there would be many questions he would like to put us after reading 
the paper. But Gokhale had an infinite capacity for taking pains as he had an Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 248 exceptionally sharp memory. He kept himself and others awake the whole 
night, posted himself fully on every point, and went over the whole ground 
again in order to make sure that he had rightly understood everything. He was 
at last satisfied. As for me I never had any fears. 
Gokhale’s interview with the ministers lasted for about two hours, and when he 
returned, he said, ‘You must return to India in a year. Everything has been 
settled. The Black Act will be repealed. The racial bar will be removed from 
the emigration law. The three pound tax will be abolished.’ ‘I doubt it very 
much,’ I replied. ‘You do not know the ministers as I do. Being an optimist 
myself, I love your optimism, but having suffered frequent disappointments. I 
am not as hopeful in the matter as you are. But I have no fears either. It is 
enough for me that you obtained this undertaking from the ministers. It is my 
duty to fight it out only where it is necessary and to demonstrate that ours is a 
righteous struggle. The promise given to you will serve as a proof of the justice 
of our demands and will redouble our fighting spirit it comes to fighting after 
all. But I do not think you can return to India in a year and before many more 
Indians have gone to jail.’ 
Gokhale said: ‘What I have told you is bound to come to pass. General Botha 
promised me that Black Act would be repealed and the three-pound tax 
abolished. You must return to India within twelve months, and I will not have 
any of your excuses.’ 
During his visit to Natal Gokhale came in contact with many Europeans in 
Durban Maritzburg and other places. He also saw the diamond mines in 
Kimberley, where as well as at Durban public dinners were arranged by the 
reception committees, and attended by many Europeans. Thus having achieved 
a conquest of Indian as well as Europeans hearts, Gokhale left South Africa on 
November 17, 1912. At his wish Mr. Kallenbach and I accompanied him as far as 
Zanzibar. On the steamer we had arranged to have suitable food for him. On his 
way back to India he was given an ovation at Delagoa Bay, Inhambane, Zanzibar 
and other ports. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 249 On the steamer our talks were confined to India or to the duty we owed to the 
motherland. Every word of Gokhale glowed with his tender feeling, truthfulness 
and patriotism. I observed that even in the games which he played on board the 
steamer Gokhale had a patriotic motive rather than the mere desire to amuse 
himself, and excellence was his aim there too. 
On the steamer we had ample time to talk to our heart’s content. In these 
conversations Gokhale prepared me for India. He analyzed for me the 
characters of all the leaders in India and his analyses was so accurate, that I 
have hardly perceived any difference between Gokhale’s estimate and my own 
personal experience of them. 
There are many sacred reminiscences of mine relating to Gokhale’s tour in 
South Africa which could be set down here. But I must reluctantly check my pen 
as they are not relevant to a history of Satyagraha. The parting at Zanzibar was 
deeply painful to Kallenbach and me, but remembering that the most intimate 
relations of mortal men must come to an end at last, we somehow reconciled 
ourselves, and hoped that Gokhale’s prophecy would come true and both of us 
would be able to go to India in a year’s time. But that was not to be. 
However, Gokhale’s visit to South Africa stiffened our resolution, and the 
implications and the importance of his tour were better understood when the 
struggle was renewed in an active form. If Gokhale had not come over to South 
Africa, if he had not seen the Union ministers, the abolition of the three pound 
tax could not have been made a plank in our platform.  
If the Satyagraha struggle had closed with the repeal of the Black Act, a fresh 
fight would have been necessary against the three pound tax, and not only 
would the Indians have come in for endless trouble, but it was doubtful 
whether they would have been ready so soon for a new and arduous campaign. 
It was incumbent upon the free Indians to have the tax abolished. All 
constitutional remedies to that end had been applied but in vain. The tax was 
being paid ever since 1895. But when a wrong, no matter how flagrant, has 
continued for a long period of time, people get habituated to it, and it 
becomes difficult to rouse them to a sense of their duty to resist it, and no less Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 250 difficult to convince the world that it is a wrong at all. The undertaking given 
to Gokhale cleared the way for the Satyagrahis. The Government must repeal 
the tax in terms of their promise, and if they did not, their breach of pledge 
would be a most cogent reason for continuing the struggle. And this was exactly 
what happened. Not only did the government not abolish the tax within a year, 
but they declared in so many words that It could not be removed at all. 
Gokhale’s tour thus not only helped us to make the three pound one of the 
targets of our Satyagraha, but it led to his being recognized as a special 
authority on the South African question. His views on South Africa now carried 
greater weight, thanks to his personal knowledge of the Indians in South Africa, 
and he understood himself and could explain to India what steps the mother 
country ought to adopt. When the struggle was resumed, India rendered 
munificent help to the Satyagraha funds and Lord Hardinge heartened the 
Satyagrahis by expressing his ‘deep and burning’ sympathy for them 
(December1913). Messrs Andrews and Pearson came to South Africa from India. 
All this would have been impossible without Gokhale’s mission.  
The breach of the ministers’ pledge and its consequences will be the subject of 
the next chapter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 251  
38. BREACH OF PLEDGE 
In prosecuting the Satyagraha struggle the Indians we re very careful not to take 
a single step not warranted by their principles, and they always remembered 
that they should not take any illegitimate advantage over the Government. For 
instance, as the Black Act was restricted in its application to Indians in the 
Transvaal, only the Transvaal Indians were admitted as recruits in the struggle. 
Not only was there no attempt made to obtain recruits from Natal, the Cape 
Colony etc., but offers from outside the Transvaal were politely refused. The 
struggle also was limited to a repeal of the Act in question. This limitation was 
understood neither by the Europeans nor by Indians. In the early stages, the 
Indians were every now and then asking for the grievances besides the Black 
Act to be covered by the struggle. I patiently explained to them that such 
extension would be a violation of the truth, which could not be so much as 
thought of in a movement professing to abide by truth and truth alone. In a 
pure fight the fighters would never go beyond the objective fixed when the 
fight began even if they received as accession to their strength in the course of 
fighting, and on the hand, they could not give up their objective if they found 
their strength dwindling away. This twofold principle was fully observed in 
South Africa. The strength of the community, upon which we counted in 
determining our goal at the commencement of the struggle, did not answer our 
expectations as we have already seen, and yet the handful of Satyagrahis who 
remained stuck to their posts. Fighting thus singlehanded in the face of odds 
was comparatively easy, but it was more difficult, and called for the exercise 
of greater self-restraint, not to enlarge one’s objective when one had received 
large reinforcement. Such temptations often faced us in South Africa but, I can 
emphatically declare that we did not succumb to them in any single case. And 
therefore I have often said that a Satyagrahi has a single objective from which 
he cannot recede and beyond which he cannot advance, which can in fact be 
neither augmented nor abridged. The world learns to apply to a man the 
standards, which he applies to himself. When the Government saw, that the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 252 Satyagrahis claimed to follow these fine principles, they began to judge the 
conduct of the Satyagrahis in the light of those principles, although they 
themselves were apparently not bound by any principle whatever, several times 
charged the Satyagrahis with a violation of their principles. Even a child can 
see that if fresh anti-Indian legislation was enacted after the Black Act, it must 
be included in the Satyagraha programme. And yet when fresh restrictions were 
imposed on Indian immigration and necessitated an extension on our 
programme, the Government leveled against us the totally underserved charge 
of raising fresh issues. If new restraints were placed on Indian new comers, we 
must have the right to recruit them for the movement, and hence Sorabji and 
other entered the Transvaal, as we have already seen. Government could not 
tolerate this at all, but I had no difficulty in persuading impartial people about 
the propriety of the step. Another such occasion arose after Gokhale’s 
departure. Gokhale supposed that the three pound tax would be taken off in a 
year and the necessary legislation would be introduced in the next ensuing 
session of the Union Parliament. Instead of this, General Smuts from his seat in 
the House of Assembly said that as the Europeans in Natal objected to the 
repeal of the tax, the Union Government were unable to pass legislation 
directing its removal, which however was not the case. The members from 
Natal by themselves could do nothing in a body upon which the four Colonies 
were represented. Again General smuts ought to have brought forward the 
necessary Bill in the Assembly on behalf of the Cabinet and then left the 
measure to its fate. But he did nothing of the kind, and provided us with the 
welcome opportunity of including the despicable impost as a cause of the 
struggle the Government made a promise and then went back upon it, the 
programme would naturally be extended so as to embrace such repudiation as 
well, and secondly, the breach of a promise, made such a representative of 
India as Gokhale was, was not only a personal insult to him but also to the 
whole of India, and as such could not be taken lying down. If there had been 
only one reason, namely the first by itself, the Satyagrahis, in case they felt 
themselves unequal to the task, could have been excused if they did not offer 
Satyagraha against the three pound tax. But it was impossible to pocket an Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 253 insult offered to the mother country, and therefore we felt the Satyagrahis 
were bound to include the three pound tax in their programme, and when this 
tax thus fell within the scope of the struggle, the indentured Indians had an 
opportunity of participating in it. The reader must note that thus far this class 
had been kept out of the fray. This new orientation of our policy increased our 
burden of responsibility on the one hand, and on the other opened up afresh 
field of recruitment for our ‘army’. 
Thus far Satyagraha had not been so much as mentioned among the indentured 
labourers; still less had they been educated to take part in it. Being illiterate, 
they could not read Indian Opinion or other newspapers. Yet I found that these 
poor folk were keen observers of the struggle and understood the movement, 
while some of them regretted their inability to join it. But when the Union 
ministers broke their pledged word, and repeal of the three pound tax was also 
included in our programme, I was not at all aware as to which of them would 
participate in the struggle.  
I wrote to Gokhale about the breach of pledge, and he was deeply pained to 
hear of it. I asked him not to be anxious and assured him that we would fight 
unto death and wring a repeal of the tax out of the unwilling hands of the 
Transvaal Government. The idea, however, of my returning to India in a year 
had to be abandoned, and it was impossible to say when I would be able to go. 
Gokhale was nothing if not a man of figures. He asked me to let him know the 
maximum and the minimum strength of our army of peace, along with the 
names of the fighters. As far as I can now remember, I sent 65 or 66 names as 
the highest and 16 as the lowest number, and also informed Gokhale that I 
would not expect monetary assistance from India for such small numbers. I 
besought him to have no fears and not to put an undue strain upon his physical 
resources. I had learnt from newspapers and other wise that after Gokhale 
returned to Bombay from South Africa, charges of weakness, etc, had been laid 
at his door. I therefore wished that Gokhale should not try to raise any funds 
for us in India. But this was his stern answer: ‘We in India have some idea of 
our duty even as you understand your obligations in South Africa. We will not Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 254 permit you to tell us what is or is not proper for us to do. I only desired to know 
the position of South Africa, but did not seek your advise as to what we may 
do.’ I grasped Gokhale’s meaning, and never afterwards said or wrote a word 
on the subject. In the same letter, he gave me consolation and caution. He was 
afraid in view of the breach of pledge that it would be a long protected 
struggle, and he doubted how long a handful of men could continue to give 
battle to the insolent brute force of the Union Government. In South Africa, we 
set about making our preparations. There could be no sitting at ease in the 
ensuing campaign. It was realized that we would be imprisoned for long terms. 
It was decided to close Tolstoy Farm. Some families returned to their homes 
upon the release of the breadwinners. The rest mostly belonged to Phoenix, 
which therefore was pitched upon as the future base of operations for the 
Satyagrahis. Another reason for preferring Phoenix was that if the indentured 
labourers joined the struggle against the three pounds tax, it would be more 
convenient to meet them from a place in Natal. 
While preparations were still being made for resuming the struggle, a fresh 
grievance came into being, which afforded an opportunity even to women to do 
their bit in the struggle. Some brave women had already offered to participate, 
and when Satyagrahis went to jail for hawking without a licence, their wives 
had expressed a desire to follow suit. But we did not then think it proper to 
send women to jail in a foreign land. There seemed to be no adequate reason 
for sending them into the firing line, and I for my part could not summon 
courage enough to take them to the front. Another argument was, that it would 
be derogatory to our manhood if we sacrificed our women in resisting a law, 
which was directed only against men. But an event now happened, which 
involved a special affront to women, and which therefore left no doubt in our 
minds as to the propriety of sacrificing them. 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 255  
39. WHEN MARRIAGE IS NOT A MARRIAGE 
As if unseen by anyone God was preparing the ingredie nts for the Indians’ 
victory and demonstrating still more clearly the injustice of the Europeans in 
South Africa, an event happened which none had expected. Many married men 
came to South Africa from India, while some Indians contracted a marriage in 
South Africa itself. There is no law for the registration of ordinary marriages in 
India, and the religious ceremony suffices to confer validity upon them. The 
same custom ought to apply to Indians in South Africa as well and although 
Indians had settled in South Africa for the last forty years, the validity of 
marriages solemnized according to the rites of the various religions of India had 
never been called in question. But at this item there was a case in which Mr. 
Justice Searle of the Cape Supreme Court gave judgment on March 14, 1913 to 
the effect that all marriages were outside in pale of legal marriages in South 
Africa with the exception of such as were celebrated according to Christian 
rites and registered by the registrar of Marriages. This terrible judgment thus 
nullified din South Africa at a stroke of the pen all marriages celebrated 
according to the Hindu Musalman and Zoroastrian rites. The many married 
Indian women in South Africa in terms of this judgment ceased to ranks the 
wives of their husbands and were degraded to the rank of concubines, while 
their progeny were deprived of their right to inherit the parent’s property. This 
was an insufferable situation for women no less than men, and the Indians in 
South Africa were deeply agitated.  
According to my usual practice I wrote to the Government, asking them 
whether they agreed to the Searle judgment and whether, if the judge was 
right to interpreting it, they would amend the law so as to recognize the 
validity of Indian marriages consecrated according to the religious customs of 
the parties and recognized as legal in India. The Government were not then in a 
mood to listen and could not see their way to comply my request. 
The Satyagraha Association held a meeting to consider whether they should 
appeal against the Searle judgment, and came to the conclusion that no appeal Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 256 was possible on a question of this nature. If there was to be an appeal, it must 
be preferred by Government, or if they so desired, by the Indians provided that 
the Government openly sided with them through their Attorney General. To 
appeal when these conditions were not satisfied would be in a way tantamount 
to tolerating the invalidation of Indian marriages. Satyagraha would have to be 
resorted to, if such an appeal was made and of it was rejected. In these 
circumstances therefore it seemed best not to prefer any appeal against this 
unspeakable insult.  
A crisis now arrived, when there could not be any waiting for an auspicious day 
or hour. Patience was impossible in the face of this insult offered to our 
womanhood. We decided to offer stubborn Satyagraha irrespective of the 
number of fighters. Not only could the women now be not prevented from 
joining the struggle, but we decided even to invite them to come into line 
along with the men. We first invited the sisters who had lived on Tolstoy Farm. 
I found that they were only too glad to enter the struggle. I gave them an idea 
of the risks incidental to such participation. I explained to them that they 
would have to put up with restraints in the matter of food, dress and personal 
movements. I warned them that they might to be given hard work in jail, made 
to wash clothes and even subjected to insult by the warders. But these sisters 
were all brave and feared none of these things. One of them was pregnant 
while six of them had young babies in arms. But one and all were eager to join 
and I simply could not come in their way. These sisters were with one 
exception all Tamilians. Here are their names: 
1. Mrs. Thambi Naidoo, 2. Mrs. Pillay, 3. Mrs. K Murugasa Pillay, 4. Mrs. Perumal 
Naidoo, 5. Mrs. P.K. Naidoo, 6. Mrs. K. Chinnaswami Pillay, &. Mrs. N. S. Pillay, 
8. Mrs. R. A. Mudalingam, 9. Mrs. Bhavani Dayal, 10. Miss Minachi Pillay, 11. 
Miss Baikum Murugasa Pillay.  
It is easy to get into prison by committing a crime but it is difficult to get in by 
being innocent. As the criminal seeks to escape arrest, the police pursue and 
arrest him. But they lay their hands upon the innocent man who courts arrest of 
his own free will only when they cannot help it. The first attempts of these Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 257 sisters were not crowned with success. They entered the Transvaal at 
Vereening without permits, but they were not arrested. They took to hawking 
without a licence, but still the police ignored them. It now became a problem 
with the women how they should get arrested. There were not many men ready 
to go to jail and those who were ready could not easily have their wish.  
We now decided to take a step which we had reserved till the last, and which 
in the event fully answered our expectations. I had contemplated sacrificing all 
the settlers in Phoenix at a critical period. That was to be my final offering to 
the God of Truth. The settlers at Phoenix were mostly my close co-workers and 
relations. The idea was to send all of them to jail with the exception of a few 
who would be required for the conduct of Indian Opinion and of children below 
sixteen. This was the maximum of sacrifice open to me in the circumstances. 
The sixteen stalwarts to whom I had referred in writing to Gokahale were 
among the pioneers of the Phoenix settlement. It was proposed that these 
friend should cross over in to Transvaal and as the crossed over, get arrested 
for entering the country without permits. We were afraid that Government 
would not arrest them if we made a previous announcement of our intention, 
and therefore we guarded it as a secret except from a couple of friends. When 
the pioneers entered the Transvaal, the police officer would ask them their 
names and addresses, and it was part of the programme not to supply this 
information as there was an apprehension that if their identity was disclosed, 
the police would come to know that they were my relations and therefore 
would not arrest them. Refusal to give name and address to an officer was also 
held to be a separate offence. While the Phoenix group entered the Transvaal, 
the sisters who had courted arrest in the Transvaal in vain were to enter the 
Natal. As it was an offence to enter the Transvaalfrom Natal without a permit it 
was equally an offence to enter Natal from the Transvaal. If the sisters were 
arrested upon entering Natal, well and good. But if they were not arrested, it 
was arranged that they should proceed to and post themselves at Newcastle, 
the great coal mining centre in Natal, and advice the indentured Indian 
labourers there to go on strike. The mother tongue of the sisters was Tamil, 
and they could speak a little Hindustani besides. The majority of labouers on Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 258 the coal mines hailed from Madras State and spoke Tamil or Telugu, though 
there were many from North India as well. If the laboures struck in response to 
the sisters’ appeal, Government was bound to arrest them along with still 
greater enthusiasm. This was the strategy I thought out and unfolded before 
the Transvaal sisters.  
I went to Phoenix, and talked to the settlers about my plans. First of all, I held 
a consultation with the sisters living there. I knew that the step of sending 
women to jail was fraught with serious risk. Most of the sisters in Phoenix spoke 
Gujarati. They had not had the training or experience of the Transvaal sisters. 
Moreover, most of them were related to me, and might think of going to jail 
only on account of my influence with them. If afterwards they flinched at the 
time of actual trial or could not stand the jail, they might be led to apologize, 
that not only giving me a deep shock but also causing serious damage to the 
movement. I decided not to broach the subject to my wife, as she could not to 
say no to any proposal I made, and if she said yes, I would not know what value 
to attach to her assent, and as I knew that in a serious matter like this the 
husband should leave the wife to take what step she liked on her own 
initiative, and should not be offended at all even if she did not take any step 
whatever. I talked to the other sisters who readily fell in with my proposal and 
expressed their readiness to go to jail. They assured me that they would 
complete their term in jail, come what might. My wife overheard my 
conversation with the sisters, and addressing me said, “I am sorry that you are 
not telling me about this. What defect is there in me which disqualifies me for 
jail? I also wish to take the path which you are inviting the others.” “You know I 
am the last person to cause you pain, “I replied. “There is no question of my 
distrust in you. I would be only too glad if you went at my instance. In matters 
like this everyone should act relying solely upon one’s own strength and 
courage. If I asked you, you might be inclined to go just for the sake of 
complying with my request. And then if you began to tremble in the law court 
or were terrified by hardships in jail, I could not find fault with you, but how 
would it stand with me? How could I then harbour you or look the world in the 
face? It is fears like these which have prevented me from asking you too to Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 259 court jail.” “You may have nothing to do with me,” she said, “If being unable 
to stand jail I secure my release by an apology. If you can endure hardships and 
so can my boys, why cannot I? I am bound to join the struggle.” “Then I am 
bound to admit you to it,” said I. “You know my conditions and you know my 
temperament. Even now reconsider the matter if you like, and if after mature 
thought you deliberately come to the conclusion not to join the movement, you 
are free to withdraw. And you must understand that there is nothing to be 
ashamed of in changing your decision even now.” 
“I have nothing to think about, I am fully determined,” she said. 
I suggested to the other settlers also that each should take his or her decision 
independently of all others. Again and again, and in a variety of ways I pressed 
this condition on their attention that none should fall away whether the 
struggle was short or long, whether the Phoenix settlement flourished or faded, 
and whether he or she kept good health or fell ill in jail. All were ready. The 
only member of the party from outside Phoenix was Rustomji Jivanji 
Ghorkhodu, from whom these conferences could not be concealed, and Kakaji, 
as he was affectionately called, was not the man to lag behind on an occasion 
like the present. He had already been to jail, but he insisted upon paying it 
another visit. The ‘invading’ party was composed of the following members: 
1. Mrs. Kasturbai Gandhi, 2. Mrs Jayakunvar Manilal Doctor, 3. Mrs. Kashi 
Chaganlal Gandhi, 4. Mrs. Santok Maganlal Gandhi, 5. Parsi Rustomji Jivanji 
Ghorkhodu, 6. Chhaganlal Khushalchand Gandhi, 7. Ravjibhai Manilal Patel, 8. 
Maganlal Haribhai Patel. 9. Solomon Royeppen, 10. Raju Govindu, 11. ramdas 
Mohandas Gandhi, 12. Shivpujan Badari, 13. V. Govindarajulu, 14. Kuppuswami 
Moonlight Mudalidar, 15. gokuldas Hansraj and 16. Revashankar Ratansi Sodha. 
The sequel must be taken up in a fresh chapter. 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 260  
40. WOMEN IN JAIL 
These ‘invaders’ were to go to jail for crossing the border and entering the 
Transvaal without permits. The reader who has seen the list of their names will 
have observed, that if some of them were disclosed beforehand, the police 
might not perhaps arrest the persons bearing them. Such in fact had been the 
case with me. I was arrested twice or thrice but after this the police ceased to 
meddle with me at the border. No one was informed of this party having 
started and the news was of course withheld from the papers. Moreover, the 
party had been instructed not to give their names even to the police and to 
state they would disclose their identity in court. 
The police were familiar with cease of this nature. After the Indians got into 
habit of courting arrest, they would often not give their names just for the fun 
of the things, and the police therefore did not notice anything strange about 
the behavior of the Phoenix party, which was arrested accordingly. They were 
then tried and sentenced to three months’ imprisonment with hard labour 
(September 23, 1913). 
The sisters who had been disappointed in the Transvaal now entered Natal but 
were not arrested for entering the country without permits. They therefore 
proceeded to Newscastle and set about their work according to the plans 
previously settled. Their influence spread like wildfire. The pathetic story of 
the wrongs heaped up by the three pound tax touched the labourers to the 
quick, and they went on strike. I received the news by wire and was as much 
perplexed as I was pleased. What was I to do? I was not prepared for this 
marvelous awakening. I had neither men nor the money which would enable me 
to cope with the work before me. But I visualized my duty very clearly. I must 
go to New Castle and do what I could. I left at once to go there.  
Government could not now any longer leave the brave Transvaal sisters free to 
pursue their activities. They too were sentenced to imprisonment for the same 
term-three months and were kept in the same prison as the Phoenix party 
(October 21, 1913). Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 261 These events stirred the heart of the Indians not only in South Africa but also in 
the motherland to its very depths. Sir Pherozeshah had been so far indifferent. 
In 1901 he had strongly advised me not to go to South Africa. He held that 
nothing could be done for Indian emigrants beyond the seas so long as India had 
not achieved her own freedom, and he was little impressed with the Satyagraha 
movement in its initial stages. But women in jail pleaded with him as nothing 
else could. As he himself put it in his Bombay Town hall speech, his blood 
boiled at the thought of these women lying in jails herded with ordinary 
criminals and India could not sleep over the matter any longer. 
The women’s bravery was beyond words. They were all kept in Maritzburg jail, 
where they were considerably harassed. Their food was of the worst quality and 
they were given them from outside nearly till the end of their term. Onesister 
was under a religious vowto restrictherself to a particular diet. After great 
difficulty the jail authorities allowed her that diet, but the foodsupplied was 
unfit for human consumption. The sister badly needed olive oil. She did not get 
it at first, and when she got it, it was old and rancid. She offered to get it at 
her own expense but was told that jail was no hotel, and she must take what 
food was given her. When this sister was released she was a mere skeleton and 
her life was saved only by a great effort.  
Another returned from jail with a fatal fever to which she succumbed within a 
few days of her release (February 22, 1914). How can I forget her? Valliamma R. 
Munuswami Mudaliar was a young girl of Johannesburg only sixteen years of 
age. She was confined to bed when I saw her. As she was a tall girl, her 
emaciated body was a terrible thing to behold.  
“Valliamma you do not repent of your having gone to jail?” I asked. “Repent? I 
am even now ready to go to jail again if I am arrested,” said Valliamma. 
“But what if it results in your death?” I pursued. 
“I do not mind it. Who would not love to die for one’s motherland?” 
Within a few days after this conversation, Valliamma was no more with us in 
the flesh, but she left us the heritage of an immortal name. Condolence 
meetings were held at various places, and the Indians resolved to erect Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 262 ‘Valliamma Hall’, to commemorate the supreme sacrifice of this daughter of 
India. Unfortunately the resolution has not still been translated into action. 
There were many difficulties. The community was torn by internal dissensions; 
the principal workers left one after another. But whether or not a hall is built 
in stone and mortar, Valliamma’s service is imperishable. She built her temple 
of service with her own hands, and her glorious image has a niche even now 
reserved from it in many a heart. And the name of Valliamma will live in the 
history of South African Satyagraha as long as India lives. 
It was an absolutely pure sacrifice that was offered by these sisters, who were 
innocent of legal technicalities, and many of whom had no idea of country, 
their patriotism being based only upon faith. Some of them were illiterate and 
could not read the papers. But they knew that a mortal blow was being aimed 
at the Indians’ honour, and they’re going to jail was a cry of agony and prayer 
offered from the bottom of their hearts, was in fact the purest of all sacrifices. 
Such heart prayer is always acceptable to God. Sacrifice is fruitful only to the 
extent that is pure. God hungers after devotion in man. He is glad to accept the 
widow’s mite offered with devotion, that is to say, without a selfish motive, 
and rewards it s hundredfold. The unsophisticated Sudama offered a handful of 
rice, but the small offering put an end to man years’ want and starvation. The 
imprisonment of many might have been fruitless but the devoted sacrifice of a 
single pure soul could never of in vain. None can tell whose sacrifice in South 
Africa was acceptable to God, and hence bore fruit. But we do know that 
Valliamma’s sacrifice bore fruit and so did the sacrifice of the other sisters. 
Souls without number spent themselves in the past, are spending themselves in 
the present and will spend themselves in the future in the service of country 
and humanity, and that is in the fitness of things as no one knows who is pure. 
But Satyagrahis may rest assured, that even if there is only one among them 
who is pure as crystal, his sacrifice suffices to achieve the end in view. The 
world rests upon the bedrock of satya or truth. Asatya meaning untruth also 
means non-existent, and satya or truth means that which is. If untruth does not 
so much as exist, its victory is out of the question. And truth being that which is 
can never be destroyed. This is the doctrine of Satyagraha concisely.  Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 263  
41. A STREAM OF LABOURERS 
The women’s imprisonment worked like a charm upon the  labourers on the 
mines near Newcastle who downed their tools and entered the city in 
succeeding batches. As soon as I received the news, I left Phoenix for 
Newcastle. 
These labourers have no houses of their own. The mine-owners erect houses for 
them, set up lights upon their roads, and supply them with water, with the 
result that the labourers are reduced to a state of utter dependence. And as 
Tulsidas put it, a dependent cannot hope for happiness even in a dream.  
The strikers brought quite a host of complaints to me. Some said the mine-
owners had stopped their lights or their water, while others stated that they 
had thrown away strikers’ household chattels from their quarters. Saiyad 
Ibrahim, a Pathan, showed his back to me and said, “Look here, how severely 
they have thrashed me. I have let the rascals go for your sake, as such are your 
orders. I am a Pathan, and Pathans never take but give a beating.” 
“Well done, brother,” I replied. “I look upon such conduct alone as pure 
bravery. We will win through people of your type.” 
I thus congratulated him, but thought to myself that the strike could not 
continue if many received the same treatment as the Pathan did. Leaving the 
question of flogging aside, there was not much room for complaint if the 
collieries cut off the lights, the water supply and other amenities enjoyed by 
the strikers. But whether or not complaint was justified, the strikers could not 
hold on the circumstances, and I must find a way out of the difficulty, or else it 
was very much to be preferred that they should own themselves to be defeated 
and return to work after a period of weary waiting. But defeatist counsel was 
not in my line. I therefore suggested that the only possible course was for the 
labourers to leave their masters’ quarters, to fare in fact like pilgrims. 
The labouers were not to be counted by tens but by hundreds. And their 
number might easily swell into thousands. How was I to house and feed this Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 264 ever-growing multitude? I would not appeal to India for monetary help. The 
river of gold, which later on flowed from the motherland had not yet started on 
its course. Indian traders were mortally afraid and not at all ready to help me 
publicly, as they had trading relations with the coal-owners and other 
Europeans. Whether I went to Newcastle, I used to stop with them. But this 
time, as I would place them in an awkward position, I resolved to put up at 
another place.  
As I have already stated, the Transvaal sisters were most of them Tamilians. 
They had taken up their quarters in Newcastle with Mr. D. Lazarus, a middle 
class Christians Tamilian, who owned a small plot of land and a house consisting 
of two or three rooms. I also decided to put up with this family, who received 
me with open arms. The poor have no fears. My host belonged to a family of 
indentured laboures, and hence he or his relations would be liable to pay the 
three-pound tax. No wonder he and his people would be familiar with the woes 
of indentured labourers and would therefore deeply sympathize with them. It 
has never been easy for friends to harbor me under their roof, but to receive 
me now was tantamount to inviting financial ruin upon one’s head or perhaps 
even to facing imprisonment. Very few well to do traders would like to place 
themselves in a like predicament. I realized their limitations as well as my own, 
and therefore remained at a respectable distance from them. Poor Lazarus 
would sacrifice some wages if it came to that. He would be willingly cast into 
prison, but how could he tolerate the wrongs heaped upon indentured labourers 
still poorer than himself? Lazarus saw that the Transvaal sisters who had been 
his guests went to the indentured labouers’ succor and suffered imprisonment 
in the act of doing so. He realized that he owned a debt of duty to the labouers 
too and therefore gave me shelter at his place. He not only sheltered me but 
he devoted his house in to a caravanserai. All sorts and conditions of men would 
come and go and the premises at all times would present the appearance of an 
ocean of heads. The kitchen fire would know no rest day and night. Mrs. 
Lazarus would drudge like a slave all day long, and yet her face as well as her 
husband’s would always be lit up with a smile as with perpetual sunshine. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 265 But Lazarus could not feed hundreds of labourers. I suggested to the labourers, 
that they should take it that their strike was to last for all time and leave the 
quarters provided by their masters. They must sell such of their belongings, but 
if with a view to wreak further revenge upon them they threw them away on 
the streets, the labourers must take that risk as well. When they came to me, 
they should bring nothing with them except their wearing apparel and blankets. 
I promised to live and have my meals with them so long as the strike lasted and 
so long as they were outside jail. They could sustain their strike and win a 
victory if and only if they came out on these conditions. Those who would not 
summon courage enough to take this line of action should return to work. None 
should despise or harass those who thus resumed their work. None of the 
labourers demurred to my conditions. From the very day that I made this 
announcement, there was a continuous stream of pilgrims who ‘retired from 
the household life to the houseless one’ along with their wives and children 
with boundless of clothes upon their heads. 
I had no means of housing them; the sky was the only roof over their heads. 
Luckily for us the weather was favorable, there being neither rain nor cold. I 
was confident that the trader class would not fail to feed us. The traders on 
Newcastle supplied cooking pots and bags of rice and dal. Other places also 
showered rice, dal vegetables, condiments and other things upon us. The 
contribution exceeded my expectations. Not all were ready to go to jail, but all 
felt for the cause, and all were willing to bring their quota to the movement to 
the best of their ability. Those who could not give anything served as volunteer 
workers. Well-known and intelligent volunteers were required to look after 
these obscure and uneducated men, and they were forthcoming. They rendered 
priceless help, and many of them were arrested. Thus everyone did what he 
could, and smoothed our path.  
There was a huge concourse of men, which was continuously received 
accessions. It was a dangerous, if not an impossible, task to keep them in one 
place and look after them while they had no employment. They were generally 
ignorant of the laws of sanitation. Some of them had been to jail for criminal Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 266 offences such as murder, theft or adultery. But I did not consider myself fit to 
sit in judgment over the morality of the strikers. It would have been silly for me 
to attempt at distinguishing between the goats and the sheep. My business was 
only to conduct the strike, which could not be mixed up with any other 
reforming activity. I was indeed bound to see that the rules of morality were 
observed in the camp, but it was not for me to inquire into the antecedents of 
each striker. There were bound to be crimes if such a heterogeneous multitude 
was pinned down to one place without any work to do. The wonder was that 
the few days that we stopped here like that passed without any incident. All 
were quite as if they had thoroughly grasped the gravity of the situation.  
I thought out a solution of my problem. I must take this ‘army’ to the Transvaal 
and see them safety deposited in jail like the Phoenix party. The army should 
be divided into small batches, each of which should cross the border 
separately. But I dropped this last idea as soon as it was formed as it would 
have taken too long a time in its execution, and the successive imprisonment of 
small batches would not produce the normal effect of a mass movement.  
The strength of the ‘army was about five thousand. I had not the money to pay 
the railway fare for such a large number of persons, and therefore they could 
not all be taken by rail. And if they were taken by rail, I would be without the 
means of putting their morale to the test. The Transvaal border is 36 miles 
from Newcastle. The border villages of Natal and the Transvaal are Charlestown 
and Volksrust respectively. I finally decided to march on foot. I consulted the 
labourers who had their wives and children with then and some of whom 
therefore hesitated to agree to my proposal. I had no alternative except to 
harden my heart, and declared that these who wished were free to return to 
the mines. But none of them would avail themselves of this liberty. We decided 
that those who were disable-bodied persons announced their readiness to go to 
Charlestown on foot. The march was to be accomplished in two days. In the end 
everyone was glad that the move was made. The labourers realized that it 
would be some relief to poor Lazarus and his family. The Europeans in 
Newcastle anticipated an outbreak of plague, and were anxious to take all Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 267 manner of steps in order to prevent it. By making a move we restored to them 
their peace of mind and also saved ourselves from the irksome measures to 
which they would have subjected us. 
While preparations for the march were on foot, I received an invitation to meet 
the coal-owners and I went to Durban. This conference and the events 
subsequent thereto will be considered in the next chapter.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 268  
42. THE CONFERENCE AND AFTER 
At their invitation, I saw the mine-owners in Durban.  I observed that they were 
somewhat impressed by the strike, but I did not expect anything big to come 
out of the conference. The humility of a Satyagrahi however knows no bounds. 
He does not let slip a single opportunity, for settlement, and he does not mind 
if anyone therefore looks upon him as timid. The man who has faith in him and 
the strength, which flows from faith, does not care if others look him down 
upon. He relies solely upon his internal strength. He is therefore courteous to 
all, and thus cultivates and enlists world opinion in favour of his own cause.  
I therefore welcomed the coal-owners’ invitation and when I met them, I saw 
that the atmosphere was surcharged with the heat and passion of the moment. 
Instead of hearing me explain the situation, their representative proceeded to 
cross-examine me. I gave him suitable answers. 
‘It is in your hands to bring the strike to an end,’ I said. 
‘We are not officials,’ was the reply. 
‘You can do a deal though you are not officials,’ I said. ‘You can fight the 
labourers’ battle from them. If you ask the Government to take off the three-
pound tax, I do not think they will refuse to repeal it. You can also educate 
European opinion on the question. 
‘But what has the three pound tax to do with the strike? If the labourers have 
any grievance against the coal-owners, you approach them for redress in due 
form.’ 
‘I do not see that the labourers have any other weapon except a strike in their 
hands. The three-pound tax too has been imposed in the interest of the mine-
owners who went the labourers to work for them but do not wish that they 
should work as free men. If therefore the labourers strike work in order to 
secure a repeal of the three-pound tax, I do not see that it involves and 
impropriety or injustice to the mine-owners. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 269 ‘You will not them advice the labourers to return to work?’ 
‘I am sorry I can’t.’ 
‘Do you know what will be the consequences?’ 
‘I know, I have a full sense of my responsibility.’ 
‘Yes, indeed. You have nothing to lose. But will you compensate the misguided 
labourers for the damage you will cause them?’ 
‘The labourers have gone on strike after due deliberation, and with a full 
consciousness of the losses which would accrue to them. I cannot conceive a 
greater loss to a man than the loss of his self-respect, and if is a matter of deep 
satisfaction to me that the labourers have realized this fundamental principle.’ 
And so on. I cannot now remember the whole of the conversation. I have put 
down in brief the points, which I do remember. I saw that the mine-owners 
understood the weakness of their case, for they had already put themselves in 
communication with the Government. 
During my journey to Durban and back I saw that the strike and the strike and 
the peaceful behavior of the strikers had produced an excellent impression 
upon the railway guards and others. I travelled in third class as usual, but even 
there the guard and other officers would surround me, make diligent inquiries 
and wish me success. They would provide me with various minor facilities. I 
scrupulously maintained the spotless purity of my relations with them. I did not 
hold out any inducement to the4m for a single amenity. I was delighted if they 
were courteous of their own free will, but no attempt was made to purchase 
courtesy. These officers were astonished to find that poor, illiterate and 
ignorant labourers made such a splendid display of firmness. Firmness and 
courage are qualities, which are bound to leave their impress even upon the 
adversary. 
I returned to Newcastle. Labourers were still pouring in from all directions. I 
clearly explained the whole situation to the ‘army’. I said they were still free 
to return to work if they wished. I told them about the threats held out by the 
coal-owners and pictured before them the risks of the future. I pointed out that Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 270 no one could tell them when the struggle would end. I described to the men the 
hardships of jail, and yet they would not flinch. They fearlessly replied, that 
they would never be down-hearted so long as I was fighting by their side, and 
they asked me not to be anxious about them as they were inured to hardships. 
It was now only left for us to march. The labourers were informed one evening 
that they were to commence the march early next morning (October 28, 1913), 
and the rules to be observed on the march were read to them. It was no joke to 
control a multitude of five or six thousand men. I had no idea of the exact 
number, nor did I know their names or places of residence. I was merely 
content with as many of them as chose to remain. I could not afford to give 
anything on the road beyond a daily ration of one pound and a half of bread 
and an ounce of sugar to each ‘soldier’ .I planned to get something more from 
the Indian traders on the way. But if I failed they must rest content with bread 
and sugar. My experience of the Boer War and the Zulu ‘rebellion’ stood me in 
good stead on the present occasion. None of the ‘invaders’ was to keep with 
him any more clothes than necessary. None was to touch anyone’s property on 
the way. They were to bear it patiently if any official or nor-official European 
met them and abused or even flogged them. They were to allow themselves to 
be arrested if the police offered to arrest them. The march must continue even 
if I was arrested. All these points were explained to the men and I also 
announced the names of those who should successively lead the ‘army’ in my 
place.  
The men understood the instructions issued to them, and our caravan safely 
reached Charlestown where the traders rendered us great help. They gave us 
the use of their houses, and permitted us to make our cooking arrangements on 
the ground of the mosque. The ration supplied on the march would be 
exhausted when camp was reached and therefore we were in need of cooking 
pots, which were cheerfully supplied by the traders. We had with us a plentiful 
store of rice, etc. to which also the traders contributed their share. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 271 Charlestown was a small village with a population of hardly 1,000 souls, and 
could never accommodate the several thousands of pilgrims. Only women and 
children were lodged in houses. All the rest camped in the open.  
There are many sweet and some bitter reminiscences of our stay in 
Charlestown. The pleasant memories are connected with the sanitary 
department and the District Health Officer, Dr. Briscoe, who was rather 
alarmed at the phenomenal increase in the population, but who, instead of 
adopting any stringent measures, met me, made some suggestions and offered 
to help me. Europeans are careful and we are careless about three things, the 
purity of the water supply, and keeping roads and sanitary conveniences clean. 
Dr. Briscoe asked me to see that no water was thrown on the roads and to 
prevent our men from dirtying the place or throwing away refuse 
promiscuously. He further suggested that the men should be confined to the 
area he assigned to us and that I should hold myself responsible for keeping 
that area clean. I thankfully accepted his suggestions and was then at perfect 
ease. 
It was very difficult to have our people observed these rules. But the pilgrims 
and co-workers lightened my task. It has been my constant experience that 
much can be done if the servant actually serves and does not dictate to the 
people. If the servant puts in body-labour himself, others will follow in his 
wake. And such was my experience on the present occasion. My co-workers and 
I never hesitated to do sweeping, scavenging and similar work, with the result 
that others also took it up enthusiastically. In the absence of such sensible 
procedure, it is no good issuing orders to others. All would assume leadership 
and dictate to others and there would be nothing done in the end. But where 
the leader himself becomes a servant, there are no rival claimants for 
leadership. 
Of co-workers Kallenbach was already in Charlsetown. And so was Miss Schlesin, 
whose industry, accuracy and honesty were beyond all praise. Of the Indians I 
now remember the late Shri P. K. Naidoo and Shri Albert Christopher. There 
were others besides who worked hard and rendered valuable help. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 272 The ration consisted of rice and dal. We had a large stock vegetable, which 
could not be cooked, separately for want of time and cooking pots and was 
therefore mixed with dal. The kitchen was active all the twenty-four hours, as 
hungry men would arrive at any time of the day or night. No labourers were to 
stop at Newcastle. All knew what way to go and therefore they would make for 
Charlestown directly they left the mines.  
As I think of the patience and endurance of the men, I am overpowered by a 
sense of the greatness of God. I was the leader among the cooks. Sometimes 
there was too much water in the dal, at other times it was insufficiently 
cooked. The vegetable and even the rice was sometimes ill-cooked. I have not 
seen many people in the world who would cheerfully gulp down such food. On 
the other hand, I have observed in the South African jails that even those who 
pass as well-educated men lose their temper if they are given food somewhat 
less than sufficient or oil-cooked, or even if they get it a little late. 
Serving the food was if possible even more difficult than cooking it, and was in 
my sole charge. I shouldered the responsibility for the food being well or ill-
cooked. Even so, it rested with me to satisfy all present by cutting down the 
individual ration when there was too little food and more than the expected 
number of diners. I can never forget the angry look which the sisters gave me 
for a moment when I gave them too little food and which was at once 
transformed into a smile as they understood the thanklessness of my self-
chosen tasks. ‘I am helpless,’ I would say. ‘The quantity cooked is small, and as 
I have to feed many, I must divide it equally between them.’ Upon this, they 
would grasp the situation and go away smiling, saying that they were content. 
Thus far, I have dealt with the pleasant memories. As for the unpleasant, I 
found that when the men had a little leisure, they occupied it with internal 
squabbles. What was worse, there were cases of adultery. There was terrible 
overcrowding and men and women had to be kept together. Animal passion 
knows no shame. As soon as the cases occurred, I arrived on the scene. The 
guilty parties were abashed and they were segregated. But who can say how 
many such cases occurred which never came to my knowledge? It is no use Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 273 dwelling any further upon this topic, which I have brought in the order to show 
that everything was not in perfect order that even when someone did go wrong 
there was no exhibition of insolence. On many similar occasions, I have seen 
how well-behaved people become in a good atmosphere even when they are 
originally semi-barbarous and not over-observant of the dictates of morality, 
and it is more essential and profitable to realize this truth.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 274  
43. CROSSING THE BORDER 
We have now arrived at the beginning of November 1913 . But before we 
proceed, it will be well to take note of two events. But before we proceed, it 
will be well to take note of two events. Bai Fatma Mehtab of Durban could no 
longer be at peace when the Tamilian sisters received sentences of 
imprisonment in Newcastle. She therefore left for Volksrust to court arrest 
along with her mother Hanifabai and seven years old son. Mother and daughter 
were arrested but the Government declined to arrest the boy. Fatma Bai was 
called upon to give her finger impressions at the charge office but she 
fearlessly refused to submit to the indignity. Eventually she and her mother 
were sent to prison for three months (October 13, 1913). 
The labourers’ strike was in full swing at this time. Men as well as women were 
on the move between the mining district and Charlestown. Of these, there 
were two women with their little once one of whom died of exposure on the 
march. The other fell from the arms of its mother while she was crossing a 
spruit and was drowned. But the brave mothers refused to be dejected and 
continued their march. One of them said, ‘We must not pine for the dead who 
will not come back to us for all our sorrow. It is the living for whom we must 
work. I have often among the poor come across such instance of quite heroism, 
sterling faith and saving knowledge.  
The men and women in Charlestown held to their difficult post of duty in such a 
stoical spirit. For it was no mission of peace that took us to that border village. 
If anyone wanted peace, he had to search for it within. Outwardly, the words 
there is no peace here were placarded everywhere, as it were. But it is in the 
midst of such storm that a devotee like Mirabai takes the cup of poison to her 
lips with cheerful equanimity, that Socrates quietly embraces death in his dark 
and solitary cell and initiates his friends and us into the mysterious doctrine 
that he who seeks peace must look for it within himself. 
With such ineffable peace brooding over them the Satyagrahis were living in 
their camp, careless of what the morrow would bring. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 275 I wrote to the Government, that we did not propose to enter the Transvaal with 
a view to domicile, but as an effective protest against the minister’s breach of 
pledge and as a pure demonstration of our distress at the loss of our self-
respect. Government would be relieving us of all anxiety if they were good 
enough to arrest us where we then were, that is in Charlestown. Btu if they did 
not arrest us, and if any of us surreptitiously entered the Transvaal, the 
responsibility would not be ours. There was no secrecy about our movement. 
None of us had a personal axe to grind. We would not like it if any of us 
secretly entered the Transvaal. But we could not hold ourselves responsible for 
the acts of any as we had to deal with thousands of unknown men and as we 
could not command any other sanction but that of love. Finally, I assured the 
Government that if they repealed the three-pound tax, the strike would be 
called off and the indentured labourers would return to work, as we would not 
ask them to join the general struggle directed against the rest of our 
grievances. 
The position therefore was quite uncertain, and there was no knowing when the 
Government would arrest us. But at a crisis like this we could not await the 
reply of the government for a number of days, but only for one or two returns 
of the post. We therefore decided to leave Charlestown and enter the 
Transvaal at once if the Government did not put us under arrest. If we are not 
arrested on the way, the ‘army of peace’ was the march twenty to twenty-four 
miles a day for eight days together, with a view to reach Tolstoy Farm, and to 
stop there till the struggle was over and in the meanwhile to maintain 
themselves by working the Farm. Mr. Kallenbach had made all the necessary 
arrangements. The idea was to construct mud huts with the help of the pilgrims 
themselves. So long as the huts were under construction, the old and the infirm 
should be accommodated in old and infirm should be accommodated in small 
tents, the able-bodied camping in the open. The only difficulty was, the rains 
were now about to set in, rained. But Mr. a shelter over his head while it 
rained. But Mr. Kallenbach was courageously confident of solving it somehow or 
other. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 276 We also made other preparations for the march. The good Dr. Briscoe 
improvised a small medical chest for us, and gave us some instruments which 
even a layman like myself could handle. The chest was to be carried by hand as 
there was to be no conveyance with the pilgrims. We therefore carried with us 
the least possible quantity of medicines, which would not enable us to treat 
even a hundred persons at the same time. But that did not matter as we 
proposed to encamp every day near some village, where we hoped to get the 
drugs of which we ran short, and as we were not taking with us any of the 
patients or disabled persons whom we had arranged to leave in the villages en 
route.  
Bread and sugar constituted our role ration, but how was a supply of bread to 
be ensured on the eight days march? The bread must be distributed to the 
pilgrims every day and we could not hold any of it in stock. The only solution of 
this problem was, that someone should supply us with bread at each stage. But 
who would be our provider? There were no Indian bakers at all. Again there 
could not be found a baker in each of the villages, which usually depended 
upon the cities for their supply of bread. Bread therefore must be supplied by 
some baker and sent by rail to the appointed station. Volksrust was about 
double the size of Charlestown, and a large European bakery there willingly 
contracted to supply bread at each place. The baker did not take advantage of 
our awkward plight to charge us higher than the market rates and supplied 
bread made of excellent flour. He sent it in time by rail, and the railway 
officials, also Europeans, not only honestly delivered it to us, but they look 
good care of it in transit and gave us, but they took good care of it in transit 
and gave us some special facilities. They knew that we harbored no enmity in 
our hearts, intended no harm to any living soul and sought redress only through 
self-suffering. The atmosphere around us was thus purified and continued to be 
pure. The feeling of love which is dormant though present in all mankind was 
roused into activity. Everyone realized that we are all brothers whether we are 
ourselves Christians, Jews, Hindus, Musalmans or anything else.  Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 277 When all the preparations for the march were completed, I made one more 
effort to achieve a settlement. I had already sent letters and telegrams. I now 
decided to phone even at the risk of my overtures being answered by an insult. 
From Charlestown I phoned to General Smuts in Pretoria. I called his secretary 
and said: ‘Tell General Smuts that I am fully prepared for the march. The 
Europeans in Volksrust are excited and perhaps likely to violate even the safety 
of our lives. They have certainly held out such a threat. I am sure that even the 
General would not wish any such untoward event to happen. If he promises to 
abolish the three-pound tax, I will stop the march, as it will not break the law 
merely for the sale of breaking it but I am driven to it by inexorable necessity. 
Will not the General accede to such a small request?’ I received this reply 
within half a minute: ‘General Smuts will have nothing to do with you. You may 
do just as you please.’ With this the message closed. 
I had fully expected this result, though I was not prepared for the curtness of 
the reply. I hoped for a civil answer, as my political relations with the General 
since the organization of Satyagraha had now subsisted for six years. But as I 
would not be elated by his courtesy, I did not weaken in the face of his 
incivility. The straight and narrow path I had to tread was clear before me. The 
next day (November 6, 1913) at the appointed stroke of the hour (6-30) we 
offered prayers and commenced the march in the name of God. The pilgrim 
band was composed of 2,037 men, 127 women and 57 children. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 278  
44. THE GREAT MARCH 
The caravan of pilgrims thus started punctually at th e appointed hour. There is 
a small spruit one mile from Charlestown, and as soon as one crosses it, one has 
entered Volksrust or the Transvaal. A small patrol of mounted policemen was 
on duty at the border gate. I went up to them, leaving instructions with the 
‘army’ to cross over when I signalled to them. But while I was still talking with 
the police, the pilgrims made a sudden rush and crossed the border. The police 
surrounded them, but the surging multitude was not easy of control. The police 
had no intention of arresting us. I pacified the pilgrims and got them to arrange 
themselves in regular rows. Everything was in order in a few minutes and the 
march into the Transvaal began. 
Two days before this, the Europeans of Volksrust held a meeting where they 
offered all manner of threats to the Indians. Some said that they would shoot 
the Indians if they entered the Transvaal. Mr. Kallenbach attended this meeting 
to reason with the Europeans who were however not prepared to listen to him. 
Indeed some of them even stood up to assault him. Indeed some of them even 
stood up to assault him. Mr. Kallenbach is an athlete, having received physical 
training at the hands of Sandow, and it was not easy to frighten him. One 
European challenged him to a duel. Mr. Kallenbach replied, ‘As I have accepted 
the religion of peace, I am not accept the challenge. Let him who will come 
and do his worst with me. But I will continue to claim a hearing at this meeting. 
You have publicly invited all Europeans to attend, and I am here to inform you 
that not all Europeans are ready as you are to lay violent hands upon innocent 
men. There is one Europeans who would like to inform you that the charges you 
level at the Indians are false. The Indians do not want what you imagine them 
to do. The Indians are not out to challenge your position as rulers. They do not 
wish to fight with you or to fill the country. They only seek justice pure and 
simple. They propose to enter the Transvaal not with a view to settle there, 
but only as an effective demonstration against the unjust tax, which is levied 
upon them. They are brave men. They will not injure you in person or in Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 279 property, they will not fight with you, but enter the Transvaal they will, even 
in the face of your gunfire. They are not the men to beat a retreat from the 
fear of your bullets or your spears. They propose to melt, and I know they will 
melt, your hearts by self-suffering. This is all I have to say. I have had my say 
and I believe that I have thus rendered you a service. Beware and save 
yourselves from perpetrating a wrong.’ With these words, Mr. Kallenbach 
resumed his seat. The audience was rather abashed. The pugilist who had 
invited Mr. Kallenbach to single combat became his friends. 
We had heard about this meeting and were prepared for any mischief by the 
Europeans in Volksrust. It was possible that the large number of policemen 
massed at the border was intended as a check upon them. However that may 
be, our procession passed through the place in peace. I do not remember that 
any Europeans attempted even a jest. All were out to witness this novel sight, 
while there was even a friendly twinkle in the eyes of some of them.  
On the first day we were to stop for the night at Palmford about eight miles 
from Volksrust, and we reached the place at about five p.m. The pilgrims took 
their ration of bread and sugar, and spread themselves in the open air. Some of 
the women were talking while others were singing bhajans. Some of the women 
were thoroughly exhausted by the march. They had dared to carry their 
children in their arms, but it was impossible for them to proceed further. I, 
therefore, according to my previous warning, kept them as lodgers with a good 
Indian shopkeeper who promised to send them to Tolstoy Farm if were 
permitted to go there, and to their homes if we were arrested.  
As the night advanced, all noises ceased and too was preparing to retire when I 
heard a tread. I saw a Europeans coming lantern in hand. I understood what it 
meant, but had no preparations to make. The police officer said,  
‘I have a warrant of arrest for you. I want to arrest you.’ 
‘When?’ I asked. 
‘Immediately.’ 
‘Where will you take me?’ Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 280 To the adjoining railway station now, and to Volksrust when we get a train for 
it.’ 
‘I will go with you without informing anyone, but I will leave some instructions 
with one of my coworkers.’ 
‘You may do so.’ 
I roused P. K. Naidoo who was sleeping near me. I informed him about my 
arrest and asked him not to awake the pilgrims before morning. At daybreak 
they must regularly resume the march. The march would commence before 
sunrise, and when it was time for them to halt and get their rations, he must 
break to them the news of my arrest. He might inform anyone who inquired 
about me in the interval. If the pilgrims were arrested, they must allow 
themselves to be arrested. Otherwise, they must continue the march according 
to the programme. Naidoo had no fears at all. I also told him what was to be 
done in case he was arrested. Mr. Kallenbach too was in Volksrust at the time.  
I went with the police officer, and we took the train for Volksrust the next 
morning. I appeared before the Court in Volksrust, but the Public Prosecutor 
himself asked for a remand until the 14th as he was not ready with the 
evidence. The case was postponed accordingly. I applied for bail as I had over 
2,000 men, 122 women and 50 children in my charge whom I should like to take 
on to their destination within the period my application. But the magistrate 
was helpless in the matter, as every prisoner not charged with a capital offence 
is in law entitled to be allowed to give bail for his appearance, and I could not 
be deprived of that right. He therefore released me on bail of fifty pound. Mr. 
Kallenbach had a car ready for me, and he took me at once to rejoin the 
‘invaders’. The special reporter of the Transvaal Leader wanted to go with us. 
We took him in the car, and he published at the time a vivid description of the 
case, the journey, and the meeting with the pilgrims, who received me with 
enthusiasm and were transported with joy. Mr. Kallenbach at once returned to 
Volksrust, as he had to look after the Indians stopping at Charlestown as well as 
fresh arrivals there. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 281 We continued the march, but it did not suit the Government to leave me in a 
state of freedom. I was therefore rearrested at Standerton on the 8th. 
Standerton is comparatively a bigger place. There was something rather strange 
about the manner of my arrest here. I was distributing bread to the pilgrims. 
The Indian store-keepers at Standerton presented us with some tins of 
marmalade, and the distribution therefore took more time than usual. 
Meanwhile the Magistrate came and stood by my side. He waited till the 
distribution of rations was over, and then called me aside. I knew the 
gentleman, who, I thought, perhaps wanted to talk with me. He laughed and 
said, 
‘You are my prisoner.’ 
‘It would seem I have received promotion in rank,’ I said, ‘as magistrates take 
the trouble to arrest me instead of mere police officials. But you will try me 
just now.’ 
‘Go with me,’ replied the Magistrate, ‘the Courts are still in session.’ 
I asked the pilgrims to continue their march, and then left with the Magistrate. 
As soon as I reached the Court room, I found some of my co-workers had also 
been arrested. There were five of them there, P. K. Naidoo, Biharilal Maharaj, 
Ramnarayan Sinha, Raghu Narasu and Rahimkhan. 
I was at once brought before the court and applied for remand and bail on the 
same grounds as in Volksrust. Here too the application was strongly opposed by 
the Public Prosecutor and here too I was released on my own recognizance of 
fifty pound and the case was remained till the 21st. The Indian traders had kept 
a carriage ready for me and I rejoined the pilgrims again when they had hardly 
proceeded three miles further. The pilgrims thought, and I thought too, that we 
might now perhaps reach Tolstoy Farm. But that was not to be. It was no small 
thing however that the invaders got accustomed to my being arrested. The five 
co-workers remained in jail.  
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 282  
45. ALL IN PRISON 
We were now near Johannesburg. The reader will remembe r that the whole 
pilgrimage had been divided into eight stages. Thus far we had accomplished 
our marches exactly according to programme and we now had four days’ march 
in front of us. But if our spirits rose from day to day, Government too get more 
and more anxious as to how they should deal with the Indian invasion. They 
would be charged with weakness and want of tact if they arrested us after we 
had reached our destination. If we were to be arrested, we must be arrested 
before we reached the promised land. 
Government saw that my arrest did not dishearten or frighten the pilgrims, nor 
did it lead them to break the peace. If they took to rioting, Government would 
have an excellent opportunity of converting them into food for gunpowder. Our 
firmness was very distressing to General Smuts coupled as it was with 
peacefulness, and he even said as much. How long can you harass a peaceful 
man? How can you kill the voluntarily dead? There is no zest in killing one who 
welcomes death and therefore soldiers are keen upon seizing the enemy alive. 
If the mouse did not flee before the cat, the cat would be driven to seek 
another prey. If all lambs voluntarily lay with the lion, the lion wouldbe 
compelled to give up feasting upon lambs. Great hunters would give up lion 
hunting if the lion took to non-resistance. Our victory was implicit in our 
combination of the two qualities of non-violence and determination. 
Gokhale desired by cable that Polak should go to India and help him in placing 
the facts of the situation before the Indian and Imperial Governments. Polak’s 
temperament was such that he would make himself useful whatever he went. 
He would be totally absorbed in whatever task he undertook. We were 
therefore preparing to send him to India. I wrote to him that he could go. But 
he would not leave without meeting me in person and taking full instructions 
from me. He therefore offered to come and see me during our march. I wired 
to him, saying that he might come if he wished though he would be in so doing 
running the risk of arrest. Fighters never hesitate to incur necessary risks. It Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 283 was a cardinal principle of the movement that everyone should make all 
straightforward and moral efforts to get arrested until he overcame the 
reluctance of Government to lay hands upon him. Polak therefore preferred to 
come even at the risk of being arrested.  
Mr. Polak joined us on the 9th at Teakworth between Standerton and 
Greylingstad. We were in the midst of our consultation and had nearly done 
with it. It was about 3 o’clock in the afternoon. Polak and I were walking at the 
head of the whole body of pilgrims. Some of the co-workers were listening to 
our conversation. Polak was to take the evening train from Durban. But God 
does not always permit man to carry out his plans. Rama had to retire to the 
forest on the very day that was fixed for his coronation. While we were thus 
engaged in talking, a Cape cart came and stopped before us from it alighted 
Mr. Chammey, the Principal Immigration Officer of the Transvaal and a police 
officer. They took me somewhat aside and one of them said, ‘I arrest you.’ 
I thus arrested thrice in four days. 
‘What about the marchers?’ I asked.  
‘We shall see to that’, was the answer. 
I said nothing further. I asked Polak to assume charge of and go with the 
pilgrims. The police officer permitted me only to inform the marchers of my 
arrest. As I proceeded to ask them to keep the peace etc., the officer 
interrupted me and said, 
‘You are now a prisoner and cannot make any speeches.’ 
I understood my position, but it was needless. As soon as he stopped me 
speaking, the officer ordered the driver to drive the cart away at full speed. In 
a moment, the pilgrims passed out of my sight.  
The officer knew that for the time being I was master of the situation, for 
trusting to our non-violence, he was alone in this desolate veld confronted by 
two thousand Indians. He also knew that I would have surrendered to him even 
if he had sent me a summons in writing. Such being the case, it was hardly 
necessary to remind me that I was a prisoner. And the advice which I would Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 284 have given the pilgrims would have served the Government’s purpose no less 
than our own. But how could an officer forego an opportunity of exercising his 
brief authority? I must say, however, that many officers understood us better 
than this gentleman. They knew that not only had arrest no terrors for us but 
on the other hand we hailed it as the gateway of liberty. They therefore 
allowed us all legitimate freedom and thankfully sought our aid in conveniently 
and expeditiously effected arrests. The reader will come across apposite cases 
of both the kinds in these pages. 
I was taken to Greylingstad, and from Greylingstad via Balfour to Heideberg 
where I passed the night. 
The pilgrims with Polak as leader resumed their march and halted for the night 
at Greylingstad where they were met by Sheth Ahmad Muhammad Kachhalia 
and Sheth Amad Bhayat who had come to know that arrangements were 
complete for arresting the whole body of marchers. Polak therefore thought 
that when this responsibility ceased in respect of the pilgrims upon their arrest, 
he could reach Durban even if a day later and take the steamer for India after 
all. But God had willed otherwise. At about 9’o’clock in the morning on the 10th 
the pilgrims reached Balour where three special trains were drawn up at the 
station to take them and deport then to Natal. The pilgrims were there rather 
obstinate. They asked for me to be called and promised to be arrested and to 
board the trains if I advised them to that effect. This was a wrong attitude. And 
the whole game must be spoiled and the movement must receive a set-back 
unless it was give up. Why should the pilgrims want me for going to jail? It 
would ill become soldiers to claim to elect their commanders or to insist upon 
their obeying only one of them. Mr. Chamney approached Mr. Polk and 
Kachhaila Sheth to help in arresting them. These friends encountered difficulty 
in explaining the situation to the marchers. They told them that jail was the 
pilgrims’ goal and they should therefore appreciate the Government’s action 
when they were ready to arrest them. Only thus could the Satyagrahis show 
their quality and bring their struggle to a triumphant end. They must realize Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 285 that no other procedure could have my approval. The pilgrims were brought 
round all entrained peacefully. 
I, on my part, was again hauled up before the Magistrate. I knew nothing of 
what transpired after I was separated from the pilgrims. I asked for a remand 
once again. I said that a remand had been granted by two courts, and that we 
had not now much to go to reach our destination. I therefore requested that 
either the Government should arrest the pilgrims or else I should be permitted 
to see them safe in Tolstoy Farm. The Magistrate did not comply with my 
request, but promised to forward it at once to the Government. This time I was 
arrested on a warrant from Dundee where I was to be prosecuted on the 
principal charge of including indentured labourers to leave the province of 
Natal. I was therefore taken to Dundee by rail the same day. 
Mr. Polak was not only not arrested at Balfour but he was even thanked for the 
assistance he had rendered to the authorities. Mr. Chamney even said that the 
Government had no intention of arresting him. But these were Mr. Chamney’s 
own views or the views of the Government in far as they were known to that 
officer. Government in fact would be changing their mind every now then. And 
finally they reached the decision that Mr. Polak should not be allowed to sail 
for India and should be arrested along with Mr. Kalllenbach who was working 
most energetically on behalf of the Indians. Mr. Polak therefore was arrested in 
Charlestown whilst waiting for the corridor train. Mr. Kallenbach was also 
arrested and both these friends were confined in Volksrust jail. 
I was tried in Dundee on the 11th and sentenced to nine months’ imprisonment 
with hard labour. I had still to take my second trial at Volksrust on the charge 
of aiding and abetting prohibited persons to enter the Transvaal. From Dundee I 
was therefore taken on the 13th to Volksrust where I was glad to meet 
Kallenbach and Polak in the jail. 
I appeared before the Volksrust court on the 14 th. The beauty of it was that 
the charge was proved against me only by witnesses furnished by myself at 
Kromdraai. The police could have secured witnesses but with difficulty. They Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 286 had therefore sought my aid in the matter. The courts here would not convict a 
prisoner merely upon his pleading guilty. 
This was arranged as regards me, but who would testify against Mr. Kallenbach 
and Mr. Polak? It was impossible to convict them in the absence of evidence, 
and it was also difficult at once to secure witnesses against them. Mr. 
Kallenbach intended to plead guilty as he wished to be with the pilgrims. But 
Mr. Polak was bound for India, and was not deliberately courting jail at his 
moment. After a joint consultation, therefore we three resolved that we should 
say neither yes nor no in case we were asked whether Mr. Polak was guilty of 
the offence with which he was charged. 
I provided the evidence for the Crown against Mr. Kallenbach and I appeared as 
witness against Mr. Polak. We did not wish that the cases should be protracted, 
and we therefore did our best to see that each case was disposed of within a 
day. The proceedings against me were complete on the 14th, against Kallenbach 
on the 15th and against Polak on the 17th, and the Magistrate passed sentence of 
three months’ imprisonment on all three of us. We now thought we could live 
together in Volksrust jail for these three months. But the Government could not 
afford to allow it. 
Meanwhile, we passed a few happy days in Volksrust jail, where new prisoners 
came every day and brought us news of what was happening outside. Among 
these Satyagrahi prisoners there was one old man named Harbatsinh who was 
about 75 years of age. Harbatsinh was not working on the mines. He had 
completed his indenture years ago and he was not therefore a striker. The 
Indians grew far more enthusiastic after my arrest, and many of them got 
arrested by crossing over from Natal into the Transvaal. Harbatsinh was one of 
these enthusiasts. 
‘Why are you in jail?’ I asked Harbatsinh. ‘I have not invited old men like 
yourself to court jail.’ 
‘How could I help it,’ replied Harbatsinh, ‘when you your wife and even your 
boys went to jail for our sake?  Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 287 ‘But you will not be able to endure the hardships of jail life. I would advise you 
to leave jail. Shall I arrange for your release?’ 
‘No, please. I will never leave jail. I must die one of these days, and how happy 
should I be to die in jail!’ 
It was not for me to try to shake such determination, which would not have 
been shaken even if I had tried. My head bent in reverence before this illiterate 
sage. Harbatsinh has his wish and he died in Durban jail on January 5, 1914. His 
body was with great honour cremated according to Hindu rites in the presence 
of hundreds of Indians. There was not one but there were many like Harbatsinh 
in the Satyagraha reserved for him alone and hence he becomes entitled to 
honourable mention in the history of Satyagraha South Africa. 
Government would not like that men should thus be attracted to jail, nor did 
they appreciate the fact that prisoners upon their release should carry my 
messages outside. They therefore decided to separate Kaencach, Polak and me, 
sent us away from Volksrust, and take me in particular to a place where no 
Indian could go and see me. I was sent accordingly to the jail in Bloemfontein, 
the capital of Orangia, where there were not more than 50 Indians, all of them 
serving as waiters in hotels. I was the only Indian prisoner there, the rest being 
Europeans and Negroes. I was not troubled at this isolation but hailed it as a 
blessing. There was no need now for me to keep my eyes or ears open, and I 
was glad that a novel experience was in store for me. Again, I never had had 
time for study for years together, particularly since 1893, and the prospect of 
uninterrupted study for a year filled me with joy. 
I reached Bloemfontein jail where I had as much solitude as I could wish. There 
were many discomforts but they were all bearable, and I will not inflict a 
description of them upon the reader. But I must state that the medical officer 
of the jail became my friend. The jailer could think only of his own powers 
while the doctor was anxious to maintain the prisoners in their rights. In those 
days I was purely a fruitarian. I took neither milk nor ghi nor foodgrains. I lived 
upon a diet of bananas, tomatoes, raw groundnuts, limes and olive oil. It meant 
starvation for me if the supply of any one of these things was bad in quality. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 288 The doctor was therefore very careful in ordering them out, and he added 
almonds, Walnuts and Brazil nuts to my diet. He inspected everything indented 
for me in person. There was not sufficient ventilation in the cell which was 
assigned to me. The doctor tried his best to have the cell doors kept open but 
in vain. The jailer threatened to resign if the doors were kept open. He was not 
a bad man, but he had been moving in a single rut from which he could not 
deviate. He had to deal with refractory prisoners, and if he discriminated in 
favour of a mild prisoner like myself, he would run the real risk of the turbulent 
prisoners getting the upper hand of him. I fully understood the jailer’s 
standpoint, and in the disputes between the doctor and the jailer in respect of 
me, my sympathies were always with the jailer who was an experienced, 
straightforward man, seeing the way clear before him. 
Mr. Kallenbach was taken to Pretoria jail and Mr. Polak to Germiston in jail. 
But the Government might have saved all this trouble. They were like Mrs. 
Partington trying to stem the rising tide of the ocean broom in hand. The Indian 
labourers of Natal were wide awake, and no power on earth could hold them in 
check.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 289  
46. THE TEST 
The jeweler rubs gold on the touchstone. If he is not  still satisfied as to its 
purity, he puts it into the fire and hammers it so that the dross if any is 
removed and only pure gold remains. The Indians in South Africa passed through 
a similar test. They were hammered, and passed through fire and had the hall-
mark attached to them only when they emerged unscathed through all the 
stages of examination. 
The pilgrims were taken on special trains not for picnic but for baptism through 
fire. On the way the Government did not care to arrange even to feed them 
and when they reached Natal, they were prosecuted and sent to jail 
straightway. We expected and even desired as much. But the Government 
would have to played into the Indians’ hands if they kept thousands of 
labourers in prison. And the coal mines would close down in the interval. If 
such a state of things lasted for any length of time, the Government would be 
compelled to repeal the three-pound tax. They therefore struck out a new 
plan. Surrounding them with wire netting, the Government proclaimed the 
mine compounds as outstations to the Dundee and Newcastle jails and 
appointed the mine-owners’ European staffs as the warders. In this way they 
forced the labourers underground against their will and the mines began to 
work once more. There is this difference between the status of a servant and 
that of a slave, that if a servant leaves his post, only a civil suit can be filed 
against him, whereas the slave who leaves his master can be brought back to 
work by main force. The labourers therefore were now reduced to slavery pure 
and simple. 
But that was not enough. The labourer were brave men, and they flatly 
declined to work on the mines with the result that they were brutally whipped. 
The insolent men dressed in a brief authority over them kicked and abused and 
heaped upon them other wrongs which have never been placed on record. But 
the poor labourers patiently put up with all their tribulations. Cablegrams 
regarding these outrages were sent to India addressed to Gokhale who would Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 290 inquire in his turn if he did not even for a day receive a fully detailed message. 
Gokhale broadcast the news from his sickbed, as he was seriously ill at the 
time. In spite of his illness, however, he insisted upon attending to the Africa 
business himself and was at it at night no less than by day. Eventually all India 
was deeply stirred, and the South African question became the burning topic of 
the day. 
It was then (December 1913) that Lord Hardinge in Madras made his famous 
speech which created a stir in South Africa as well as in England. The Viceroy 
may not publicly criticize other members of the Empire, but Lord Hardinge not 
only passed severe criticism upon the Union Government, but he also whole-
heartedly defended the action of the Satyagrahis and supported their civil 
disobedience of unjust and invidious legislation. The conduct of Lord Hardinge 
came in for some adverse comment in England, but even then he did not repent 
but on the other hand asserted the perfect propriety of the step he had been 
driven to adopt. Lord Hardinge’s firmness created a good impression all round. 
Let us leave for the moment these brave but unhappy labourers confined to 
their mines, and consider the situation in other parts of Natal. The mines were 
situated in the north-west of Natal, but the largest number of Indian labourers 
was to be found employed on the north and the south coasts. I was fairly 
intimate with the labourers on the north coast, that is, in about Phoenix, 
Verulam, Tongaat etc., many of whom served with me in the Boer War. I had 
not met labourers on the south coast from Durban to Isipingo and Umizinto at 
such close quarters, and I had but few co-workers in those parts. But the news 
of the strike and the arrests spread everywhere at lightning speed, and 
thousands of labourers unexpectedly and spontaneously came out on the south 
as well as on the north coast. Some of them sold their household chattels from 
an impression that it would be a long drawn out struggle and they could not 
expect to be fed by others. When I went to jail, I had warned no co-workers 
against allowing any more labourers to go on strike. I hoped that a victory could 
be achieved only with the help of the miners. If all the labourers, there were 
about sixty thousand of them all told, were called out it would be difficult to Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 291 maintain them. We had not the means of taking so many on the march; we had 
neither the men to control them nor the money to feed them. Moreover, with 
such a large body of men it would be impossible to prevent a breach of the 
peace.  
But when the floodgates are opened, there is no checking the universal deluge. 
The labourers everywhere struck work of their own accord, and volunteers also 
posted themselves in the various places to look after them.  
Government now adopted a policy of blood and iron. They prevented the 
labourers from striking by sheer force. Mounted military policemen chased the 
strikers and brought them back to their work. The slightest disturbance on the 
part of the labourers was answered by rifle fire. A body of strikers resisted the 
attempt to take them back to work. Some of them even threw stones. Fire was 
opened upon them, wounding many and killing some. But the labourers refused 
to be cowed down. The volunteers prevented a strike near Verulam with great 
difficulty. But all the labourers did not return to work. Some hid themselves for 
fear and did not go back.  
One incident deserves to be placed on record. Many labourers came out in 
Verulam and would not return in spite of all the efforts of the authorities. 
General Lukin was present on the scene with his soldiers and was about to late 
Parsi Rustomji then hardly 18 years of age, had reached here from Durban. He 
seized the reins of the of the General’s horse and exclaimed, ‘You must not 
order firing. I undertake to induce my people peacefully to return to work.’ 
General Lukin was charmed with the young man’s courage and gave him time to 
try his method of love. Sorabji reasoned with the labourers who came round 
and returned to their work. Thus a number of murders were prevented by the 
presence of mind, valour and loving kindness of one young man. 
The reader must observe that this firing and the treatment accorded by the 
Government to the strikers on the coast were quite illegal. There was an 
appearance of legality about the Government’s procedure in respect of the 
miners who were arrested not for going on strike but for entering the Transvaal 
without proper credentials. On the north and the south coast, however, the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 292 very act of striking work was treated as an offence not in virtue of any law but 
of the authority of the Government. Authority takes the place of law in the last 
resort. There is a maximum in English law that the king can do no wrong. The 
convenience of the powers that be is the law in the final analysis. This 
objection is applicable to all governments alike. And as a matter of fact it is 
not always objectionable thus to lay the ordinary law on the shelf. Sometimes 
adherence to ordinary law is itself open to objection. When the authority 
charged with the pledged to the public good is threatened with destruction by 
the restraints imposed upon it, it is entitled in its discretion to disregard such 
retraints. But occasions of such a nature must always be rare. If the authority is 
in the habit of frequently exceeding the limits set upon it, it cannot be 
beneficial to the common weal. In the case under consideration the authority 
had no reason whatever to act arbitrarily. The labourer has enjoyed the right to 
strike from times immemorial. The Government had sufficient material before 
them to know that the strikers were not bent upon mischief. At the most the 
strike was to result only in the repeal of the three pound tax. Only peaceful 
methods can be properly adopted against men of peace. Again the authority in 
South Africa was not pledged to the public good but existed for the exclusive 
benefit of the Europeans, being generally hostile to the Indians. And therefore 
the breach of all restraints on the part of such a partisan authority could never 
be proper or excusable.  
Thus in my view there was here a sheer abuse of authority, which could never 
achieve the ends which it proposed to itself. There is sometimes a momentary 
success, but a permanent solution cannot be reached by such questionable 
methods. In South Africa made itself heard everywhere. Indeed, I believe, that 
as every part has its place in a machine, every feature has its place in a 
movement of men, and as a machine is clogged by rust, dirt and the like, so is a 
movement hampered by a number of factors. We are merely the instruments of 
the Almighty Will and are therefore often ignorant of what helps us forward and 
what acts as an impediment. We must thus rest satisfied with a knowledge only 
of the means and if these are pure, we can fearlessly leave the end to take 
care of itself. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 293 I observed in this struggle, that its end drew nearer as the distress of the 
fighters became more intense, and as the innocence of the distressed grew 
clearer. I also saw that in such a pure, unarmed and non-violent struggle, the 
very kind of material required for its prosecution, be it men, money or 
munitions, is forth coming at the right moment. Many volunteers rendered 
spontaneous help, whom I do not know even to this day. Such workers are 
generally selfless and put in a sort of invisible service even in spite of himself 
or herself. No one takes note of them, no one awards them a certificate of 
merit. Some of them do not even know that their nameless but priceless 
unremembered acts of love do not escape the sleepless vigilance of the 
recording angle.  
The Indians of South Africa successfully passed the test to which they were 
subjected. They entered the fire and emerged out of it unscathed. The 
beginnings of the end of the struggle must be detailed in a separate chapter.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 294  
47. THE BEGINNING OF THE END 
The reader has seen that the Indians exerted as much quite strength as they 
could and more than could b expected of them. He has also seen that the very 
large majority of these passive resisters were poor downtrodden men of whom 
no hope could possibly be entertained. He will recall too, that all the 
responsible workers of the Phoenix settlement with the exception of two or 
three were now in jail. Of the workers outside Phoenix the late Sheth Ahmed 
Muhammad Kachhalia was still at large, and so were Mr. West, Miss West and 
Maganlal Gandhi in Phoenix. Kachhalia Sheth exercised general supervision. Miss 
Schlesin kept all the Transvaal accounts and looked after the Indians who 
crossed the border. Mr. West was in charge of the English section of Indian 
Opinion and of the cable correspondence with Gokhale. At a time like the 
present, when the situation assumed a new aspect every moment, 
correspondence by post was out of the question. Cablegrams had to be 
dispatched, no shorter in length than letters, and the delicate responsibility 
regarding them was shoulders by Mr. West. 
Like Newcastle in the mine area, Phoenix now became the centre of the 
strikers on the north coast, and was visited by hundreds of them who came 
there to seek advice as well as shelter. It therefore naturally attracted the 
attention of the Government, and the angry looks of the Europeans 
thereabouts. It became somewhat risky to live in Phoenix, and yet even 
children there accomplished dangerous tasks with courage. West was arrested 
in the meanwhile, though as a matter of fact there was no reason for arrested 
him. Our understanding was, that West and Maganlal Gandhi should not only 
not try to be arrested, but on the other hand should, as far as possible, avoid 
any occasion for arrest. West had not therefore allowed any ground to arise for 
the Government to arrest him. But the Government could scarcely be expected 
to consult the convenience of the Satyagrahis, nor did they need to wait for 
some occasion to arise for arresting anyone whose freedom jarred upon their 
nerves. The authority’s very desire to take a step amply suffices as a reason for Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 295 adopting it. As soon as the news of the arrest of West was cabled to Gokhale, 
he initiated the policy of sending out able men from India. When a meeting was 
held in Lahore in support of the Satyagrahis of South Africa, Mr. C.F. Andrews 
gave away in their interest all money in his possession, and ever since then 
Gokhale had had his eye upon him. No sooner, therefore, did he hear about 
West’s arrest, than he inquired of Andrews by wire if he was ready to proceed 
to South Africa at once. Andrews replied in the affirmative. His beloved friend 
Pearson also got ready to go the same moment, and the two friends left India 
for South Africa by the first available steamer. 
But the struggle was now about the close. The Union Government had not the 
power to keep thousands of innocent men in jail. The Viceroy would not 
tolerate it, and all the world was waiting to see what General Smuts would do. 
The Union Government now did what all governments similarly situated 
generally do. No inquiry was really needed. The wrong perpetrated was well 
known on all hands, and everyone realized that it must be redressed. General 
Smuts too saw that there had been injustice which called for remedy, but he 
was in the same predicament as a snake which has taken a rat in its mouth but 
can neither gulp it down nor cast it out. He must do justice, but he had lost the 
power of doing justice, as he had given the Europeans in South Africa to 
understand, that he would not repeal the three-pound tax nor carry out any 
other reform. And now he felt compelled to abolish the tax as well as to 
undertake other remedial legislation. States amenable to public opinion get out 
such awkward positions by appointing a commission which conducts only a 
nominal inquiry, as its recommendations are a foregone conclusion. It is a 
general practice that the recommendations of such a commission should be 
accepted by the State, and therefore under the guise of carrying out the 
recommendations, governments give the justice, which they have first refused. 
General Smuts appointed a commission of three members, with which the 
Indians pledged themselves to have nothing to do so long as certain demands of 
theirs in respect of the commission were not granted by the government. One 
of these demands was, that the Satyagrahi prisoners should be released, and 
another that the Indians should be represented on the commission by at least Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 296 one member. To a certain extent the first demand was accepted by the 
commission itself, which recommended to the Government ‘with a view to 
enabling the enquiry to be made as thorough as possible’ that Mr. Kallenbach, 
Mr. Polak and I should be released unconditionally. The Government accepted 
this recommendation and released all three of us simultaneously (December 18, 
1913) after an imprisonment of hardly six weeks. West who had been arrested 
was also released as Government had no case against him. 
All these events transpired before the arrival of Andrews and Pearson whom I 
was thus able to welcome as they landed at Durban. They were agreeably 
surprised to see me, as they knew nothing of the events which happened during 
their voyage. This was my first meeting with these noble Englishmen. 
All three of us were disappointed upon our release. We knew nothing of the 
events outside. The news of the commission came to us as a surprise, but we 
saw that we could not co-operate with the commission in any shape or form. 
We felt that the Indians should be certainly allowed to nominate at least one 
representative on the commission. We there, therefore, upon reaching Durban, 
addressed a letter to General Smuts on December 21, 1913 to this effect: 
‘We welcome the appointment of the commission, but we strongly object to 
the inclusion in it of Messers Esselen and Wylie. We have nothing against them 
personally. They are well-known and able citizens. But as both of them have 
often expressed their dislike for the Indians, there is likelihood of their doing 
injustice without being conscious of it. Man cannot change his temperament all 
at once. It is against the laws of nature to suppose, that these gentlemen will 
suddenly become different from what they are. However we do not ask for 
their removal from the commission. We only suggest that some impartial men 
should be appointed in addition to them, and in this connection, we would 
mention Sir James Rose Innes and the Hon. Mr. W.P. Schreiner, both of them 
well-known men noted for their sense of justice. Secondly, we request that all 
the Satyagrahi prisoners should be released. If this is not done, it would be 
difficult for us to remain outside the jail. There is no reason now for keeping 
the Satyagrahis in jail any longer. Thirdly, if we tender evidence before the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 297 commission, we should be allowed to go to the mines and factories where the 
indentured labourers are at work. If these requests are not complied with, we 
are sorry that we shall have to explore fresh avenues for going to jail.’ 
General Smuts declined to appoint any more members on the commission and 
stated that the commission was appointed not for the sake of any party but 
merely for the satisfaction of the government. Upon receiving this reply on 
December 24, we had no alternative but to prepare to go to jail. We therefore 
published a notification to the Indians that a party of Indians courting jail 
would commence their march from Durban on January 1, 1914. 
But there was one sentence in General Smuts’ reply, which prompted me to 
write to him again, and it was this: ‘We have appointed an impartial and 
judicial commission, and if while appointed it, we have not consulted the 
Indians, neither have we consulted the coal-owners or the sugar-planters.’ I 
wrote privately to the General, requesting to see him and place some facts 
before him if the Government were out to do justice. General Smuts granted 
my request for an interview, and the march was postponed for a few days 
accordingly. 
When Gokhale heard that a fresh march was under contemplation, he sent a 
long cablegram, saying that such a step on our part would land Lord Hardinge 
and himself in an awkward position and strongly advising us to give up the 
march, and assist the commission by tendering evidence before it. 
We were on the horns of a dilemma. The Indians were pledged to a boycott of 
the commission if their personnel was not enlarged to their satisfaction. Lord 
Hardinge might be displeased, Gokhale might be pained, but how could we go 
back upon our pledged word? Mr. Andrews suggested to us the considerations of 
Gokhale’s feelings, his delicate health and the shock, which our decision was 
calculated to impart to him. But in fact these considerations were never absent 
from my mind. The leaders held a conference and finally reached the decision 
that boycott must stand at any cost if more members were not coopted to the 
commission. We therefore sent a long cablegram to Gokhale, at an expense of Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 298 about a hundred pounds. Andrews too concurred with the gist of our message 
which was to the following effect: 
‘We realize how you are pained, and would like to follow your advice at 
considerable sacrifice. Lord Hardinge has rendered priceless aid, which we wish 
we would continue to receive till the end. But we are would continue to 
receive till the end. But we are anxious that you should understand our 
position. It is a question of thousands of men having taken a pledge to which no 
exception can be taken. Our entire struggle has been built upon a foundation of 
pledges. Many of us would have fallen back today had it not been for the 
compelling force of our pledges. All moral bonds would be relaxed at once if 
thousands of men once proved false to their plighted word. The pledge was 
taken after full and mature deliberation, and there is nothing immoral about it. 
The community has an unquestionable right to pledge itself to boycott. We wish 
that even you should advise that a pledge of this nature should not be broken 
but be observed inviolate by all, come what might. Please show this cable to 
Lord Hardinge. We wish you might not be placed in a false position. We have 
commenced this struggle with god as our witness and His help as our sole 
support. We desire and bespeak the assistance of elders as well as big men, and 
are glad when we get it. But whether or not such assistance is forthcoming, we 
are humbly of opinion that pledges must ever be scrupulously kept. We desire 
your support and your blessing in such observance.’ 
This cable, when it reached Gokhale, had an adverse effect upon his health, 
but he continued to help us with unabated or even greater zeal than before. He 
wired to Lord Hardinge on the matter but not only did he not throw us 
overboard, but he on the other hand defended our standpoint. Lord Hardinge 
too remained unmoved. 
I went to Pretoria with Andrews. Just at this time, there was a great strike of 
the Europeans employees of the Union railways, which made the position of the 
Government extremely delicate. I was called upon to commence the Indian 
march at such a fortunate juncture. But I declared that the Indians could not 
thus assist the railway strikers, as they were not out to harass the Government Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 299 their struggle being entirely different and differently conceived. Even if we 
undertook the march, we would begin it at some other time when the railway 
trouble had ended. This decision of ours created a deep impression, and was 
cabled to England by Reuter. Lord Ampthill cabled his congratulations from 
England. English friends in South Africa too appreciated our decision. One of 
the secretaries of General Smuts jocularly said: ‘I do not like your people, and 
do not care to assist them at all. But what I am I to do? You help us in our days 
of need. How can we lay hands upon you? I often wish you took to violence like 
the English strikers, and then we would know at once how to dispose of you. 
But you will not injure even the enemy. You desire victory by self-suffering 
alone and never transgress your self-imposed limits of courtesy and chivalry. 
And that is what reduces us to sheer helplessness.’ General Smuts also gave 
expression to similar sentiments. 
I need scarcely suggest to the reader that this was not the first incident of 
chivalrous consideration for others being shown by the Satyagrahis. When the 
Indian labourers on the north coast went on strike, the planters at Mount 
Edgecombe would have been put to great losses if all the cane that had been 
cut was not brought to the mill and crushed. Twelve hundred Indians therefore 
returned to work solely with a view to finish this part of the work, and joined 
their compatriots only when it was finished. Again when the Indian employees 
of the Durban Municipality struck work, those who were engaged in the sanitary 
services of the borough or as attendants upon the patients in hospitals were 
sent back, and they willingly returned to their duties. If the sanitary service 
were dislocated, and if there was no one attend upon the patients in hospitals, 
there might be an outbreak of disease in the city and the sick would be 
deprived of medical aid, and no Satyagrahi would wish for such consequences 
to ensue. Employees of this description were therefore exempted from the 
strike. In every step that he takes, the Satyagrahis is bound to consider the 
position of his adversary. 
I could see that the numerous cases of such chivalry left their invisible yet 
potent impress everywhere, enhanced the prestige of the Indians, and prepared 
a suitable atmosphere for a settlement.  Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 300  
48. THE PROVISIONAL SETTLEMENT 
The atmosphere was thus becoming favourable for a set tlement. Sir Benjamin 
Robertson, who had been sent by Lord Hardinge in a special steamer, was to 
arrive about the same time that Mr. Andrews and I went to Pretoria. But we did 
not wait for him and set out as we had to reach Pretoria on the day fixed by 
General Smuts. There was no reason indeed to await his arrival, as the final 
result could only be commensurate with our strength. 
Mr. Andrews and I reached Pretoria. But I alone was to interview GeneralSmuts. 
The General was preoccupied with the railway strike, which was so serious in 
nature, that the Union Government had declared martial law. The European 
workmen not only demanded higher wages, but aimed at taking the reins of 
government into their hands. My first interview with the General was very 
short, but I saw that he today did not ride the same high horse as he did 
before, when the Great March began. At that time the General would not so 
much as talk with me. The threat of Satyagraha was the same then as it was 
now. Yet he had declined to enter into negotiations. But now he was ready to 
confer with me.  
The Indians had demanded that a member should be co-opted to the 
commission to represent Indian interest. But on this point General Smuts would 
not give in. ‘That cannot be done,’ said he, ‘as it would be derogatory to 
Government’s prestige, and I would be unable to carry out the desired reforms. 
You must understand that Mr. Esselen is our man, and would fall in with, not 
oppose, the Government’s wished as regards reform. Colonel Wylie is a man of 
position in Natal and might even be considered anti-Indian. If therefore even he 
agrees to a repeal of the three pound tax, the Government will have an easy 
task before them. Our troubles are manyfold; we have not a moment to spare 
and therefore wish to set the Indian question at rest. We have decided to grant 
your demands, but for this we must have a recommendation from the 
commission. I understand your position too. You have solemnly declared that 
you will not lead evidence before it so long as there is no representative of the 
Indians sitting on the commission. I do not mind if you do not tender evidence, Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 301 but you should not organize any active propaganda to prevent anyone who 
wishes to give evidence from doing so, and should suspend Satyagraha in the 
interval. I believe that by so doing you will be serving your own interest as well 
as giving me a respite. As you will not tender evidence, you will not be able to 
prove your allegations as regards ill-treatment accorded to the Indian strikers. 
But that is for you to think over.’ 
Such were the suggestions of General Smuts, which on the whole I was inclined 
to receive favourably. We had made many complaints about ill-treatment of 
strikers by soldiers and warders, but the difficulty was that we were precluded 
by a boycott of the commission from proving our allegations. There was a 
difference of opinion among the Indians on this point. Some held that the 
charges leveled by the Indians against the soldiers must be proved, and 
therefore suggested that if the evidence could not be placed before the 
commission, we must challenge libel proceedings by publishing the authentic 
evidence in our possession. I disagreed with these friends. There was little 
likelihood of the commission giving a decision unfavourable to the Government. 
Challenging libel proceedings would land the community in endless trouble, and 
the net result would be barren satisfaction of having proved the charges of ill-
treatment. As a barrister, I was well aware of the difficulties of proving the 
truth of statements giving rise to libel proceedings. But my weightiest 
argument was, that the Satyagrahi is out to suffer. Even before Satyagraha was 
started, the Satyagrahis knew that they would have to suffer even unto death, 
and they were ready to undergo such suffering. Such being the case, there was 
no sense in proving mow that they did suffer. A spirit of revenge being alien to 
Satyagraha, it was best for a Satyagrahi to hold his peace when he encountered 
extraordinary difficulties in proving the fact obnoxious laws should be repealed 
or suitably amended, and when this was fairly within his grasp, he need not 
bother himself with other things. Again a Satyagrahi’s silence would at the time 
of settlement stand him in good stead in his resistance to unjust laws. With 
such arguments I was able to win over most of these friends who differed from 
me, and we decided to drop the idea of proving our allegations of ill-
treatment. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 302  
49. LETTERS EXCHANGED 
Correspondence passed between General Smuts and mysel f, placing on record 
the agreement arrived at as the result of a number of interviews. My letter 
dated January 21, 1914 may be thus summarized: 
‘We have conscientious scruples with regard to leading evidence before the 
commission as constituted at present. You appreciate these scruples and regard 
them as honourable, but are unable to alter your decision. As however, you 
have accepted the principle of consultation with the Indians, I will advise my 
countrymen not to hamper the labours of the commission by any active 
propaganda, and not to render the position of the Government difficult by 
reviving passive resistance, pending the result of the commission and the 
introduction of legisllation during the forthcoming session. It will further be 
possible for us to assist Sir Benjamin Roberston who has been deputed by the 
Viceroy. 
‘As to our allegations of ill-treatment during the progress of the Indian strike in 
Natal, the avenue of proving them through the commission is closed to us by 
our solemn declaration to have nothing to do with it. As Satyagrahis we 
endeavour to avoid, as far as possible, any resentment of personal wrongs. But 
in order that our silence may not be mistaken, may I ask you to recognize our 
motive and reciprocate by not leading evidence of a negative character before 
the commission on the allegations in question?  
‘Suspension of Satyagraha, moreover, carries with it a prayer for the release of 
Satyagrahi prisoners. 
‘It might not be out of place here to recapitulate the points on which relief has 
been sought: 
1. Repeal of the $ 3 tax; 
2. Legalization of the marriages celebrated according to the rite of Hinduism, 
Islam, etc; 
3. The entry of educated Indians;  Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 303 4. Alternation in the assurance as regards the Orange Free State; 
5. An assurance that the existing laws especially affected Indians will be 
administered justly, with the regard to vested rights. 
‘If you view my submission with favour, I shall be prepared to advise my 
countrymen in accordance with the tenor of this letter.’ 
General Smuts’ reply of the same date was to this effect: 
‘I regret but understand your inability to appear before the commission. I also 
recognize the motive which makes your you unwilling to revive old sores by 
courting libel proceeding before another tribunal. The Government repudiates 
the charges of harsh action against the Indian strikers. But as you will not lead 
evidence in support of those allegations, it would be futile for the Government 
to lead rebutting evidence in vindication of the conduct of its officers. As 
regards the release of Satyagrahi prisoners, the Government had already issued 
the necessary orders before your letter arrived. In regard to the grievances 
summarized at the end of your letter, the Government will await the 
recommendations of the commission before any action is taken.’ 
Mr. Andrews and I had frequent interviews with General Smuts before these 
letters were exchanged. But Meanwhile Sir Benjamin Robertson too arrived at 
Pretoria. Sir Benjamin Robertson too arrived at Pretoria. Sir Benjamin was 
looked upon as a popular official, and he brought a letter of recommendation 
from Gokhale, but I observed that he was not entirely free from the usual 
weakness of the English official. He had no sooner come than he began to 
create factions among the Indians and to bully the Satyagrahis. My first meeting 
with him in Pretoria did not prepossess me in his favour. I told him about the 
telegrams I had received informing me of his bullying procedure. I dealt with 
him, as indeed with everyone else, in a frank and straightforward manner, and 
we therefore became friends. But I have often seen that officials are apt to 
bully those who will tamely submit to them, and will be correct with those who 
are correct themselves and will not be cowed down. 
We thus reached a provisional argument, and Satyagraha was suspended for the 
last time. Many English friends were glad of this, and promised their assistance Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 304 in the final settlement. It was rather difficult to get the Indians to endorse this 
agreement. No one would wish that enthusiasm which had arisen should be 
allowed to subside. Again, whoever would trust General Smuts? Some reminded 
me of the fiasco in 1908, and said, ‘General Smuts once played us false, often 
charged you with forcing fresh issues, and subjected the community to endless 
suffering. And yet what a pity that you have not learnt the necessary lesson of 
declining to trust him! This man will betray you once again, and you will again 
propose to revive Satyagraha. But who will then to you? Is it possible that men 
should every now and then go to jail, and be ready to be faced with failure 
each time? With a man like General Smuts settlement is possible only if he 
actually delivers the goods. It is no use having his assurances. How can we any 
further trust a man who pledges his word and then breaks it?  
I knew that such arguments would be brought forward, and was not therefore 
surprised when they were. No matter how often a Satyagrahi is betrayed, he 
will repose his trust in the adversary so long as there are not cogent grounds for 
distrust. Pain to a Satyagrahi is the same as pleasure. He will not therefore be 
misled by the mere fear of suffering into groundless distrust. On the other 
hand, relying as he does upon his own strength, he will not mind being betrayed 
by the adversary, will continue to trust in spite of frequent betrayals, and will 
believe that he thereby strengthens the forces of truth and brings victory 
nearer. Meetings were therefore held in various places, and I was able at last to 
persuade the Indians to approve of the terms of the agreement. The Indians 
now came to a better understanding of the spirit of Satyagraha. Mr. Andrews 
was the mediator in the witness in the present agreement, and then there was 
Sir Benjamin Robertson as representing the Government of India. There was 
therefore the least possible likelihood of the agreement being subsequently 
repudiated. If I had obstinately refused to accept the agreement, it would have 
become a count of indictment against the Indians, and the victory which was 
achieved in the next six months would have been best with various obstacles. 
The author of the Sanskrit saying, ‘Forgiveness is an ornament to the brave’, 
drew upon his rich experience of Satyagrahis never giving anyone the least 
opportunity of finding fault with them. Distrust is a sign of weakness and Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 305 Satyagraha implies the banishment of all weakness and therefore of distrust, 
which is clearly out of place when the adversary is not to be destroyed but to 
be won over. 
When the Indians thus endorsed the agreement, we had only to wait for the 
next session of the Union Parliament. Meanwhile the commission set to work. 
Only a very few witnesses appeared before it on behalf of the Indians, 
furnishing striking evidence of the great hold which the Satyagrahis had 
acquired over the community. Sir Benjamin Robertson tried to induce many to 
tender evidence but failed except in the case of a few who were strongly 
opposed to Satyagraha. The boycott of the commission did not produce any bad 
effect. Its work was shortened and its report was published at once. The 
commission strongly criticized the Indians for withholding their assistance and 
dismissed the charges of misbehavior against the soldiers, but recommended 
compliance without delay with all the demands of the Indian community, such 
as for instance the repeal of the three pound tax and the validation of Indian 
marriages, and the grant some trifling concessions in addition. Thus the report 
of the commission was favourable to the Indians as predicated by General 
Smuts. Mr. Andrews left for England and Sir Benjamin Robertson for India. We 
had received an assurance that the requisite legislation would be undertaken 
with a view to implement the recommendations of the commission. What this 
legislation was and how it was brought forward will be considered in the next 
chapter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 306  
50. THE END OF THE STRUGGLE 
Within a short time of the issue of the report, the G overnment published in the 
Official Gazette of the Union the Indians Relief Bill, which was to effect a 
settlement of their long-standing dispute with the Indians; and I went at once 
to Cape Town where the Union Parliament sits. The Bill contained sections and 
would take up only two columns of a paper like Young India. One part of it 
dealt with the question of Indian marriages and validated in South Africa the 
marriages which were held legal in India, except that if a man had more wives 
than one, only one of them would any time be recognized as his legal wife in 
South Africa. The second part abolished the annual licence three pound of tax 
to be taken out by every indentured Indian Labourer who failed to return to 
India and settled in the country as a free man on the completion of his 
indenture. The third part provided that the domicile certificates issued by the 
Government to Indians in Natal and bearing the thumb impression of the holder 
of the permit should be recognized as conclusive evidence of the of the right of 
the holder to enter the Union as soon as his identity was established. There was 
a long and pleasant debate over the bill in the Union Parliament. 
Administrative matters which did not come under the Indians Relief Bill were 
settled by correspondence between General smuts and me, as for example, 
safeguarding the educated Indians’ right of entry into the Cape Colony, 
allowing ‘specially exempted’ educated Indians to enter entered South Africa 
within the last three years, and permitting existing plural wives to join their 
husbands in South Africa. After dealing with all these points, General Smuts, in 
his letter of June 30, 1914, added: 
‘With regard to the administration of existing laws, it has always been and will 
continue to be the desire of the Government to see that they are administered 
in a just manner and with due regard to vested rights.’ 
I replied to the above letter to this effect  
‘I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter of even date. I feel deeply grateful 
for the patience and courtesy which you showed during our discussions. Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 307 ‘The passing of the Indians Relief Bill and this correspondence finally closed the 
Satyagraha struggle which commenced in the September of 1906 and which to 
the Indian community cost much physical suffering and pecuniary loss and to 
the government much anxious thought and consideration. 
‘As you are aware, some of my countrymen have wished me to go further. They 
are dissatisfied that the Trade Licence laws of the different provinces, the 
Transvaal Gold Law, the Transvaal townships Act, the Transvaal Law 3 of 1885 
have not altered so as to give them full rights of residence, trade and 
ownership of land. Some of them are dissatisfied that full interprovincial 
migration is not permitted, and some are dissatisfied that on the marriage 
question the Relief Bill goes no further than it does. They have asked m e that 
all the above matters might be included in the Satyagraha struggle. I have been 
unable to comply with their wishes. Whilst, therefore, they have not been 
included in the programme of Satyagraha, it will not be denied that some day 
or other these matters will require further and sympathetic consideration by 
the Government. Complete satisfaction cannot be expected until full civic 
rights have been conceded to the resident Indian population. 
‘I have told my countrymen that they will have to exercise patience, and by all 
honourable means at their disposal educate public opinion so as to enable the 
Government of the day to go further than the present correspondence does. I 
shall hope when the Europeans of South Africa fully appreciate the fact that 
now the importation of indentured labour from India is prohibited, and the 
Immigrants Regulation Act of last year has in practice all but stopped further 
free Indian immigration, and that my countrymen do not entertain any political 
ambition, they, the Europeans, will see the justice and indeed the necessity of 
my countrymen being granted the rights I have just referred to.  
‘Meanwhile, if the generous spirit that the Government have applied to the 
treatment of the problem during the past few months continues to be applied, 
as promised in your letter, in the administration of the existing laws, I am quite 
certain that the Indian community throughout the Union will be able to enjoy 
some measure of peace and never be a source of trouble to the Government.’ Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 308  
CONCLUSION 
Thus the great Satyagraha struggle closed eight years , and it appeared that the 
Indians in South Africa were now at peace. On July 18, 1914, I sailed from 
England, to meet Gokhale, on my way back to India, with mixed feelings of 
pleasure and regret, pleasure because I was returning home after many years 
and eagerly looked forward to serving the country under Gokhale’s guidance, 
regret because it was a great wrench for me to leave South Africa, where I had 
passed twenty-one years of my life sharing to the full in the sweets and bitters 
of human experience, and where I had realized my vocation in life.  
When one considers the painful contrast between the happy ending of the 
Satyagraha struggle and the present condition of the Indians in South Africa, 
one feels for the moment as if all this suffering had gone for nothing, or is 
inclined to question the efficacy of Satyagraha as a solvent of the problems of 
mankind. Let us here consider this point for a little while. There is a law of 
nature that a thing can be retained by the same means by which it has been 
acquired. A thing acquired by violence can be retained only by truth. The 
Indians in South Africa, therefore, can ensure their safety today if they can 
wield the weapon of Satyagraha. There are no such miraculous properties in 
Satyagraha, that a thing acquired by truth could be retained even when truth 
was given up. It would not be desirable even if it was possible. If therefore the 
position of Indians in South Africa has now suffering deterioration, that argues 
the absence of Satyagrahis among them. There is no question here of finding 
fault with the present generation of South African Indians, but of merely stating 
the facts of the case. Individuals or bodies of individuals cannot borrow from 
others qualities, which they themselves do not possess. The Satyagrahi veterans 
passed away one after another. Sorabji, Kachhalia, Thambi Naidoo, Parsi 
Rustomji and others are no more, and they are very few now who passed 
through the fire of Satyagraha. The few that remain are still in the fighting 
line, and I have not a shadow of a doubt that they will be the saviors of the Satyagraha in South Africa 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 309 community on the day of its trial if the light of Satyagraha is burning bright 
within them. 
Finally, the reader of these pages has seen that had it not been for this great 
struggle and for the untold sufferings which many Indians invited upon their 
devoted heads, the Indians today would have been bounded out of South Africa 
Nay, the victory achieved by Indians in South Africa more or less served as a 
shield for Indian emigrants in other parts of the British Empire, who, if they are 
suppressed, will be suppressed thanks to the absence of Satyagraha among 
themselves, and to India’s inability to protect them, and not because of any 
flaw in the weapon of Satyagraha.I will consider myself amply repaid if I have 
in these pages demonstrated with some success that Satyagraha is a priceless 
and matchless weapon, and that those who wield it are strangers to 
disappointment and defeat. 