 
Selected Writings of 
MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
Selected and introduced by RONALD DUNCAN  
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
Published by  
Faber and Faber Limited  
24 Russell Squary, London  
 
           
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
The Editor  wishes  to acknowledge  with gratitude  the assistance  he has received  
from Admiral  Earl Mountbatten  of Burma, the  High Commi ssioner  for India, Mr.  
Devedas Gandhi  and Shri Pyarelal, in  collecting  this material; and also the 
permission  to reprint  it, obtained from the Nawaji van Trust, The  Marquess  of 
Linlithgo w and Sir Robert  Tottenham.  
The frontispiece  is reproduced by courtesy  of His Excellency  the High 
Commissioner  for India.  
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3 CONTENTS  
Introduction  by Ronald Duncan  
PART  I 
Anasakti  Yoga, or  The Gospel  of Selfless  Action ; An extract  from Gandhi’s  
Commentary on The Bhagavad  Gita.  
PART  II 
The Gita and Satyagraha; The  Philosophy  of Non-violence  and The Doctrine  of the 
Sword; A  letter  From  Tolstoy to  Gandhi.  
PART  III 
The Practice  of Satyagraha or Civil Disobedience; The Passive  resister’s  discipline  
and method; the  growth  of Congress; Satyagraha and Nazism; Satyagraha as a 
means  Of national  defens e; an  appeal  to England; Ahimsa  and Himsa;  Fasting  as a 
method of passive  resistance.  
PART  IV 
A reply to the poet, Tagore; Politics  and Religion; Advice  to Satyagrahis  in an 
Industrial  Strike; A  letter  to the Viceroy  Inaugurating  the Non-Co-operative  
Movement; An  appeal  to his followers; The  Swadeshi  Movement.  
PART  V 
Report of the Trial of Mahatma Gandhi; A letter  to Mahatma Gandhi  from prison.  
PART  VI 
Brahmachar ya; the  virtue  of chastity – Caste, and  Hindu  Muslim  Unity – 
Monoculture  in Education – The Untouchables – Hinduism.  
PART VII  
Extracts  from Gandhi’s  Diary kept during  his residence In Delhi  after  India had 
achieved  Dominion  Status  up to the time of his assassination.  
PART  VIII 
Correspondence  between  Mahatma Gandhi  and Lord Linlithgow,  Viceroy  of India.  
PART  IX 
Aphorisms.  
BIBLIOGRAPHY  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4 INTRODUCTION  
What  are my credentials  for making  this selection  or for writing  about Mahatma  
Gandhi ? The reader  has a right to ask that question.  Before  he can assess  the 
accuracy  of an account, he  must first know  something  about the historian.  There  is 
no such thing  as complete  objectivity especially in human relationships  and we 
delude  ourselves  when  we pretend that there  is. Though detachment must always  
be the biographer’s  aim, he  can never  achieve  it; and  more  often  than not he 
succeeds  in revealing  nothing  but himself.  This being  so, perhaps  he should  in the 
first place  admit to those  factors  which  have probably limited  his vision  and thus 
give the reader  the chance  to make  adjustments  accordingly.  With this purpose  in 
mind, the  following  facts concerning  myself  may not appear  wholly  irrelevant.  
In 1937 I was only twenty- two, and that is probably not the best age at which  one 
can assess  the achievements  or the personality of a philosopher  of sixty.  
Furthermore, the  nineteen- thirties  produced a particularly  raw type of young  man, 
to which  I was no exception.  It was a decade  of political  arrogance  and spiritual  
apathy: the  air was thick with so-called  progressive  thought  which  approved of 
nothing  in the past, but for all that claimed  to be omniscient  with regard  to the 
future; the  lessons  of history were disregarded, tradition  was derided; and though  
everything  was explained, no thing  was understood.  It was a period of naivet’e.  
As soon as I came  down  from the University, I  busied myself  about  reforming  
everything, excluding  myself.  Many of my friends  were equally active  in the same  
conveniently  extrovert  fashion.  On one side it must be said that we were  
genuinely  perplexed  by the seeming  paradox  of poverty amongst plenty which  we 
saw around us, and in various  ways we sought  to do something  about  this 
condition.  At this time there  were nearly three  million  unemployed; and this 
factor accounted  for the extreme views  to which  many  of us then inclined.  We 
made  the mistake  of assuming  that the cure for this social  disease  was obvious  as 
the symptoms  were apparent.  It proved  otherwise.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5 For several  months  I worked  in a Yorkshire  coal-field as a miner.  My duties  were to 
look after the pit ponies at the bottom  of the shaft.  I was not a member  of any 
political  party; I  was not an agitator, and if I had been, the  work down  the mine 
was so exhausting  that I should  not have had the energy  for such activities.  I told 
myself  I was living  as a working  man in order  to understand  him. Perhaps  it was 
merely  an adventure.  However, this  is not the place  to describe  it. 
Soon after I left the colliery  and returned  to London, a  stay-in strike  occurred  in 
the Rhondda  Valley.  I immediately went  there, for  I now had some  practical  
knowledge  of the miners’  conditions: they  had been my own. The miners  had 
struck  without their Union’s  support.  For four days and nights  thirty of them  had 
remained  down, refusing  to come  to the surface.  I stood  with the worried  women  
at the top of the shaft.  
It then occurred  to me that if only these  strikers  could  refrain  from all violence  
and continue  their passive  resistance  they might  in time arouse  the conscience  of 
the owners  and the nation; and, by these  means, achieve  for themselves  more  
than political  theories  could  do for them.  Their  wives  prepared food to be lowered  
down  the shaft.  I smuggled  some  chewing  tobacco  into the basket and a note to 
their leader  urging  him to contin ue his non-violent  resistance.  But to no avail.  The 
Communists  exploited the situation; violence  broke  out, the  police  had then 
sufficient  cause  to act; the  public  lost their sympathy with the strike  and it 
eventually  petered out. I myself  was denounced  by the Communists  who informed  
the police  that I was an agent provocateur.  I was arrested as a vagrant, but  
eventually  allowed  my freedom.   
This experience convinced  me of the importance  of passive  resistance.  I could  see 
the need of personal  discipline  even in industrial  disputes.  This realization  turned  
me from all the current  political  theories  with their ridiculous  simplifications.  
Dimly, I  perceived  that what our age needed  most was a saint, not  politicians.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6 True to type, I wrote  a pamphlet about the matter  and as nobody  would  sell it 
when  it was printed;  I posted the copies  away to anybody whose  name  came  to my 
mind.  One of these  was, of  course, Mahatma Gandhi.  
To my surprise, he  treated my silly essay  seriously  and wrote  a long letter  to me 
on this question of discipline. This raised  another  dimension.  We continued  to 
correspond.  There  was no air mail then, it  took me six weeks  to get an answer.  
With my usual  impatience  I sent him a post card suggesting  we should  meet.  He 
took me at my word and cabled his reply: ‘Meet  me Wardha  on the 23rd inst.’  
I remember  that I was sitting  playing  chess  in Amen  Court  with the late Dick 
Sheppard at the time when  I received  it. The first thing  was to find an atlas to 
discover  the whereabouts  of Wardha.  I then realized that if I was to keep the 
appointment I had to get to the very centre  of India within  a month.  Sheppard  
advised me to go. He was at this time running  the Peace  Pledge  Movement  and 
urged  me to ask Gandhi’s  advice  on several  matters . 
So within  a couple  of days I left London.  Benjamin  Britten  and Henry Boys came  as 
far as Paris with me. There  was a feeling  I should  never  return  and Britten  worried  
lest I might  become  a yogi in Tibet.  
The journey  was uneventful  except  for the fact that I discovered  a detective  had 
been detailed to accompany  me. We used to play poker  together.  
I reached  Wardha on 23rd. At the station  I looked  for a taxi. There  was none.  I was 
persuaded to hire a primitive  vehicle  called  a tonga.  It resembled  Boadicea’s  
chariot, it  had wooden  wheels  without  any kind of rims or tyres, th ree hand-sawn  
planks  constituted  the body and these  were  nailed direct  on to the axle. The 
emaciated driver  sat on the shaft and steered  the lean bullock  by twisting  its bony 
tail. There  were no reins, no  springs  and no road.  It was all ruts and bumps.  I do 
not know  how far Gandhi’s  Ashram  was from Wardha station.  I shall always  believe  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7 it was too far. After  half an hour of bumping  across  an arid, infertile  scrubland I 
could  do no more  than cling on for I now lacked  the strength  to fling myself  off. 
Suddenly the sadistic  and reckless  driver  pointed out some  figure  Walking  towards  
us; I was too shaken  to be interested.  But the driver  pulled  up and there  was 
Gandhi  smiling  mischiev ously  above  me. He had walked three  miles  to meet  me. I 
crawled  off my tonga quite  expecting  him to congratulate  me on my survival, or  at 
least make  some  comment  on my arrival, for I had travelled several  thousand  
miles  to keep this appointment.  
‘As I was saying  in my last letter,’ he  began  before  I had time to dust the tonga off 
my back, ‘means  must determine  ends and indeed it’s questionable  in human 
affairs  whether  there  is an end. The best we can do is to make  sure of the method  
and examine  our motive….’  
Whereupon we began  to walk across  this desert  scrub, continuing  our discussion  as 
though neither  time nor place  had interrupted our correspondence.  I noted Gandhi  
never  referred  to my arrival – which  I suppose  was one way of making  feel at home  
and saved  us the time of discussing  something  of no consequence.  
For the rest of our walk he continued  to discuss  the ethics  of action  and he 
explained what he meant by ‘selfless  action’ – ‘I will give you a Gita as soon as we 
get in’. He also asked me about  the pacifist  organizations  in England.  
I told him that one of their difficulties  was the expense of propaganda.  He smiled  
ruefully  at this. 
‘The right action  contains  its own propaganda and needs  no other,’ he  said. ‘It’s  
the same  with all these  movements, societies, or  sects, they waste  their time and 
energies  saying  what everybody ought  to do, but if they themselves  were  to act up 
to their own principles  that would  be sufficient  and arresting  propaganda.  Truth  
needs  no publicity other  than itself  and like a small  stone  thrown  into a pond, its  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8 ripples  will in time inevitably reach  the circumference.  The only thing  to consider  
is the solidity  and the weight  of the stone…’  
Eventually we reached  Gandhi’s  Ashram  and he immediately showed  me round.  He 
called  it ‘Segoan’  and had settled  there  some  years  before  when he announced  his 
intention  of withdrawing  from Congress  and devoting  his life to the betterment of 
the Indian  villages.  
I think  he had chosen  this site for two reasons – firstly, because  the neighbouring  
village  was one of the most backward in the country; and secondly  because  the 
natural  conditions  could  not have been more  difficult.  It looked  like a desert; 
indeed  it was one, except  where  Gandhi’s  efforts  had produced this small  oasis of 
fertility around  his Ashram.  
This tiny settlement  built of adobe had now become  the political  and spiritual  
centre  of India.  It consisted  of a simple  one roomed  house  with verandas  on two 
sides.  We ate our meals  on one and I kept my belongings  on the other.  There  was 
no furniture  or decorations  of any kind.  The walls  were of mud or adobe: the  floor 
was swept  earth, trodden  hard.  This was Gandhi’s  workroom.  There  was a rug and 
a spinning -wheel  on the floor and in front of this a soap box which  served  as his 
desk.  I observed  that it was inscribed  with the word ‘Lifebuoy ’. Yet it contained  
his library; there  were  five books; I noticed  one was by Tolstoy.  
Adjoining  Gandhi’s  cell was several  others  in which  Miss Slade  and the other  
members  of the Ashram  lived.  Here too, they used to teach  the village  children.  
These  buildin gs were  enclosed  by a bamboo  stockade  in one corner  of which  three  
or four villagers  were pressing  sugar  cane and, in  another, a great draught bullock  
trod and endless  journey  drawing  water  from a well to water  the extensive kitchen  
garden.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9 Outside  the stockade, Gandhi  showed  me his idea of a lavatory.  This consisted  of a 
narrow hand-dug trench  with a portable  shelter.  
‘You’ve  no idea how difficult  it is to persuade  the villagers  to bury their excreta,’ 
he told me. I little guessed  then that I was soon to discover.  
The kitchen  consisted  of a pump and a fire, both  in the open.  On the veranda  
opposite  sat a middle -aged woman  shelling  peas with remarkable  dexterity.  
Gandhi  introduced me to her. It was his wife, Kasturbai.  She seemed  very shy and 
could  not speak  English.  As soon as we had moved  away he told me that twenty  
years  ago he had undertaken  vow of chastity.  And with the amazing  frankness  
which  later I was to take for granted, he  said that he had married  at an early  age. 
He paused. “I  was only thirteen.’  He told me how Hindu  parents  waste  so much  
time and money  over the marriage  celebrations  of their children, who  are 
themselves  often  unaware  of their betrothal.  And how his father  and mother  had 
decided to stage  one extravagant  celebration  and marry him and his two brothers  
off in a grand triple  wedding.  Only when  he was measured for new clothes  did he 
realize  that his wife had been chosen.  He told me, too, of  the shyness  and the 
agony of intimacy  he and his wife felt when  thrust into this premature  wedlock . 
I formed  the impression  that Gandhi, the  reformer, was  born on his own wedding  
night.  
‘The marriage  was unhappy at the start owing  to my jealousy  and I have never  
forgiven  myself  for all the sensualism  I indulged  in which  left me no time to teach  
my wife. She remains  almost illiterate.  As you notice, she  cannot  speak  English.’  
For my part I had thought  no less of her for this lack and indeed  her homeliness  
had attracted me as a relief  from Gandhi’s  own intellectualism.  I was unable  to 
understand his sense  of guilt in this respect, nor  could  I appreciate  his concern  
that Kasturbai  could  only speak  Gujarati.  After  all, I thought, she  can shell peas.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10 But even so, I realized  then that Gandhi’s  child marriage  had left him with a deep  
sense  of shame  which  nobody could  remove.  There  is a tragic  passage  in his 
autobiography which  reveals  this:  
‘The time of which  I am now speaking  is my sixteenth  year.  My father, as  we have 
seen, was  bedridden, suffering  from a fistula.  My mother, an  old servant of the 
house  and I were  his principal  attendants.  I had the duties  of a nurse, which  
mainly consisted  in dressing  the wound, giving  my father  his medicine, and  
compounding  drugs  whenever  they had to be made  up at home.  Every  night  I 
massaged his legs and retired  only when  he asked  me to do so or after  he had 
fallen  asleep.  I loved  to do this service.  I do not remember  ever having  neglected  
it. All the time at my disposal, after  the performance  of the daily duties, was  
divided  between  schools  and attending  on my father.  I would only go out for an 
evening  walk either  when  he permitted me or when  he was feeling  well.  
‘This was also the time when  my wife was expecting  a baby – a circumstance  
which, as  I can see to-day, meant a double  shame  for me. For one thing  I did not 
restrain  myself, as  I should  have done, whilst  I was yet a student.  And secondly, 
this carnal  lust got the better  of what I regarded as my duty to study and of what  
was even a greater  duty, my devotion  to my parents, Shraven  having been my 
ideal since  childhood.  Every night  whilst  my hands  were  busy massaging  my 
father’s  legs, my  mind  was hovering  about the bedroom – and that too at a time 
when  religion, medical  science, and  common  sense  alike forbade  sexual  
intercourse.  I was always  glad to be relieved  from my duty, and  went  straight to 
the bedroom  after  doing  obeisance  to my father…  
‘The dreadful  night  came.  My uncle was then  in Rajkot . I have a faint recollection  
that he came  to Rajkot  having  had news  that my father  was getting  worse.  The 
brothers  were deeply attached  to each other.  My uncle  would  sit near my father’s  
bed the whole  day, and would  insist  on sleeping  by his bedside  after sending  us all Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11 to sleep.  No one had dreamt that this was to be the fateful  night.  The danger  of 
course  was there.  
‘It was 10.30  or 11 p.m.  I was giving  the massage.  My uncle  offered  to relieve me. 
I was glad and went straight to the bedroom.  My wife, poor  thing, was  fast asleep.  
But how could  she sleep  when  I was there ? I woke  her up. In five or six minutes, 
however, the  servant knocked  at the door.  I started with alarm. “Get  up,” he  said, 
“Father  is very ill.” I knew  of course  that he was very ill, and  so I guessed  what 
“very  ill” meant at that moment.  I sprang  out of bed. 
‘ “What  is the matter ?  Do tell me!” 
‘ “Father  is no more.”  
‘So all was over! I had but to wring  my hands.  I felt deeply ashamed and 
miserable.  I ran to my father’s  room.  I saw that, if  animal  passion  had not blinded  
me, I  should  have been spared the torture  of separation  from my father  during  his 
last moments.  I should have been massaging  him and he would  have died in my 
arms.  But now it was my uncle  who had had this privilege.  He was so deeply  
devoted to his elder  brother  that he had earned  the honour  of doing  him the last 
services.  My father  had forebodings  of the coming  event.  He had made  a sign for 
pen and paper  and written: “Prepare  for the last rites.”  He had then snapped the 
amulet off his arm and also his gold necklace  of tulasi -beads  and flung  them  aside.  
A moment  after this he was no more.  
‘The shame, to  which I have referred  in a foregoing  chapter, was  this shame  of my 
carnal  desire  even at the critical  hour of my father’s  death, which  demanded  
wakeful  service.  It is a blot I have never been able to efface  or forget, and I have 
always  thought  that, although  my devotion  to my parents  knew  no bounds  and I 
would  have given  up anything  for it, yet it was weighed  and found  unpardonably  
wanting  because  my mind was at the same  moment  in the grip of lust. I have 
therefore  always  regarded myself  as a lustful, though a faithful, husband.  It took Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12 me long to get free from the shackles  of lust, and I had to pass through many 
ordeals  before  I could  overcome  it.’ 
Gandhi  then went  on to speak  to me about the necessity  of continence  and 
chastity in the pursuit  of Brahmacharya.  I felt that our respective  ages gave him a 
natural  advantage  in this discussion.  
After  he had shown  me round  the rest of his Ashram, he  introduced me to Miss 
Slade, or  Mira Ben, to  use the Indian  name  she adopted when  she became  a 
devoted follower  of the Mahatma.  She wore a plain white  Indian  costume, not  a 
sari, but such as the Untouchable  beggars  wear.  Her grey hair was entirely  shaven.  
This forbidding  appearance  did nothing  to conceal  the warm  kindness  of the 
woman.  Often  I used to go to her bare little cell and watch  her teaching  the 
village  children  to spin cotton  or attend to their filthy  sores, and  I was always  
struck  by the essentially English  thoroughness  of her work.  No shaven  head or loin-
cloth  of coarse  linen could  hide those  qualities.  I formed  the impression  that she 
was a character  as courageous  and as resolute  as Florence  Nightingale.  
I also met Rajkumari  Amrit Kaur, an  Indian  princess  who had given  her estate  away  
and joined  the community.  She was a most educated and very beautiful  woman  
who combined  the best of the West with all the grace  of the East.  
Others  in the Ashram  included  Gandhi’s  two pretty grand- daughters  who were 
devoted to him, and  a young  man called  Pyarelal  who had abandoned a promising  
university  career  for a religious  life. He acted  as Gandhi’s  amanuensis.  
I was then told the discipline  which  the Ashram  followed. ‘We  rise at 4 a.m. for 
communal  prayers,’ Gandhi  said slyly, ‘but  I shall not expect  you to attend.  After  
which  we do our toilet, breakfast, and  then work.’  
He sugge sted that I should  talk with him alone  for two hours  every  morning  and 
then accompany him on his walk.  He outlined the rest of the day. Every  moment  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13 was devoted to service  to the neighbouring  village – except  for those  times  which  
were given  to regular  prayer and meditation.  
 I had brought  a bed-roll with me and the first night  I slept on this on the veranda.  
I was wakened by the sound  of a chant; its  rhythm  was the most complex  I have 
ever heard.  The stars were still shining; it  was 4 a.m. All the members  of the 
Ashram  were sitting  in a circle  round  a log fire in the open, Gandhi  was reading  
the Vedas  and after each sloka  the others  chanted the responses.  I did not 
understand a single  word  but the rhythm  was articulate  by itself.  
After  this service  we used to wash and breakfast on figs and the green  loose -
skinned  nagpuri  oranges.  Then everybody would  go to their tasks  just as it became  
light.  The Ashram  was veterinary college, dispensary, hospital  and school  to the 
village, to  which  the peasants  used to come  with their ailing  animals  and children  
for free medical  service  and instruction  in husbandry  and rural crafts.  
‘Patient example  is the only possible  method to effect  a reform,’ Gandhi  told me 
as we walked through the sugar -cane plantations, towards  the little village  which  
was a mere  collection  of fly-blown  and squalid shacks, an  eyrie  for well-fed 
vultures.  
‘This is the real India,’ said the voice  beside  me, ‘it  is one which  visitors  to the 
Taj Mahal  seldom  see.’  
The hovels  were improvised, not  built.  Their walls  were of mud, their  roofs  of 
flattened petrol  cans, tattered mats in place  of doors; and none of them  could  
boast a window.  But it was not the extreme poverty and filth of the place  which  
appalled me most, but the complete  inertia  of the derelict inhabitants.  They were  
too emaciated for work, too  apathetic  for hope.  There  they sat in front  of their 
homes  without  even the energy  to remove  the flies settling  on their sores.  I tried 
to compare  this sight before  me with the slums  of the Rhondda  Valley, but there  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14 was no point of comparison.  The dour streets  of inhabited tombstones  in which  the 
colliers  lived were  gay and neat cottages  compared  to this. 
Gandhi  let me absorb the scene. ‘Hardly  the brightest jewel  is it?’ he said. ‘There  
are tens of millions  living  like this; usury  has brought  them  to it – they are 
mortgaged three  generations  ahead and what they sow the moneylender  and the 
tax collector  harvest.’  He told me of the injustice  of a fixed  charge, that is to say, 
taxes  which  are not computed on the yield of the harvest, but a relentless  burden  
when  drought  produces  insufficient  even for next year’s  seed.  
As we stood  there  I noticed  four or five men were squatting  in front of us. They 
were relieving  themselves.  I glanced  around  me: what  I had taken  to be the 
droppings  of dogs was, I realized,  all human excreta.  It was outside  the hovels, it  
was bedside  their only well…no  wonder  the people  were ridden  by disease  and the 
children  poxed with sores.  
Gandhi  stood  silent.  A look of intense  pity and sorrow came  into his face.  There  
was no anger.  He did not step forward  and give them  a lecture  on hygiene  or 
modern  sanitation.  He did not plead, cajole  or reprimand.  But with the same  
expression  of abject humility  as though he himself  was personally to blame  for all 
this suffering  and filth, began  to scavenge  the excreta  and bury it with his own 
hand.  As we did this together, the  villagers  at first stood  by and watched.  Then  
the example  of their beloved Mahatmaji  worked  upon them.  He was clearing  their 
filth away without a look or a word of complaint.  Within  a few minutes  the 
villagers  began  to follow  his example.  Gandhi’s  act of selfless  action, of  service, 
had achieved  in a moment  what coercion  or teaching  could  not have done in a 
century.  
Here was an example  of practical  politics, of  applied religion, an  excellent  
introduction  to philosophy.  I had come  to India to talk to Gandhi – but this incident  
taught me more  than all the discussions  we had. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15 When  we had finished  cleaning  round  the well, Gandhi  took me into one of the 
‘houses’. It was dark, entirely unfurnished, a  sort of noisy  grave  with tubercular  
children  in fly-blown  corners.  The smell made  me feel sick. To my surprise  I saw 
that his face was now radiant with pleasure.  I looked  for the cause.  In a corner  of 
the room  sat a woman  using  a charkha, or  home -made  spinning  wheel.  Another  
example  of his had been followed.  
As we walked  home, he  told me something  of the economics  of rural India and how 
many of the village  crafts  had been so discouraged and neglected  as to be 
forgotten.  
‘For instance, they go without  sugar  though these  palms  above  them  will yield it if 
only they are tapped in the proper  manner.  And the Government  has, by  taxing  
Indian  cloth  to encourage  Lancashire  exports, left us almost  naked, though  cotton  
will grow here and used to be spun in the homes.’  
He explained his Khadi  Movement  and how he had made  a vow many years  ago to 
spin so many yards  of yarn every  day. The result  was that cheap  Indian  cloth  could  
now be bought  in many villages.  And that evening  he gave me a portable  spinning  
wheel  which  was fitted  into a little case and a blue rug made  from cloth  he 
himself  had spun.  
‘The spinning  wheel  is not only the very symbol  of passive  resistance,’ he  said, ‘it  
is also a means  of meditation.  And so long as the peasants  spin they have their 
self-respect  and a measure  of independence.’  
I began  to understand  what he meant by the relation  of religion  to politics. ‘Every  
act’ he  would  repeat almost daily to me, ‘has  its spiritual , economic  and social  
implications.  The spirit  is not separate.  It cannot  be.’ This point of view was, I  
think, his  most important contribution  to twentieth -century  thought.  It was the 
base of all his activities.  Those  people  who ask whether  Gandhi  was a saint or a 
statesman  do not begin  to understand  him or his achievements.  He was one Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16 because  he was the other; in  him they were  identified, and this was the secret  of 
his success  as a politician  and his integrity as a religious  man.  
The midday meal at the Ashram  was taken  squatting  on the veranda.  I used to sit 
next to Gandhi  for he was most concerned  that I should  eat enough.  The food was 
vegetarian  and was quite  delicious.  I was particularly fond of the hand-ground  
bread with white  butter.  The only condiment  allowed  was salt, as  Gandhi 
disapproved of all seasoning  and would  not permit the Indian  curry  to be served  as 
he maintained that such seasoning  not only ruined  the palate  but was bad for the 
health  and aggravated the senses.  He said curries  were  aphrodisiacs.  
He told me that though he had been born into a religious  sect which  practiced  
strict  vegetarianism, he  had once tried meat eating.  Apparently when  he was at 
school  the doggerel  rhyme –  
Behold  the mighty Englishman  
He rules the Indian  small  
Because  he is a meat eater  
And is five cubits  tall. 
- had persuaded him to change  his diet. This step meant  breaking  with the habits  
of his parents  and the strict rules of his religion  and had to be done in secret.  But 
he told me, ‘Since  I wanted to be strong  and daring  and free my countr y from the 
English, I  decided on the experiment.’  He and a friend  went  to a lonely  spot by a 
river and there  are some  goat’s  flesh.  That night  he had a nightmare  and dreamed  
that a live goat was bleating  inside  him. He persisted in these  surreptitious  feasts 
for a time but eventually returned  to the diet of his forefathers.  
Such detailed principles  of diet and behavior  did not make  Gandhi  a prig or 
deprived him of his sense  of humour.  One day I noticed  that whereas  I and other  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17 members  of the Ashram  ate off brass  plates, Gandhi  used an old battered tin bowl.  
I asked him why he preferred it. 
‘It was given  to me when  I first went  to prison, and as I’m always  ready  to go back 
there  it’s only right that I should  continue  to use the bowl.’  
He spoke  of his prison  days with joy and with genuine  gratitude  to those  who had 
detained him. You cannot  punish a man who is grateful  for the punishment  and 
insists  on regarding  his jailer  as his host.  Every  privation  only enriched  him. His 
dignity lay in the acceptance  of every  humiliation.  
Yet in counterpoint  to these  qualities  he had a wry and mischievous  side to him. I 
was never  sure when  he was not teasing  me. And when  people  began  to praise  him 
to excess  or almost deify him, as  some  of his followers  did, his  defense was to turn 
imp. 
I remember  once when  he asked me to accompany him to Wardha where  he had 
promised to attend  a conference  of Anglican  bishops  in India.  We did not travel  by 
tonga; an  open car called  for us. As we drove  into the town, the  car was pelted  
with flowe rs and surrounded.  One earnest  devotee, a girl of about twenty, jumped  
on to the running  board in order  to touch  the Mahatma’s  garment.  As she leaned  
over to do so, Gandhi  broke  the spell by boyishly  pulling  her nose.  
‘I am not a God,’ he  used to complain  to me, ‘if  the truth  were  known  I am 
tempted more  than most men – but perhaps  less than those  who are sinners.’  In 
that distinction  was all of tolerance.  
Another  time, I  myself  had been asking  him earnest  questions  about his ‘Fast unto 
Death’ – for there  is no doubt that he would  have died voluntarily  on  that 
occasion  if the Government  had not been persuaded by opinion  to act at the last 
moment.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18 ‘Do you know  what I did on the first day of that fast?’ he asked me. ‘I got the 
prison  dentist  in to measure  me up for this set of false teeth.’  
Whether  he meant by this that he had had no intention  of fasting  to death, or  that 
he had ordered  the teeth  as an act of faith that the Government  would  recognize  
the righteousness  of his cause, he  didn’t say. But in fact I discovered  that the 
latter  was his reason, though Gandhi  told me the story in order  to suggest  the 
former  out of modesty, and to make  e believe that his will power  was not as great  
as his reputation.  
To say the least, I  was most ill-prepared  for the religious discipline  and austerity  
of Gandhi’s  Ashram.  I had come  merely  to talk – there  is nothing  so comfortable  as 
a discussion  on remote  ideals, but Gandhi  would  always  take my theory gently by 
the scruff  of its neck and rub my nose in the practical  and personal  implication.  It 
was a useful  but painful  lesson.  In this connection  one day he interrupted one of 
my more  abstract dissertations  with a little story from the life of Buddha, which I 
suspect  I have not remembered  correctly, but it is probably well known. 
‘The Buddha  had a young  disciple’, Gandhi  told me, ‘whom  the Master  left in the 
desert  promising  to return  to him in three  years  to see how he had progressed.  
During  this time the disciple  built a house  which  he proudly showed  the Buddha  
when  he return ed. The Master  examined it and then told the disciple  to take the 
house  to pieces  and erect  it again  a few paces  farther  away, promising  to return  in 
another  three  years.  The disciple  did as he was instructed.  The Master  returned, 
examined  the house  again,  but told the young  man that he must now abandon  it 
altogether  and sit by the river and meditate, promising  to return  again  at the end 
of another  three  years.  The disciple  did as he was instructed.  When  the Master  at 
last returned  he asked the disciple  what he had done with his time. “I  can now 
walk across  on the surface  of the river without  getting  my feet wet,” the  young  
man boasted. “Then  you have wasted your time,” said Buddha, “for  there  is a 
ferry just round  the corner.”  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19 The implications  of this parable  were not entirely  lost on me. Gandhi  was the most 
practical  man I have ever met. He would  always  drive  any thought  to its personal  
implication  and practical  application.  
When  I arrived  at the Ashram  I was a heavy smoker – and of course  nobody there  
ever indulged in that habit.  I used to steal off somewhat  furtively  into a field of 
sugar  cane where  I had first to overcome  my horror of snakes  before  hiding  in the 
crop to light a cigarette.  But Gandhi  was not be deceived.  He took my addiction  to 
this habit very seriously, and in order  to help me break  it he told me how he and a 
friend  had once become  fond of smoking  and used as children  to pick up the ends 
of cigarettes  which  his uncle  threw  away. ‘The  stumps  were not very satisfactory  
and so we began  to steal the servants’ pocket  money  in order  to buy them.  But 
even so we found  it intolerable  to have to  smoke  in secret  and eventually we 
became  so disgusted with these  parental  restrictions  that we decided to commit  
suicide.  We stole off into the jungle  and tried to poison  ourselves  with some  seeds  
but were  so frightened  of dying  we only took sufficient  to give us stomachache.  
However, it  cured  me of smoking – but not from thieving.  I once stole some  gold 
out of my brother’s  armlet and was then so overcome  with remorse  that I wrote  
out a full confession  and gave it to my father.  He read it. He said nothing.  He only 
wept.  This was for me an important object  lesson  in ahimsa of  love.’  
As Gandhi  told me this incident, I  was again  made  aware  of how most of his 
convi ctions  sprang  from his experiences  as a child.  His love for his parents  and the 
fact that they were both deeply religious  people  were factors  which  could  not be 
underestimated in assessing  the growth  of his character.  
His concern  about my smoking  became  of great importance  to him. Urgent  matters  
of political  moment, correspondence  with the Viceroy, were  all put aside  to keep 
me provided with toffee  made  out of the palm sugar  as a substitute  for cigarettes.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20 ‘If you can’t  master  yourself  in this’ Gandhi  used to say, ‘how  can you hope to do 
anything  else?’ And he would  then quote  the Gita and tell me that detachment  
from the senses  was the first step in the ladder, without which  nothing.  
And even after I left the Ashram, Gandhi  continued  to worry.  When  I arrive d at 
Bombay to take a boat home, a  large  parcel  of toffee  was already on the boat to 
help me on the voyage.  When  I reached  Port Sudan, there  was a letter  already  
there, in  his own hand, begging  me not to smoke.  
After  lunch, it  was the custom  for the member s of the Ashram  to retire  and 
meditate.  I soon realized  that a voyage  up the unexplored  regions  of the Amazon  
would  be an easy expedition  compared  with a journey  into my own mind.  It is an 
extremely  embarrassing  experience to discover  the shallowness  of one’s own 
thought  and complete  inability  to concentrate.  
‘Meditation  is not for him who eats too much, nor  for him who eats not at all, nor  
for him who is over-addicted to sleep, nor  for him who is always  awake.’  
After  a few days, Gandhi  took me for a long walk till we came  to a little  hut in a 
clearing.  The occupant  had put himself  under  Gandhi’s  teaching.  He was what is 
termed  a Yogi; and  had been in this place  for over a year.  The hut was no more 
than a summer -house  and contained  no furniture  except  a table and a chair.  There  
were no papers  or books.  I commented  on this. ‘The  sacrifice  of wisdom  is superior  
to any material  sacrifice; for  O Arjuna, the  climax  of action  is always  Realization,’ 
he murmured.  I stayed talking  to him for several  hours.  This man had the physique  
of a boxer  and the poise  of a dancer.  There  was about him a lake of calmness; 
being  with him was a kind of solitude.  He emitted peace  in the same  way as a 
heater  radiates  warmth.  
When  I was taking  my leave  I noticed  there  was a chill in the evening  air. I glanced  
round  his bare hut – ‘Don’t  you ever catch  cold? I asked him. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21 ‘No,’ he  said with a simplicity which  was without  a trace  of pride, ‘I  do not allow  
them…’  
So, that night, I  foolishly  abandoned the luxury  of my bed-roll on the veranda and 
followed  Gandhi  out into the open where  he used to sleep  on the damp ground.  I 
awoke  with a heavy dew on me  and a severe chill.  However, I  persisted in sleeping  
in the open till the chill got steadily worse.  Gandhi  was sympathetic  but in no way 
alarmed at my sneezes.  I also had a temperature  and the discomfort  of a stiff 
neck.  Eventually, when  leaving  the Ashram  to visit a colony  of Untouchables, he  
sent me to an osteopath  who strapped me into a vertical  machine.  A lever  was 
pulled  and the contraption  flung me violently  on to my back.  I was released – not a 
single  trace  of my influenza  remained.  
As I had daily conversations  with Gandhi, I  had a unique  opportunity to study both 
the man and his ideas.  But I was too young  to appreciate  much  at the time.  I can 
correct  some  of my youthful  impressions, but  no more; what  was hidden  from me 
then, cannot  be recalled  now.  
There  is no need to describe  his appearance : his  features  were  frequently  
photographed.  But I shall always  remember  the anachronism  of the large  cheap  
watch  which  dangled on a safety -pin attached to his loin-cloth: worn  this way, 
time itself  appeared  to be a toy, an  invention  of the Western  mind.  
His face was too animated to give the impression  of serenity; his  mind too active  
to suggest  repose.  Though his dress  was almost comical  in its simplicity, with  his 
shaven  head, steel -rimmed  glasses  and single  tooth, yet  one was unaware  of his 
appearance, and only impressed  by his extraordinary strength  of will. His humility  
was so complete  as to be the very essence of dignity.  His hands, like  all Indians’, 
were extremely  beautiful – with thousands  of years  of craft in his long supple  
fingers, by  comparison  with which  any Western  hand is a clumsy  paw. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22 During  these  discussions  he never  raised his voice  above  a whisper  and the 
spinning  wheel  was never  still. 
I told him of my experience of the stay-in strike  in the coal-mine at the Rhondda  
Valley, and asked him what training  was required  for passive  resistance.  His 
answer  was, of  course, such  as to leave  English  politics  far behind. ‘There  is no 
short  cut,’ he  told me, ‘but  the way of the spirit which  is one of detachment, of  
self-abnegation, of  being  unattached to all desires.  If such truth  resides  in one 
man, all  follows  inevitably from him. But without  that essence, nothing.’  
All conversations, whatever  their point of departure, returned to  the teachings  of 
the Gita, the  gospel  of selfless  action.  And there  was always  his insistence  that 
there  was no life but a spiritual  life. 
There  was no need for me to ask him why he concerned  himself  with politics, for  I 
had seen him clean  round  that village  well.  To him it was all service, selfless  
action, action  that is prayer.  
‘I do not believe  that the spiritual  law works  on a plane  of its own’ he  used to say 
and he had no patience  with what he called ‘the  futility of mere religious  
knowledge’.  To Gandhi  the whole  of life resided in every  part.  He did not allow  
the distinctions – religion, culture, politics  or art. His insistence  on the necessity  
of being  unattached to the senses  reminded  me of Jerome’s  vow not to read 
poetry.  I could  not understand him when  he used to tell me that all sensual  
gratification  is sin. And I used to disagree.  I remember  that I argued  on the lines 
that it did not matter  what one loved  but how; t he object  being  unimportant, the  
quality, the  purity of love, being  all important.  To my mind  the legend  of ‘Le  
Jongleur  de Notre  Dame’ is  an example  of this. 
Gandhi  saw sin in every  sensual  pleasure.  It seemed  to amount  to a nausea with 
life itself.  I was at times  reminded  of the pettiness  of English  Puritanism  and I 
suggested  that perhaps  the most perverse  sensual  gratification  was to be obtained  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23 not by satisfying  one’s  senses, but  by denying  them  satisfaction.  Gandhi  smiled  at 
this. ‘That  is also a dange r,’ ‘but  there  is no point in renouncing  an object  that 
one still desires.’  
With infinite  patience  and good humour  he tried to make  me understand the 
difference  between  what I called  Puritanism  and what he referred  to as 
Brahmacharya.  ‘What  you are talking  about amounts  to a mere  negation  of this 
life, but  what  I am talking  about is a means  to an everlasting  life. There  is a 
difference  between  renouncing  an object  and relinquishing  it.’ As usual  he quoted  
the Gita. ‘The  sages  say that renunciation means  forgoing  an action  which  springs  
from desire, and relinquishing  means  the surrender of its fruit.’*1 
This last phrase ‘the  surrender of its fruit’ was  always  on Gandhi’s  lips. It was the 
key to the philosophy of selfless  action.  
But in spite of his endless  patience  with me in these  discussions, I  refused  to 
understand – for at that age. I was determined not to do so. In retrospect I realize  
that I did, but would  not admit it. And in order  to preserve  my own tastes  and 
habits  I subconsciously  began  to seek points of disagreement  with all the 
desperation  of a goldfish  clinging  to the little bowl I knew  in preference  to the 
lake I did not dare to experience.  
One day during  a walk, he  defined  sin to me as ‘being  acted  upon by the senses’.  I 
remember  I instantly  asked him if he considered  listening  to Mozart  was a sin. The 
question  was all-important  to me. 
‘All attachment to the senses  is death’, he  replied.  It may seem  strange  but I used 
Gandhi’s  light dismissal  of Mozart as the reason  for refusing  his invitation, w hich 
he made  later to me, to  return  to India again  and live with him for a year.  
We were, of  course, often  talking  at different  levels, yet  I was reminded that most 
of his early influences  had been Western  in origin.  It was Ruskin’s  Unto this Last, Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24 Carlyle ’s Heroes  and Hero Worship, Tolstoy, and even Mrs. Besant  and the 
literature  of the Theosophical  Society  in Bayswater, which  had all influenced  
Gandhi  as a young  man.  But these  writers  only awakened  a spiritual  strength  which  
was already there.  
I discovere d that most of his ideas  concerning  self-sufficiency, rural  crafts  and 
vegetarianism  were derivative  from Tolstoi.  But the derivation  is unimportant.  The 
essential  contribution  Gandhi  made  to twentieth -century  thought  was his 
insistence  on the need for a lower standard of living, in  opposition  to the Western  
notion  that progress  lies in an accumulation  of material  prosperity.  He maintained  
that the essence of civilization  consists  not in the multiplication  of wants  but in 
their deliberate  and voluntary renunciation.  
He preached  a higher  standard of spiritual  living  and maintained that a lower level 
of material  well- being  was a necessary  prerequisite.  His ideas  were  the very 
antithesis  of both Marx and Ford.  This being so, can  his importance  to 
contemporary thought  be over-estimated ? 
I do not think  they can, and I have made  this selection  because I believe that 
Gandhi’s  teaching  is of permanent value  especially to the West, which  is so 
bemused  with the experiments  of science  that it is completely blind to the 
potentialities  of the spirit.  
Gandhi’s  political  efforts  were  entirely  without ‘concern for the fruit’.  And in the 
tragic  Delhi  Diary  one reads  of his self-doubts  as to the value  of realizing  his great  
ambition.  He had devoted his life to obtaining  the independence  of India.  In the 
whole  course  of history there  is probably no other  example  where  such a great  
political  accomplishment  depended on the efforts  of one man.  And then it was not 
a military victory  but a triumph  of his own will. Yet, as  the Delhi  Diary reveals, if  
there  is one thing  worse  than failing  in one’s  ambitions, it is to achieve  them.  For 
to do that is often  to see their value.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25 From  the moment  that Gandhi  achieved  independence  for India, he  suffered  
intense  introspection, first  appealing  to one side to abandon  communal  strife, 
then pleading  with the other, till  he was again  forced  to fast. Not only did he do 
this; but as ever, led  the nation  in a practical  example  by touring  the most 
dangerous  areas, and going  into the houses  of Moslems  in preference to those  of 
Hindus.  
Page after page of this tragic  Diary shows  his disillusionment  as he witnessed  the 
scramble  for power  and the way it corrupted  many of his own supporters.  He alone  
could  find no cause  for rejoicing  at his achievement  and was to the last filled  with 
fore-bonding  for India’s  future.  
At the age of seventy -eight ‘with  nothing  but agony in his heart’, on  12th January  
1948, he  announced  his intention  of under -taking  a great fast in an effort  to quell  
the violent  antagonism  between  India and Pakistan.  This final act of self-sacrifice  
was not in vain, but caused the Government  of India to pay over certain  assets  to 
Pakistan  which  they had been withholding  pending  a settlement  of the Kashmir  
dispute.  And only when  the two governments  pledged  themselves  to protect the 
life and property  of the minorities, did  Gandhi  break  his fast on January 18th. 
But two days later, a bomb was thrown  into the garden  at Birla House  where  the 
Mahatma lived and held his prayer  meetings.  The explosion  caused no loss of life. 
Gandhi  instantly  intervened  with the police  on the would -be assassin’s  behalf.  
On January  26th, when  India was celebrating  Independence  Day, Gandhi  at his 
prayer  meeting  asked what was the cause  of their rejoicing. ‘Now  that we have 
independence  we seem  to be disillusioned.  At least I am, if  you are not.’ He then 
continued  to speak  against  the violence  and corruption  growing  around him. 
He knew  that the final sacrifice  was inevitable.  And two days later he told his 
secretary to bring  him all his important letters. ‘I  must reply  to them  to-day, for  
to-morrow I may not be.’ This done he went  into the grounds  for his prayer  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26 meeting.  A Hindu  youth  broke  from the crowd  and almost  knelt  before  the 
Mahatma, then  fired into his stomach.  Gandhi  fell chanting ‘Ram, Ram’  (O God, O  
God), his  hands  held in an attitude  of prayer.  
As the bibliography shows, Mahatma Gandhi  had many books  published; yet he was 
neither  a prolific  writer nor a deliberate  author.  Many  of his books  consist  of 
reports  of speeches  which he delivered, or  collections  of articles  written  for his 
weekly  journal, Harijan, or  were printed in the magazine, Young  India.  
In making  this selection, I  have tried to bear three  things  in mind: firstly, my  
intention  to present  material  of permanent  interest  as opposed  to comments  on 
day-to-day political  matters; also  to show  the development  and to give the 
essence of his philosophy of satyagraha, and its basis in the religious  teachings  of 
the Gita; and thirdly, I  have tried to emphasize  those  ideas  which, though they 
may not seem  immediately applicable  to Western  life, should  be of considerable  
relevance to contemporary thought.  
We live to-day in a period which  has much  in common  with the Dark Ages – though  
ours is the darkness  of the neon light – in the way that many of us are isolated  
though we are surrounded  by means  of communication; and inarticulate  in spite of 
innumerable  late-editions.  In such a time, Mahatma Gandhi  was an oasis of 
meditation  in our vast and garrulous  vacuity.  
His insistence  that spiritual  value  should  be the basis for all action, and his belief  
that all culture  is merely  a manifestation  of religious  beliefs (or  the lack of them), 
stands  in complete  opposition  to the materialistic  flood  from Asia and America  
which, If not arrested, will certainly engulf these ruins, the  remnants  of 
Christendom.  European  culture  arose  from a spiritual  impulse and I suggest  that it 
can ultimately  only be defended by precisely  the same  dynamic  which  produced  it. 
Gandhi  understood  these  essentials  of philosophical  strategy; that is, he  could  
distinguish  between  ends and means, and was aware  that it is impossible  to mend  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27 a delicate  wrist-watch  with a sledge -hammer.  He knew, too, that freedom  consists  
of discipline; and that a higher  standard of living  is not to be confused  with the 
acquisition  of or attachment  to a greater  number  of mere  things.  He knew  that the 
spirit  can ultimately only be defended  by the spirit; and  that the means  for our 
survival  are not visible  nor material.  
 I have not included  his account  of his campaign  of satyagraha  in South  Africa, nor  
the great tour which  he undertook  in his last days amongst the North -west Frontier  
Pathans, as  both of these  accounts  are reported elsewhere and extracts  could  not 
do justice  to them.  Similarly, I have not attempted to give a full picture  of his life 
since  my friend, Shri  Pyarelal, is  now engaged  in writing  a comprehensive  
biography.  
But since  so much  of Gandhi’ s political  action  was in opposition  to the British  Raj 
in India, I  have included  some  correspondences  between  him and the Marquis  of 
Linlithgow, who  was Viceroy  of India during  a crucial  period in the relationship  
between  the two countries.  I believe  that this correspondence  not only shows  the 
deep respect  in which  Gandhi  was held even by the Government  which  he sought  
to overthrow, but  that Lord Linlithgow’s  letters  reveal  the best qualities  of English  
authority.  His letters  are not only tolerant but friendly; they are dignified  and 
firm, yet  also kind.  They show  the virtues  of governing  class over a mere  
bureaucracy.  They are also fine examples  of the epistolary style; and I believe  
that when  history comes  to assess  the achievements  or failings  of the British  in 
India, then  these  qualities  of tolerance  and impartial  judgment  which  Lord 
Linlithgow’s  letters  contain, must weigh  to our advantage . 
RONALD  DUNCAN  
*1 For these questions I have used the excellent translation of the Gita from the original 
Sanskrit made by Shri Purhit Swami (published by Faber and Faber, London, 1935  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  
 
   
 
PART ONE  
 
 
Anasakti  Yoga, or  The Gospel  of selfless  
Action, an  Extract  from Gandhi’s  Commentary  
on The Bhagvad Gita 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- - 
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29 Chapter 01  
ANASAKTI  YOGA  
Now about  the message  of the Gita.  
Even in 1988- 9, when  I first became acquainted with the Gita, I  felt that it was 
not an historical  work, but  that, under  the guise  of physical  warfare, it described  
the duel that perpetually went  on in the hearts  of mankind, and that physical  
warfare  was brought  in merely  to make  the description  of the internal  duel more  
alluring.  This preliminary  intuition  became  more  confirmed  on a closer  study  of 
religion  and the Gita.  A study of the Mahabharata  gave it added confirmation.  I 
do not regard  the Mahabharata as an historical  work in the accepted sense.  The 
Adiparva  contains  powerful  evidence  in support  of my opinion.  By ascribing  to 
the chief  actors  superhuman or subhuman  origins, the  great Vyasa made  short  
work of the history of kings and their peoples.  The persons  therein  described may 
be historical, but the author  of the Mahabharata has used them  merely  to drive  
home  his religious  theme.  
The author  of the Mahabharata has not established the necessity  of physical  
warfare; on  the contrary he has proved its futility.  He has made  the victors  shed 
tears  of sorrow and repentance, and has left them  nothing  but a legacy  of 
miseries.  
In this great work the Gita is the crown.  Its second  chapter, instead of teaching  
the rules of physical  warfa re, tells  us how a perfected man is to be known.  In the 
characteristics  of the perfected  man of the Gita I do not see any to correspond  to 
physical  warfare.  Its whole  design  is inconsistent  with the rules of conduct  
governing  the relations  between  warring  parties.  
Krishna  of the Gita is perfection  and right knowledge  personified; but the picture  
is imaginary.  That does not mean  that Krishna, the  adored of his people, never  
lived.  But perfection  is imagined.  The idea of a perfect  incarnation  is an 
aftergrowt h. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30 In Hinduism, incarnation is ascribed  to one who has performed  some  
extraordinary service  of mankind.  All embodied life is in reality an incarnation  of 
God, but it is not usual  to consider  every  living  being  an incarnation.  Future  
generations  pay this homage  to one who, in  his own generation, has  been 
extraordinarily religious  in his conduct.  I can see nothing  wrong  in this 
procedure.  It takes  nothing  from God’s  greatness, and there  is no violence  done 
to Truth.  There  is an Urdu saying  which  means, ‘Adam  is not God but he is a 
spark  of the Divine.’  And therefore  he who is the most religious  behaved has 
most of the divine  spark  in him. It is in accordance  with this train of thought, 
that Krishna  enjoys, in Hinduism, the  status  of the most perfect  incarnatio n. 
This belief  in incarnation  is a testimony of man’s  lofty spiritual  ambition.  Man is 
not at peace  with himself  till he has become  like unto God. The endeavour  to 
reach  this state  is the supreme, the  only ambition  worth  having.  And this is self-
realizatio n. This self-realization  is the subject  of the Gita, as  it is of all 
scriptures.  But its author  surely  did not write  it to establish  that doctrine.  The 
object  of the Gita appears  to me to be that of showing  the most excellent  way to 
attain  self-realization . That which  is to be found, more  or less clearly, spread out 
here and there  in Hindu  religious  books, has  been brought  out in the clearest  
possible  language  in the Gita even at the risk of repetition.  
That matchless  remedy  is renunciation of fruits  of action.  
This is the centre  round  which  the Gita is woven.  This renunciation is the central  
sun, round  which  devotion , knowledge  and the rest revolve  like planets.  The 
body has been likened  to a prison.  There  must be action  where  there  is body.  Not 
one embodie d being  is exempted from labour.  And yet all religions  proclaim  that 
it is possible  for man, by  treating  the body as the temple  of God, to  attain  
freedom.  Every  action  is tainted, be  it ever so trivial.  How can the body be made  
the temple  of God? In other  words  how can one be free from action, i.e.  from the 
taint of sin? The Gita has answered  the question  in decisive  language: ‘B y Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31 desireless  action; by renouncing  fruits  action; by dedicating  all activities  to God, 
i.e. by  surrendering  oneself  to Him body and soul.’  
But desirelessness  of renunciation does not come  for the mere  talking  about it. It 
is not attained by an intellectual  feat. It is attainable  only by a constant  heart-
churn.  Right  knowledge  is necessary  for attaining  renunciation.  Learned  men 
posse ss a knowledge  of a kind.  They may recite  the Vedas  from memory, yet they 
may be steeped in self-indulgence.  In order  that knowledge  may not run riot, the  
author  of the Gita has insisted  on devotion  accompanying  it and has given  it the 
first place.  Knowled ge without  devotion  will be like a misfire.  Therefore, says  
the Gita, ‘Have  devotion, and knowledge  will follow.’  This devotion  is not mere  
lip worship, it  is a wrestling  with death.  Hence  the Gita’s  assessment  of the 
devotee’s  qualities  is similar  to that of the sage’s.  
Thus the devotion  required  by the Gita is no soft-hearted effusiveness.  It 
certainly is not blind faith.  The devotion  of the Gita has the least to do with 
externals.  A devotee  may use, if  he likes, rosaries, forehead  marks, offerings, 
but these things  are no test of his devotion.  He is the devotee  who is jealous  of 
none, who  is a fount  of mercy, who  is without  egotism, who  is self-less, who  
treats  alike cold and heat, happiness  and misery, who  is ever forgiving, who  is 
always  contented, whos e resolutions  are firm, who  has dedicated mind  and soul 
to God, who  causes  no dread, who  is not afraid  of others, who  is free from 
exultation, sorrow  and fear, who  is pure, who  is versed  in action  and yet remains  
unaffected by it, who  renounces  all fruit, good or bad, who  treats  friend  and foe 
alike, who  is untouched  by respect  or disrespect, who  is not puffed  up by praise, 
who does not go under  when  people  speak  ill of him, who  loves  silence  and 
solitude, who  has a disciplined  reason.  Such devotion  is inconsistent  with the 
existence at the same  time of strong  attachments.  
 We thus see, that to be a real devotee  is to realize  oneself.  Self-realization  is 
not something  apart.  One rupee  can purchase  for us poison  or nectar, but Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32 knowledge  or devotion  cannot  buy us either  salvation  or bondage.  These  are not 
media of exchange.  They are themselves  the things  we want.  In other  words, if  
the means  and the end are not identical, they  are almost so. The extreme  of 
means  is salvation.  Salvation  of the Gita is perfect  peace. 
But such knowledge  and devotion, to  be true, have  to stand the test of 
renunciation of fruits  of action.  Mere knowledge  of right and wrong  will not make  
one fit for salvation.  According  to common  notions, a  mere  learned man will pass 
as a pandit.  He need not perform  any service.  He will regard  it as bondage  even 
to lift a little lota. Where  one test of knowledge  is non-liability  for service, there  
is no room  for such mundane  work as the lifting  of a lota. 
Or take bhakti.  The popular  motion  of bhakti  is soft-heartedness, telling  beads  
and the like, and  disdaining  to do even a loving  service, lest  the telling  of beads, 
etc. might  be interrupted . This bhakti, therefore, leaves  the rosary  only for 
eating, drinking  and the like, never  for grinding  corn or nursing patients.  
But the Gita says: ‘ No one has attained his goal without  action.  Even men like 
Janaka attained  salvation  through action.  If even I were lazily  to cease  working, 
the world  would  perish.  How much  more  necessary  then for the people  at large  
to engage  in action ?’ 
 While  on the one hand it is beyond dispute  that all action  binds, on  the other  
hand it is equally true that all living  beings  have to do some  work, whether they 
will or no. Here all activity, whether  mental  or physical, is  to be includ ed in the 
term action.  Then how is one to be free from the bondage  of action, even  though 
he may be acting ? The manner  in which  the Gita has solved  the problem  is, to  my 
knowledge, unique.  The Gita says: ‘Do your allotted work but renounce  its fruit – 
be detached  and work – have no desire  for reward  and work.’  
This is the unmistakable  teaching  of the Gita.  He who gives  up action  falls. He 
who gives  up only the reward  rises.  But renunciation of fruit in no way means  
indifference  to the result.  In regard to every action  one must know  the result  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33 that is expected to follow, the  means  thereto, and capacity for it. He, who, 
being  thus equipped, is  without  desire  for the result, and  is yet wholly  engrossed  
in the due fulfillment  of the task before  him, is  said to have renounced  the fruits  
of his action.  
Again, let no one consider  renunciation to mean  want of fruit for the renouncer.  
The Gita reading  does not warrant  such a meaning.  Renunciation means  absence  
of hankering  after fruit.  As a matter  of fact, he  who renounces  reaps  a thousand -
fold. The renunciation of the Gita is the acid test of faith.  He who is ever 
brooding  over result  often  loses nerve  in the performance  of his duty.  He 
becomes  impatient and then gives  vent to anger  and begins  to do unworthy  
things; he  jumps  from action  to action, never  remaining faithful  to any. He who 
broods  over results  is like a man given  to objects  of senses; he  is ever distracted, 
he says good-bye to all scruples, everything  is right in his estimation  and he 
therefore  resorts  to means  fair and foul to attain  his end. 
From  the bitter  experiences  of desire  for fruit the author  of the Gita discovered  
the path of renunciation of fruit, and put it before  the world  in a most 
convincing  manner.  The common  belief  is that religion  is always  opposed to 
material  good. ‘One  cannot  act religiously  in mercantile  and such other  matters.  
There  is no place  for religion  in such pursuits; religion  is only for attainment of 
salvation,’ we  hear many  worldly -wise people  say. In my opinion  the author  of 
the Gita has dispelled this delusion.  He has drawn  no line of demarcation  
between  salvation  and worldly  pursuits.  On the contrary he has shown  that 
religion  must rule even our worldly pursuits.  I have felt that the Gita teaches  us 
that what cannot  be followed out in day-to-day practice  cannot  be called  
religion.  Thus, according  to the Gita, all  acts that are incapable  of being  
performed  without attachment  are taboo.  This golden  rule saves  mankind from 
many a pitfall.  According  this interpretation  murder, ly ing, dissoluteness  and the 
like must be regarded as sinful  and therefore  taboo.  Man’s  life then becomes  
simple, and  from that simpleness  springs  peace.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34 Thinking  along  these  lines, I  have felt that in trying  to enforce  in one’s  life the 
central  teaching  of the Gita, one  is bound to follow  Truth  and ahimsa.  When  
there  is no desire  for fruit, there  is no temptation  for untruth  or himsa.  Take any 
instance  of untruth or violence, and  it will be found  that at its back was the 
desire  to attain  the cherished  end. But it may be freely  admitted  that the Gita 
was not written  to establish  ahimsa.  It was an accepted and primary duty even 
before  the Gita age. The Gita had to deliver  the message  of renunciation of fruit.  
This is clearly  brought  out as early as the second  chapter.  
But if the Gita believed  in ahimsa or it was included  in desire lessness, why  did 
the author  take a warlike  illustration ? When  the Gita was written, although  
people  believed  in ahimsa, wars  were not only not taboo, but nobody  observed  
the contradict ion between  them  and ahimsa.  
In assessing  the implications  of renunciation of fruit, we  are not required  to 
probe  the mind of the author  of the Gita as to his limitations  of ahimsa  and the 
like. Because  a poet puts a particular  truth  before  the world, it  does not 
necessarily  follow  that he has known  or worked  out all its great consequences, or  
that having  done so, he  is able to express  them  fully.  In this perhaps  lies the 
greatness  of the poem  and the poet.  A poet’s  meaning  is limitless.  Like man, the  
meani ng of great  writings  suffers  evolution.  On examining  the history of 
languages, we  notice  that the meaning  of important words  has changed  or 
expanded.  This is true of the Gita.  The author  has himself  extended  the meaning  
of important words  has changed  or expanded.  This is true of the Gita.  The author  
has himself  extended  the meanings  of some  of the current  words.  We are able to 
discover  this even on a superficial  examination.  It is possible  that, in  the age 
prior to that of the Gita, offering  of animals  in sacrifice  was permissible.  But 
there  is not a trace  of it in the sacrifice  in the Gita sense.  In the Gita continuous  
concentration  on God is the king of sacrifices.  The third chapter  seems  to show  
that sacrifice  chiefly  means  body- labour  for service.  The third and the fourth  
chapters  reads  together  will give us other  meanings  for sacrifice, but  never  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35 animal -sacrifice.  Similarly  has the meaning  of the word sannyasa undergone, in 
the Gita, a  transformation.  The sannyasa of the Gita will not tolerate complete 
cessation of all activity. The sannyasa of the Gita is all work and yet no work.  
Thus the author  of the Gita, by  extending  meanings  of words, has  taught us to 
imitate  him. Let it be granted, that according  to the letter  of the Gita it is 
possible  to say that warfare  is consistent  with renunciation of fruit.  But after 
forty years’  unremitting  endeavour  fully to enforce  the teaching  of the Gita in 
my own life, I  have, in  all humility, felt  that perfect  renunciation is impossible  
without  perfect  observance  of ahimsa  in every  shape  and form.  
The Gita is not an aphoristic  work; it  is a great religious  poem.  The deeper  you 
dive into it, the  richer  the meanings  you get. It being  meant for the people  at 
large, there  is pleasing  repetition.  With every  age the importan t words  will carry 
new and expanding  meanings.  But its central  teaching  will never  vary.  The seeker  
is at liberty to extract  from this treasure  any meaning  he likes so as to enable  
him to enforce  in his life the central  teaching.  
Nor is the Gita a collecti on of do’s and don’ts.  What  is lawful  for one may be 
unlawful  for another.  What  may be permissible  at one time, or  in one place, may  
not be so at another  time, and in another  place.  Desire  for fruit is the only 
universal  prohibition.  Desirelessness  is obligatory.  
The Gita has sung the praises  of Knowledge, but it is beyond the mere  intellect; 
it is essentially addressed to the heart and capable  of being  understood by the 
heart.  Therefore  the Gita is not for those  who have no faith.  The author  makes  
Krishna  say: 
‘Do not entrust  this treasure  to him who is without  sacrifice, without  devotion, 
without  the desire  for this teaching  and who denies  Me. On the other  hand, those  
who will give this precious  treasure  to My devotees  will, by  the fact of this 
service, as suredly  reach  Me. And those  who, being  free from malice, will with Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36 faith absorb  this teaching, shall, having  attained freedom, live  where  people  of 
true merit  go after  death.’ 1 
1  Extract from The Gospel  of Selfless  Action  or The Gita according  to Gandhi, by 
Mahadev  Desai (Navajivan  Publishing  House, August, 1946),  pp. 123 -31 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37  
 
   
 
Part Two 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
The Gita and Satyagraha:  
The Philosophy  of Non-violence  and The Doctrine  
of the Sword : A  Letter  from Tolstoy  to Gandhi  
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38 Chapter 02  
THE GITA AND SATYAGRAHA  
I have admitted in my introduction  to the Gita known  as Anasakti  Yoga that it is 
not a treatise  on non-violence, nor  was it written  to condemn  war. Hinduism, as  it 
is practiced  to-day or has even been known  to have ever been practiced, has  
certainly not condemned  war as I do. What, however , I have done is to put a new 
but natural  and logical  interpretation  upon the whole  teaching  of the Gita and the 
spirit  of Hinduism.  Hinduism, not to speak  of other  religions, is  ever evolving.  It 
has no one scripture  like the Koran  or the Bible. Its scriptures  are also evolving  
and suffering  addition.  The Gita itself  is an instance  in point.  It has given  a new 
meaning  to karma, sannyasa, yajna, etc.  It has breathed new life into Hinduism.  It 
has given  an original  rule of conduct.  Not that what the Gita has given  was not 
implied  in the previous  writings, but the Gita put these  implications  in a concrete  
shape.  I have endeavoured, in  the light of a prayerful  study of the other  faiths  of 
the world, and  what is more,  in the light of my own experiences  in trying  to live 
the teaching  of Hinduism  as interpreted in the Gita, to  give an extended but in no 
way strained meaning  to Hinduism, not  as buried in its ample  scriptures, but  as a 
living  faith speaking  like a mother  to her aching  child.  What  I have done is 
perfe ctly historical.  I have followed  in the footsteps  of our forefathers.  At one 
time they sacrificed  animals  to propitiate  angry gods.  Their  descendants, but our 
less remote  ancestors, read  a different  meaning  into the word ‘sacrifice’, and  they 
taught that sacrifice  was meant to be of our baser  self, to  please  not angry gods 
but the one living  God within.  I hold that the logical  outcome  of the teaching  of 
the Gita is decidedly for peace  at the price  of life itself.  It is the highest  
aspiration  of the human species.  
The Mahabharata and Ramayana, the  two books  that millions  of Hindus  know  and 
regard  as their guides, are  undoubtedly allegorie s as the internal  evidence  shows.  
That they most probably deal with historical  figures  does not affect  my Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39 proposition.  Each epic describes  the eternal  duel that goes on between  the forces  
of darkness  and of light.  Anyway, I  must disclaim  any intention  of straining  the 
meaning  of Hinduism  or the Gita to suit any preconceived  notions  of mine.  My 
notions  were an outcome  of a study  of the Gita, Ramayana, Mahabharata, 
Upanishads, etc.  
(Harijan, 3rd October, 1936)  
 
Truth1 
The word ‘Satya’ (Truth)  is derived  from ‘Sat’  which  means  being.  And nothing  is 
or exists  in reality except  Truth.  That is why ‘Sat’  or Truth  is perhaps  the most 
important  name  of God. In fact it is more  correct  to say that Truth  is God, than  to 
say that God is Truth.  But as we cannot  do without  a ruler or a general, names  of 
God such as King of Kings  or the Almighty are and will remain  more  usually  
current.  On deeper thinking, however, it  will be realized that ‘Sat’  or ‘Satya’  is 
the only correct  and fully significant  name  of God. 
And where  there  is Truth, there  also is knowledge, pure  knowledge.  Where  there  
is no Truth, there  can be no true knowledge.  That is why the word ‘Chit’  or 
knowledge  is associated with the name  of God. And where  there  is true 
knowledge, there is always  bliss (ananda).  Sorrow has no place  there.  And even as 
Truth  is eternal, so  is the bliss derived  from it. Hence  we know  God as ‘Sat-chit-
ananda’,  one who combined  in Himself  Truth, Knowledge  and Bliss.  
Devotion  to this Truth  is the sole reason  for our existence.  All our activities  should  
be centered  in Truth.  Truth  should  be the very breath  of our life. When  once this 
stage  in the pilgrim’s  progress  is reached, all  other  rules of correct  living  will 
come  without  effort, and obedience  to them  will be instinctive.  But without  Truth  
it would  be impossible  to observe  any principles  or rules in life. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40 Generally  speaking, observing  the law of Truth  is merely  understood to mean  that 
we must speak  the truth.  But we in the Ashram  understand  the word  Satya  or 
Truth  in a much  wider  sense.  There  should  be he Truth  in thought, Truth in 
speech, and Truth  in action.  To the man who has realized  this Truth  in perfection, 
nothing  else remains  to be known, because  all knowledge  is necessarily  included  in 
it. What  is not included  in it is not Truth, and so  not true knowledge; and there  
can be no inward  peace  without  true knowledge.  If once we learn  how to apply  
this never -failing  test of Truth, we  will at once be able to find out what is worth  
doing, what  is worth  seeing, what  is worth  reading.  
But how is one to realize  this Truth, which may be likened  to the philosopher’s  
stone  or the cow of plenty?  By single -minded devotion (abhyasa)  and indifference  
to every  other  interest  in life (vairagya)  – replies  the Bhagavadgita.  In spite, 
however, of  such devotion, what may appear  as truth  to one person  will often  
appear  as untruth  to another  person.  But that need not worry  the seeker.  Where  
there  is honest  effort, it  will be realized that what appear  to be different  truths  
are like apparently different  countless  leaves  of the same  tree.  Does not God 
Himself  appear  to different  individuals  in different  aspects ? Still we know  that He 
is one. But Truth  is the right designation  of God. Hence  there  is nothing  wrong  in 
every  one following  Truth  according  to one’s  lights.  Indeed it is one’s  duty to do 
so. Then if there  is a mistake  on the part of any one so following  Truth, it  will be 
automatically set right.  For the quest of Truth  involves  tapas – self-suffering, 
sometimes  even unto death.  There  can be no place  in it for even a trace  of self-
interest.  In such self-less search  for Truth  nobody  can lose his bearings  for long.  
Directly  one takes  to the wrong  path one stumbles, and is thus redirected to the 
right path.  Therefore  the pursuit  of Truth  is true bhakti (devotion).  It is the path 
that leads  to God, and  therefore  there  is no place  in it for cowardice, no  place  for 
defeat.  It is the talisman  by which  death  itself  becomes  the portal  of life eternal.  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41 Non-possession  or Poverty  
Civilization, in  the real sense  of the term, consists  not in the multiplication, but in 
the deliberate  and voluntary  reduction  of wants.  This alone  promotes  real 
happiness  and contentment, and increases  the capacity for service.  
From  the standpoint of pure Truth, the  body too is a possession.  It has been truly 
said, that  desire  for enjoyment  creates  bodies  for the soul. When  this desire  
vanishes, there  remains  no further  need for the body, and man is free from the 
vicious  cycle  of births  and deaths.  The soul is omnipresent; why should  she care to 
be confined  within  the cage-like body, or  do evil and even kill for the sake of the 
cage? We thus arrive  at the ideal of total renunciation, and  learn  to use the body 
for the purposes  of service  so long as it exists, so  much  so that service, and  not 
bread , becomes  with us the staff of life. We eat and drink, sleep  and awake, for  
service  alone.  Such an attitude  of mind brings us real happiness, and the beatific  
vision  in the fullness  of time.  Let us examine  ourselves  from this standpoint.  
We should  remember, that  Non-possession  is a principle  applicable  to thoughts, as  
well as to things.  One, who  fills his brain  with useless knowledge, violates  that 
inestimable  principle.  Thoughts, whi ch turn us away  from God, or  do not turn us 
towards  Him, constitute  impediments  in our way. In this connection  we may 
consider  the definition  of knowledge  contained  in the 13th chapter  of the Gita.  We 
are there  told, that humility (amanitvam)  etc. constitute  knowledge, and all the 
rest is ignorance.  If this is true – and there  is no doubt that it is true – much  that 
we hug to-day as knowledge  is ignorance  pure and simple, and  therefore, only  
does us harm , instead of conferring  any benefit.  It makes  the mind wander, and  
even reduces  it to a vacuity, and discontent flourishes  in endless  ramifications  of 
evil. Needless  to say, this  is not a plea for intertia.  Every  moment  of our life 
should  be filled with activity, but that activity should  be sattvika, tending  to 
Truth.  One, who  has consecrated  his life to service, cannot  be idle for a single  
moment.  But one has to learn  to distinguish  between  good activity, and evil Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42 activity.  This discernment  goes naturally with a single -minded  devotion  to service.  
 
Fearlessness  
Every  reader  of the Gita knows  that fearlessness  heads  the list of the Divine  
Attributes  enumerated  in the 16th chapter.  Whether  this is merely  due to the 
exigencies  of metre, or  whether  the pride  of place  has been deliberately  yielded  
to fearlessness, is  more  than I can say. In my opinion, however, fearlessness  richly  
deserves  the first rank assigned  to it there.  For it is a sine qua non for the growth  
of the other  noble  qualities.  How can one seek Truth, or  cherish  Love, without  
fearlessness ? As Pritam  has it, ‘the  path of Hari (the  Lord) is the path of the brave, 
not of cowards’.  Hari here means  Truth, and  the brave  are those  armed  with 
fearlessness, not  with the sword, the  rifle and other carnal  weapons, which, 
strictly speaking  are affected  only by cowards.  
Fearlessness  connotes  freedom  from all external  fear – fear of disease, bodily  
injury  and death, of  dispossession, of  losing  one’s  nearest  and dearest, of  losing  
reputation  or giving  offence, and  so on. One, who  overcomes  the fear of death, 
does not surmount  all other  fears, as  is commonly  but erroneously  supposed.  Some 
of us do not fear death, but flee from the minor  ills of life. Some are ready to die 
themselves, but  cannot  bear their loved  ones to be taken  away from them.  Some 
misers  will put up with all this, will  part even with their lives, but  not their 
property; others  will do any number  of black  deeds  in order  to uphold their 
supposed prestige.  Some will swerve  from the strait and narrow path, which  lies 
clear before  them, simply  because  they are afraid  of incurring  the world’s  odium.  
The seeker  after Truth  must conquer  all these  fears.  He should  be ready to 
sacrifice  his all in the quest of Truth, even  as Harishchandra did. The story of 
Harishchandra may be only a parable; but every  seeker  will bear witness  to its 
truth  from his personal  experience, and  therefore  that story is more  precious  than 
any historical  fact. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43 Perfect  fearlessness  can be attained only by him who has realize d the Supreme, as  
it implies  freedom  from delusions.  One can always  progress  towards  this goal by 
determined  and constant  endeavour, and by cultivating  self-confidence.  
As I have stated  at the very outset, we  must give up all external  fears.  But the 
intern al foes we must always  fear. We are rightly afraid  of animal  passion, anger, 
and the like. External  fears  cease  of their own accord, when  once we have 
conquered  these  traitors  within  the camp.  All fears revolve  round  the body as the 
centre,  and would  there fore disappear, as  soon as one got rid of attachment for 
the body.  We thus find, that  all fear is the baseless  fabric  of our own vision.  Fear 
has no place  in our hearts, when  we have shaken  off the attachment for wealth, 
for family  and for the body. ‘Enjoy  the things  of the earth  by renouncing  them’ is  
a noble  percept.  Wealth, family and body will be there, just  the same; we  have 
only to change  our attitude  towards  them.  All these  are not ours, but  God’s.  
Nothing  whatever  in this world  is ours.’ Even we ourselves  are His. Why, then, 
should  we entertain  any fears ? The Upanishad therefore  directs  us ‘to  give up 
attachment for things, while  we enjoy  them’.  That is to say, we must be 
interested  in them, not  as proprietors, but as only trustees.  He, on  whose  behalf  
we hold them, will  give us the strength  and the weapons  requisite  for defending  
them  against all usurpers.  When we thus cease  to be masters  and reduce  ourselves  
to the rank of servants, humbler  than the very dust under  our feet, all  fears will 
roll away  like mists; we  shall attain  ineffable  peace, and  see Satyanarayana (the 
God of Truth)  face to face.  
 
Tolerance  
I did not like this word, but  could  not think  of a better  one. Tolerance  implies  a 
gratuitous  assumption  of the inferiority  of other  faiths  to one’s  own, whereas  
ahimsa teaches  us to entertain  the same  respect  for the religious  faiths  of others  
as we accord  to our own, thus  admitting  the imperfection  of the latter.  This Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44 admission  will be readily made  by a seeker  of Truth, who  follows  the law of Love. 
If we had attained the full vision  of Truth, we  would  no longer  be mere  seekers, 
but become  one with God, for  Truth  is God. But being  only seekers, we  prosecute  
our quest, and  are conscious  of our imperfection.  And if we are imperfect  
ourselves, relig ion as conceived  by us must also be imperfect.  We have not 
realized  religion  as in its perfection, even  as we have not realized  God. Religion  of 
our conception, being  thus imperfect, is  always  subject  to a process  of evolution  
and reinterpretation.  Progres s towards  Truth, towards  God, is  possible  only 
because  of such evolution.  And if all faiths  outlined  by men are imperfect, the  
question  of comparative  merit  does not arise.  All faiths  constitute  a revelation  of 
Truth, but  all are imperfect, and liable  to error. Reverence for other  faiths  need 
not blind us to their faults.  We must be keenly  alive to the defects  of our own 
faith, and must not leave  it on that account, but try to overcome  those  defects.  
Looking  at all religions  with an equal  eye, we would  not only not hesitate, but  
would  think  it our duty, to  adopt  into our faith every  acceptable  feature  of other  
faiths.  
The question  then arises : Why  should  there  be so many different  faiths ? The soul is 
one, but  the bodies  which  she animates  are many.  We cannot  reduce  the number  
of bodies; yet  we recognize  the unity  of the Soul.  Even as a tree has a single  
trunk, but  many  branches  and leaves, so  is there  one true and perfect  Religion, 
but it becomes  many, as  it passes  through the human medium.  The one Religion  is 
beyond all speech.  Imperfect  men put it into such language  as they can command  
and their words  are interpreted by other  men equally imperfect.  Whose  
interpretation  is to be held to be the right one? Every  one is right from his own 
standpoint, but  it is not impossible  that every  one is wrong.  Hence  the necessity  
for tolerance, which  does not mean  indifference  towards  one’s  own faith but a 
more  intelligent  and purer  love for it. Tolerance  gives  us spiritual  insight, which is 
as far from fanaticism  as the North Pole is from the South.  True knowledge  of Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45 religion  breaks  down  the barriers  between  faith and faith.  Cultivation  of tolerance  
for other  faiths  will impart  to us a truer  understanding  of our own.  
Tolerance  obviously  does not disturb the distinction  between right and wrong, or  
good and evil. The reference  here throughout  is naturally to the principal  faiths  of 
the world.  They are all based on common  fundamentals.  They have all produced  
saintly men and women.  
 
Humility  
Humility  cannot  be an observance  by itself.  For it does not lend itself  to being  
practiced.  It is however  an indispensable  test of ahimsa.  In one who has ahimsa in 
him it becomes  part of his very nature.  
But although humility  is not one of the observances, it certainly as essential  as, 
and perhaps  even more  essential  than, any one of them.  Only it never  came  to any 
one by practice.  Truth  can be cultivated, as  well as Love.  But to cultivate  humility  
is tantamount to cultivating  hypocrisy.  Humility  must not be here confounded  with 
mere  manners  or etiquette.  One man will sometimes  prostrate  himself  before  
another, although his heart is full of bitterness  against the latter.  This is not 
humility, but cunning.  A man may repeat  Ramanama, or  tell his beads  all day long, 
and move  in society  like a sage; but  if he is selfish  at heart, he  is not meek, but  
only hypocritical.  
A humble  person  is not himself  conscious  of his humility.  Truth  and the like 
perhaps  admit of measurement, but  not humility.  Inborn  humility  can never  
remain  hidden, and yet the posse ssor is unaware  of its existence.  The story of 
Vasistha and Vishvamitra furnishes  a very good case in point.  Humility should  make  
the possessor  realize  that he is as nothing.  Directly  one imagines  oneself  to be 
something, there  is egotism.  If a man who keeps  observances  is proud of keeping  
them, they will lose much, if  not all of their values.  And a man who is proud  of his Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46 virtue  often  becomes  a curse  to society.  Society  will not appreciate  it, and he 
himself  will fail to reap any benefit  out of it. Only a little thought  will suffice  to 
convince  us, that all creatures  are nothing  more  than a mere  atom  in this 
universe.  Our existence as embodied  beings  is purely momentary; what are a 
hundred  years  in eternity ? But if we shatter  the chains  of egotism, and are melted  
in the ocean  of humanity, we  share  its dignity.  To feel that we are something  is to 
set up a barrier  between  God and ourselves.  To cease  feeling  that we are 
something  is to become  one with God. A drop in the ocean  partakes  of the 
greatness  of its parent, although  it is unconscious  of it. But it is dried up, as  soon 
as it enters  upon an existence independent of the ocean.  We do not exaggerate  
when  we say that life is a mere  bubble.  
A life of service  must be one of humility.  One, who  would  sacrifice  his life for 
others, has  hardly time to reserve  for himself  a place  in the sun. Intertia must not 
be mistaken  for humility, as  it has been in Hinduism.  True humility  means  most 
strenuous  and constant endeavour  entirely  directed to the service  of humanity.  
God is performing  continuous  action  without  resting  for a single  moment.  If we 
would  serve  Him or become  one with Him, our  activity must be as unwearied  as 
His. There  may be rest in store  for the drop which  is separated from the ocean, 
but not for the drop in the ocean, which  knows  no rest. The same  is the case with 
ourselves.  As soon as we become  one with the ocean  in the shape  of God, there  is 
no more  rest for us, nor  indeed  do we need rest any longer.  Our very sleep  is 
action.  For we sleep  with the thought  of God in our hearts.  This restlessness  
constitutes  true rest. This never -ceasing  agitation  holds  the key to peace  
ineffable.  This supreme  state  of total surrender is difficult  to describe, but  not 
beyond  the bounds  of human experience.  
 
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47 The Doctrine  of the Sword  
I do believe that, where  there  is only a choice  between  cowardice  and violence, I  
would  advise  violence.  Thus when  my eldest  son asked me what he should  have 
done, had he been present  when  I was almost  fatally  assaulted in 1908, whether  
he should  have run away and seen me killed  or whether  he should  have used his 
physical  force  which  he could  and wanted to use, and  defended me, I  told him 
that it was his duty to defend  me even by using  violence.  Hence  it was that I took 
part in the Boer War, the  so-called  Zulu Rebellion  and the late war. Hence  also do 
I advocate  training  in arms for those  who believe in the method of violence.  I 
would  rather  have India resort  to arms in order  to defend  her honour  than that she 
should, in a cowardly  manner, become or remain  a helpless  witness  to her own 
dishonour.  
But I believe that non-violence  is infinitely  superior  to violence, forgiveness  is 
more  manly than punishment.  Forgiveness  adorns  a soldier.  But abstinence  is 
forgiveness  only when  there  is the power  to punish; it  is meaningless  when  it 
pretends  to proceed  from a helpless  creature.  A mouse  hardly forgives  a cat when  
it allows  itself  to be torn to pieces  by her. I therefore  appreciate  the sentiment  of 
those  who cry out for the condign  punishment  of General  Dyer and his ilk. They 
would  tear him to pieces, if  they could.  But I do not believe India to be helpless.  I 
do not believe myself  to be a helpless  creature.  Only I want to use India’s  and my 
strength  for a better  purpose.  
Let me not be misunderstood.  Strength does not come  from physical  capacity.  It 
comes  from an indomitable  will. An average  Zulu is any way more  than a match  for 
an average  Englishman in bodily capacity.  But he flees from an English  boy, 
because  he fears  the boy’s  revolver  or those  who will use it for him. He fears  
death  and is nerveless  in spite of his burly figure.  We in India may in a moment  
realize  that one hundred  thousand  Englishmen need not frighten  three  hundred  
million  human beings.  A definite  forgiveness  would, therefore, mean  a definite  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48 recognition  of our strength.  With enlightened  forgiven ess must come  a mighty 
wave  of strength  in us, which would  make  it impossible  for a Dyer and a Frank  
Johnson to heap affront  on India’s  devoted  head.  It matters  little to me that for 
the moment  I do not drive  my point home.  We feel too downtrodden  not to be 
angry and revengeful.  But I must not refrain  from saying  that India can gain more  
by waiving  the right of punishment.  We have better  work to do, a  better  mission  
to deliver  to the world.  
I am not a visionary.  I claim  to be a practical  idealist.  The religion  of non-violence  
is not meant merely  for the rishis  and saints.  It is meant for the common  people  as 
well.  Non-violence  is the law of our species  as violence  is the law of the brute.  
The spirit lies dormant in the brute, and he knows  no law but that of physical  
might.  The dignity of man requires  obedience  to a higher  law – to the strength  of 
the spirit.  
I have therefore  ventured  to place  before  India the ancient  law of self-sacrifice.  
For satyagraha and its offshoots, non -co-operation  and civil resistance  are nothing  
but new names  for the law of suffering.  The rishis , who  discovered  the law of non-
violence  in the midst of violence, were greater  geniuses  than Newton.  They were  
themselves  greater  warriors  than Welli ngton.  Having  themselves  known  the use of 
arms, they realized their uselessness, and  taught  a weary world  that its salvation  
lay not through violence  but through non-violence.  
Non-violence  in its dynamic  condition  means  conscious  sufferi ng. It does not mean  
meek  submission  to the will of the evil-doer, but it means  the pitting  of one’s  
whole  soul against the will of the tyrant.  Working  under  this law of our being, it  is 
possible  for a single  individual  to defy the whole  might  of an unjust  empire  to save 
his honour, his  religion, his  soul, and  lay the foundation  for that empire’s  fall or 
its regeneration.2 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49 Not only did I offer  my services  at the time of the Zulu revolt  but before  that, at  
the time of the Boer War, and not only did I raise recruits  in India during  the late 
war, but I raised an ambulance  corps  in 1914 in London.  If, therefore, I  have 
sinned, the  cup of my sins is full to the brim.  I lost no occasion  of serving  the 
Government  at all times.  Two questions  presented themselves  to me during  all 
those  crises.  What  was my duty as a citizen  of the Empire  as I then believed  
myself  to be, and what was my duty as an out-and-out believer  in the religion  of 
ahimsa – non-violence ? 
I know  now that I was wrong  in thinking  that I was a citizen  of the Empire.  But on 
those  four occasions  I did honestly  believe that, in  spite of the many disabilities  
that my country  was laboring  under, it  was making  its way towards  freedom, and  
that on the whole  the Government  from the popular  standpoint  was not wholly 
bad, and that the British  administrators  were honest  though insular  and dense.  
Holding  that view, I  set about doing  what an ordinary Englishman would  do in the 
circumstances.  I was not wise or important enough to take independent action.  I 
had no business to judge  or scrutinize  ministerial  decisions  with the solemnity of a 
tribunal.  I did not impute  malice  to the ministers  either  at the time of the Boer 
War, the  Zulu revolt  or the late war. I did not consider  Englishmen, nor  do I now 
consider  them,  as particularly  bad or worse  than other  human beings.  I considered  
and still consider  them  to be as capable  of high motives  and actions  as any other  
body of men, and  equally capable  of making  mistakes.  I therefore  felt that I 
sufficiently  discharged my duty as a man and a citizen  by offering  my humble  
services  to the empire  in the hour of its need whether  local or general.  That is 
how I would  expect  every  Indian  to act by his country  under  Swaraj. I should  be 
deeply distressed, if  on every  conceivable  occasion  every  one of us were  to be a 
law unto oneself  and to scrutinize  in golden  scales  every  action  of our future  
National  Assembly.  I would  surrender my judgment  in most matters  to national  
representatives, taking  particular  care in making  my choice  of such Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50 representatives.  I know  that in no other  manner  would  a democratic  government  
be possible  for one single  day. 
The whole  situation  is now changed  for me. My eyes, I  fancy, are  opened.  
Experience has made  me wiser.  I consider  the existing  system  of government  to be 
wholly  bad and requiring  special  national  effort  to end or mend  it. It does not 
possess  within  itself  any capacity for self-improvement.  That I still believe  many  
English  administrators  to be honest  does not assist  me, because  I consider  them  to 
be as blind and deluded as I was myself.  Therefore  I can take no pride  in calling  
the Empire  mine or describing  myself  as a citizen.  On the contrary, I  fully realize  
that I am a pariah  untouchable  of the Empire.  I must, therefore, constantly pray 
for its radic al reconstruction  or total destruction, even  as a Hindu  pariah  would  be 
fully justified  in so praying  about  Hinduism  or Hindu  society.  
The next point, that ahimsa , is more  abstruse.  My conception  of ahims a impels  me 
always  to dissociate  myself  from almost every  one of the activities  I am engaged  
in. My soul refuses  to be satisfied so long as it is a helpless  witness  of a single  
wrong  or a single  misery.  But it is not possible  for me – a weak, frail, miserable  
being – to mend  every  wrong  or to hold myself  free of blame  for all the wrong  I 
see. The spirit  in me pulls one way, the  flesh in me pulls in the opposite  direction.  
There  is freedom  from the action  of these  two forces, but  that freedom  is 
attainable  only by slow and painful  stages.  I can attain  freedom  not by a 
mechanical  refusal  to act, but  only by intelligent  action  in a detached manner.  
This struggl e resolves  itself  into an incessant  crucif ixion of the flesh so that the 
spirit  may become  entirely  free.  
I was, again, an  ordinary citizen  no wiser than my fellows, myself  believing  in 
ahimsa and the rest not believing  in it at all but refusing  to do their duty of 
assisting  the Government  because  they were actuated by anger  and malice.  They 
were refusing  out of their ignorance  and weakness.  As a fellow  worker  it became  
my duty to guide  them  aright.  I therefore  placed  before  them  their clear duty, Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51 explained the doctrine  of ahimsa to them, and let them  make  their choice, which  
they did. I do not repent  of my action  in terms  of ahimsa.  For, under  Swaraj  too I 
would  not hesitate  to advise  those  who would  bear arms to do so and fight for the 
country.  
That brings  to me the second  question.  Under  Swaraj  of my dream  there  is no 
necessity  for arms at all. But I do not expect  that dream  to materialize  in its 
fullness  as a result  of the present  effort, first  because  the effort  is not directed to 
that end as an immediate  goal, and secondly  becau se I do not consider  myself  
advanced enough to be able to prescribe  a detailed course  of conduct  to the 
nation  for such preparation.  I am still myself  too full of passion  and other  frailties  
of human  nature  to feel the call or the capacity.  All I claim  for myself  is that I am 
incessantly trying  to overcome  every  one of my weaknesses.  I have attained great  
capacity, I  believe, for  suppressing  and curbing  my senses, bu t I have not become  
incapable  of sin, i.e. of being  acted upon by my senses.  I believe it to be possible  
for every  human being  to attain  that blessed  and indescribably sinless  state  in 
which  he feels within  himself  the presence of God to the exclusion  of everything  
else. It is, I must confess, as  yet a distant scene.  And therefore  it is not possible  
for me to show  the nation  a present  way to complete  non-violence  in practice.2 
My path is clear.  Any attempt to use me for violent  purposes  is bound  to fail. I 
have no secret  methods.  I know  no diplomacy save that of Truth.  I have no weapon  
but non-violence.  I may be unconsciously  led astray for a while  but not for all 
time.  I have therefore  well-defined  limitations , within  which alone  I may be used.  
Attempts  have been made  before  now to use me unlawfully  more  than once.  They 
have failed  each time so far as I am aware.  
I am yet ignorant of what exactly  Bolshevism  is. I have not been able to study  it. I 
do not know  whether  it is for the good of Russia  in the long run. But I do know  that 
in so far as it is based on violence  and denial  of God, it  repels  me. I do not believe  
in short – violent – cuts to success.  Those  Bolshevik  friends  who are bestowing  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52 their attention  on me should  realize  that, however  much  I may sympathize  with 
and admire  worthy  motives, I  am an uncompromising  opponent  of violent  methods  
even to serve  the noblest of causes.  There  is, therefore, really  no meeting  ground  
between  the school  of violence  and myself.  But my creed  of non-violence  not only 
does not preclude  me but compel  me even to associate  with anarchists  and all 
those  who believe in violence.  But that association  is always  with the sole object  
of weaning  them  from what appears  to me to be their error.  For experience  
convinces  me that permanent good can never  be the outcome  of untruth and 
violence.  Even if my belief  is a fond delusion, it  will be admitted that it is a 
fascinating  delusion.2 
I have not the capacity  for preaching  universal  non-violence  to the country.  I 
preach, therefore, non -violence  restricted  strictly to the purpose  of winning  our 
freedom  and therefore  perhaps  for preaching  the regulation  of international  
relations  by non-violent  means.  But my incapacity must not be mistaken  for that 
of the doctrine  of non-violence.  I see it with my intellect  in all its effulgence.  My 
heart grasps  it. But I have not yet the attainments  of preaching  universal  non-
violence  with effect.  I am not advanced  enough for the great  task. I have yet 
anger  within  me, I  have yet the dwaitabhava – duality – in me. I can regulate  my 
passions, I  keep them  under  subjection, but before  I can preach  universal  non-
violence  with effect, I  must be wholly  free from passions.  I must be wholly  
incapable  of sin. Let the revolutionary pray with and for me that I may soon 
become  that. But meanwhile  let him take with me the one step to it which  I see as 
clearly  as daylight, i.e. to  win India’s  freedom  with strictly non-violent  means.  
And then under  Swaraj  you and I shall have a discipline d intelligent  educated  
police  force  that would  keep order  within  and fight raiders  from without, if  by 
that time I or someone  else does not show  a better  way of dealing  with either.3 
From  what will the masses  be delivered ? It will not do to have a vague  
generalization  and to answer : ‘from  exploitation  and degradation.’  Is not the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53 answer  that, that they want to occupy  the status  that capital  does to-day? If so, it  
can be attained only by violence.  But if they want to shun the evils of capital, 
then they would strive  to attain  a juster  distribution  of the products  of labour.  
This immediately takes  us to contentment  and simplicity , voluntarily adopted.  
Under  the new outlook multiplicity of material  wants  will not be the aim of life, 
the aim will be rather  their restriction  consistently  with comfort.  We shall cease  
to think  of getting  what we can, but  we shall decline  to receive  what  all cannot  
get. It occurs  to me that it ought  not  to be difficult  to make  a successful  appeal  
to the masses  of Europe  in terms  of economics, and  fairly  successful  working  of 
such an experiment  must lead to immense  and unconscious  spiritual  results.  I do 
not believe that the spiritual  law works  on a field of its own. On the contrary, it  
expresses  itself  only through the ordinary activities of life. It thus affects  the 
economic, the  social  and the political  fields.  If the masses  of Europe  can be 
persuaded to adopt the view I have suggested, it will be found  that violence  will 
be wholly  unnecessary  to attain  the aim, and that they can easily come  to their 
own by following  out the obvious  corollaries  of non-violence.  It may even be that 
what seems  to me to be so natural  and feasible  for India may take longer  to 
permeate  the inert Indian  masses  than the active  European  masses.  But I must 
reiterate  my confession  that all my argument  is based in suppositions  and 
assumptions  and must, therefore, be  taken  for what it is worth.3 
I do justify  entire  non-violence, and  consider  it possible  in relation  between  man 
and man and nation  and nation; but  it is not ‘a resignation  from all real fighting  
against wickedness’.  On the contrary, the  non-violence  of my conception  is a more  
active  and more  real fighting  against wickedness  than retaliation  whose  very 
nature  is to increase  wickedness.  I contemplate  a mental, and  therefore  a moral, 
opposition  to immoralities.  I seek entirely to blunt the edge of the tyrant’s  sword, 
not by putting  up against it a sharper -edged weapon, but by disappointing  his 
expectation  that I should  be offering  physical  resistance.  The resistance  of the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54 soul that I should  offer instead would  elude  him. It would  at first dazzle  him, and  
at last compel  recognition  from him, which recognition  would  not humiliate  him 
but would  uplift  him. It may be urged  that this again  is an ideal state.  And so it is. 
The propositions  from which  I have drawn  my arguments  are as true as Euclid’s  
definition, which  are none the less true, because  in practice  we are unable  even 
to draw Euclid’s  line on a blackboard.  
But even a geometrician  finds it impossible  to get on without  bearing  in mind 
Euclid’s  definitions.  Nor may we, the  German  friend, his  colleagues  and myself, 
dispense  with the fundamental  propositions  on which  the doctrine  of satyagraha is 
based.  
I have often  noticed  that weak  people  have taken  shelter under  the Congress  
creed  or under  my advice, when  they have simply, by  reason  of their coward ice, 
been unable  to defend  their own honour  or that of those  who were entrusted to 
their care.  I recall  the incident  that happened near Bettiah  when  non-co-operation  
was at its height.  Some villagers  were looted.  They had fled, leaving  their wives, 
children  and belongings  to the mercy  of the looters.  When  I rebuked them  for 
their cowardice  in thus neglecting  their charge, they shamelessly  pleaded  non-
violence.  I publicly denounced  their conduct  and said that my non-violence  fully 
accommodated violence  offered  by those  who did not feel non-violence  and who 
had in their keeping  the honour  of their women -folk and little children.  Non-
violence  is not a cover  for cowar dice, but it is the supreme  virtue  of the brave.  
Exercise  of non-violence  requires  far greater  bravery than that of swordsmanship.  
Cowardice  is wholly  inconsistent  with non-violence.  Translation  from 
swordsmanship  to non-violence  is possible  and, at  times,  even an easy stage.  Non-
violence, therefore, presupposes  ability  to strike.  It is a conscious  deliberate  
restraint put upon one’s  desire  for vengeance.  But vengeance  is any day superior  
to passive, effeminate  and helpless  submission.  Forgiveness  is higher  still. 
Vengeance  too is weakness.  The desire  for vengeance  comes  out of fear of harm, Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55 imaginary or real. A dog barks  and bites when  he fears.  A man who fears  no one on 
earth  would  consider  it too troublesome  even to summon  up anger  against one 
who is vainly trying  to injure  him. The sun does not wreak  vengeance upon little  
children  who throw  dust at him. They only harm  themselves  in the act.3 
Non-resistance  is restraint voluntarily undertaken  for the good of society.  It is, 
therefore, an  intensely  active, purifying, inward force.  It is often  antagonistic  to 
the material  good of the non-resister.  It may even mean  his utter  material  ruin. It 
is rooted  internal  strength, never  weakness.  It must be consciously  exercised.  It 
therefore  presupposes  ability to offer physical  resistance.3 
The acquisition  of the spirit of non-resistance  is a matter  of long training  in self-
denial  and appreciation  of the hidden  forces  within  ourselves.  It changes  one’s  
outlook upon life. It puts different  values  upon things  and upsets  previous  
calculations, and when  once it is intensive  enough can overtake  the whole  
universe.  It is the greatest  force  because  it is the highest  expression  of the soul. 
All need not possess  the same  measure  of conscious  non-resistance  for its full 
operation s. It is enough for one person  only to possess  it, even  as one general  is 
enough to regulate  and dispose  of the energy  of millions  of soldiers  who enlist  
under  his banner, even  though they know  not the why and the wherefore  of his 
dispositions.  The monkeys  of one Rama were enough to confound  the innumerable  
hosts  armed from head to foot of the ten-headed  Ravana.3 
A friend  sends  me the following  cutting  from the New York Nation : ‘Some  time ago 
(either  in the latter  part of 1924, or  early in 1925) a  band of twenty -five American  
missionaries  in China  addressed the following  appeal  to the American  Minister  at 
Peking :  
‘ “The  undersigned  American  missionaries  are in China  as messengers  of the gospel  
of brotherhood  and peace.  Our task is to lead men and women  into a new life in 
Christ, which  promotes  brotherhood  and takes  away  all occasions  of war. We Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56 therefore  express  our earnest  desire  that no form of military pressure, especially  
no foreign  military force, be  exerted  to protect us or our property; and that, in  
the event  of our capture  by lawless  persons  of our death  at their hands, no  money  
be paid for our release, no  punitive  expedition  be sent out, and  no indemnities  be 
exacted.  We take this stand  believing  that the way to establish  righteousness  and 
peace  is through bringing  the spirit  of personal  goodwill  to bear on all persons  
under  all circumstances, even  through  suffering  wrong  without  retaliation.’’  
‘The American  Legation, however, replied  that this petition  was inconsistent  with 
the necessity  that exists  for safeguarding  American  in China, and that therefore  no 
exception  could  or would  be made  in the procedure  in case of emergencies  with 
regard  to the singers  of the petition.’  
This is one of those  instances  in which  two apparently contradictory positions  are 
right at the same  time.  For the brave  missionaries  there  was no other  attitude  
possible, though  nowadays  very few adopt it. Was it not about China  that a 
missionary  deputation  some  thirty years  ago waited on the late Lord Salisbury and 
asked the protection  of the British  gunboats  for carrying  their message  to the 
unwilling  Chinese ? Then the late noble  Marquess  had to tell the missionaries  that, 
if they sought  the protection  of the British  arms, they must submit to international  
obligations  and curb their missionary  ardour.  He reminded  them  that Christians  of 
old, if  they penetrated the remotest  regions  of the earth, expected no protection  
save from God and put their lives in constant  danger.  In the case quoted by the 
New York Nation, the  missionaries, acc ording  to the report, have  reverted  to the 
ancient  practice.  
The American  Government, however, so  long as it retains  its present  character, 
can only give the answer  they are reported to have given.  That the answer  betrays  
the evil of the modern  system  is another  matter.  The American  prestige  depends  
not upon its moral  strength  but upon force.  But why should  the whole  armed  force  
of America  be mobilized  for the so-called  vindication  of its honour  or name ? What  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57 harm  can accrue  to the honour  of America if twen ty-five missionaries  choose  to go 
to China  uninvited  for the sake of delivering  their message  and get killed  in the 
act? Probably  it would  be the best thing  for their mission.  The American  
Government  by its interference could  only interrupt the full workin g of the law of 
suffering.  But self-restraint of America  would  mean  a complete  change  of outlook.  
To-day defence  of citizenship  is a defence of national  commerce, i.e.  
exploitation.  That exploitation  presupposes  the use of force  for imposing  
commerce  upon an unwilling  people.  Nations  have, in  a sense, therefore, almost  
become  gangs of robbers, whereas  they should  be a peaceful  combination  of men 
and women  united  for the common good of mankind.  In the latter  case, their  
strength  will lie not in their skill in the use of gunpowder, but in the possession  of 
superior  moral  fibre.  The action  of the twenty -five missionaries  is a dim shadow  of 
reconstructed society  or even reconstructed  nations.  I do not know  whether  they 
carried  their principle  into practice  in every department of life. I need hardly  
point out that, in  spite of the threat of the American  Government  to protect them  
against themselves, they  could  neutralize, indeed  even frustrate, any effort  at 
retaliation.  But that means  complete  self-effacement.  And if one is to combat  the 
fetish  of force, it  will only be by means  totally different  from those  in vogue  
among  the pure worshippers  of brute  force.  
It must not be forgotten  that after all there  is a philosophy behind  the modern  
worship  of brute  force  with a history to back it. The microscopic non-militant  
minority  has indeed  nothing  to fear from it, if only it has immovable  faith behind  
it. But faith in the possibility of holding  together  society  without  brute  force  
seems  somehow  to be lacking.  Yet if one person  can pit himself  against  the whole  
world, why  cannot  two or more  do likewise  together ? I know  the answer  that has 
been given.  Time  alone  can show  the possibilities  of the revolution  that is silently  
creeping  upon us. Speculation  is waste  of effort  where action  is already afoot.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58 Those  who have faith will join the initial  effort  in which  demonstrable  results  
cannot  be shown.3 
Language  at best is but a poor vehicle  for expressing  one’s  thoughts  in full. For me 
non-violence  is not a mere  philosophical  principle.  It is the rule and the breath  of 
my life. I know  I fail often, sometimes  consciously, more  often  unconsciously.  It is 
a matter  not of the intellect  but of the heart.  True guidance  comes  by constant  
waiting  upon God, by  utmost humility, self -abnegation, by  being  ever ready to 
sacrifice  one’s  self. Its practice  requires  fearlessness  and courage  of the highest  
order.  I am painfully aware  of my failings.  
But the Light  within  me is steady and clear.  There  is no escape  for any of us save 
through Truth  and non-violence.  I know  that war is wrong, is  an unmitigated evil. I 
know  too that it has got to go. I firmly  believe  that freedom  won through  
bloodshed or fraud  is no freedom.  Would  that all the acts alleged  against me were  
found  to be wholly  indefensible  rather  than that by any act of mine non-violence  
was held to be compromised  or that I was ever thought  to be in favour  of violence  
or untruth  in any shape  or form.  Not violence, not  untruth, but non-violence, 
Truth  is the law of our being.3 
Ahimsa is not the way of the timid  or the cowardly.  It is the way of the brave  
ready to face death.  He who perishes  sword  in hand is no doubt brave, but he who 
faces  death  without  raising  his little finger  and without flinching  is braver.  But he 
who surrenders  his rice bags for fear of being  beaten  is a coward  and no votary of 
ahimsa.  He is innocent  of ahimsa.  He, who, for  fear of being  beaten, suffers  the 
women  of his household  to be insulted, is  not manly but just the reverse.  He is fit 
to be neither  a husband nor a father nor a brother.  Such people  have no right to 
complain.  
These  cases  have nothing  to do with inveterate  enmity between  the Hindus  and 
Mussulmans.  Where there are fools there are bound to be kn aves, where there are Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59 cowards there are bound to be bullies, whe ther they are Hindus or Mussulmans. 
Such cases  used to happen  even before  the outbreak  of these  communal  
hostilities.  The question  here, therefore, is  not how to teach  one of the two 
communities  a lesson  or how to humanize  it, but how to teach  a coward  to be 
brave.  
If the thinking  sections  of both the communities  realize  the cowardice  and folly at 
the back of the hostilities, we  can easily end them.  Both have to be brave, both  
have to be wise.  If both or either  deliberately get wise, theirs  will be the way of 
non-violence.  If both fight and learn  wisdom  only by bitter  experience, the way 
will be one of violence.  Either  way there  is no room  for cowards  in a society  of 
men, i.e. in a society  which  loves  freedom.  Swaraj  is not for cowards.  
It is idle, therefore , to denounce  ahimsa or to be angry with me on the strength  of 
the cases  cited.  Ever since  my experience of the distortion  of ahimsa in Bettiah  in 
1921 I have been repeating  over and over again  that he who cannot  protect  
himself  or his nearest  and dearest or their honour  by non-violently facing  death , 
may and ought  to do so by violently dealing  with the oppressor.  He who can do 
neither  of the two is a burden.  He has no business  to be the head of a family.  He 
must either  hide himself, or  must rest content  to live for ever in helplessness  and 
be prepared to crawl  like a worm  at the bidding  of a bully.  
I know  only one way – the way of ahimsa.  The way of himsa  goes against my grain.  
I do not want to cultivate  the power  to inculcate  himsa.  As ahimsa  has no place  in 
the atmosphere  of cowardice  prevailing  to-day, I  must needs  be reticent  over the 
riots we hear of from day to day. This exhibition  of my helplessness  cannot  be to 
my liking.  But God never  ordains  that only things  that we like should  happen  and 
things  that we do not like should  not happen.  In spite of the helplessness, the  
faith sustains  me that He is the Help of the helpless, that He comes  to one’s  
succor  only when  one throws  oneself  on His mercy.  It is because  of this faith that I 
cherish  the hope that God will one day show  me a path which  I may confidently  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60 commend  to the people.  With me the conviction  is as strong  as ever that willy-
nilly Hindus  and Mussulmans  must be friends  one day. No one can say how and 
when  that will happen.  The future  is entirely  in the hands  of God. But He has 
vouchsafed  to us the ship of Faith  which  alone  can enable  us to cross  the ocean  of 
Doubt.  
Not to believe in the possibility of permanent peace  is to disbelieve  in goodliness  
of human nature.  Methods  hitherto  adopted have failed because  rock-bottom  
sincerity  on the part of those  who have striven  has been lacking.  Not that they 
have realized  this lack. Peace  is unattainable  by part performance  of conditions, 
even as chemical  combination  is impossible  without complete  fulfillmen t of 
conditions  of attainment thereof.  If recognized  leaders  of mankind  who have 
control  over engines  of destruction  were wholly  to renounce  their use with full 
knowledge  of implications, permanent peace  can be obtained.  This is clearly  
impossible  without  the great  powers  of the earth  renouncing  their imperialistic  
designs.  This again  seems  impossible  without  these  great  nations  ceasing  to 
believe in soul-destroying  competition  and to desire  to multiply wants  and 
therefore  increase  their material  possession s. It is my conviction  that the root of 
the evil is want of a living  faith in a living  God. It is a first-class human tragedy  
that peoples  of the earth  who claim  to believe in the message  of Jesus  whom  they 
describe  as the Prince  of Peace  show  little of that belief  in actual  practice.  It is 
painful  to see sincere  Christian  divines  limiting  the scope  of Jesus’s  message  to 
select  individuals.  I have been taught  from my childhood, and  I have tested the 
truth  by experience, that primary virtues  of mankind  are possible  of cultivation  by 
the meanest  of the human species.  It is this undoubted  universal  possibility that 
distinguishes  the human  from the rest of God’s  creation.  If even one great nation  
were unconditionally to perform  the supreme  act of renunciation, m any of us 
would  see in our lifetime  visible  peace  established  on earth.3 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61 Arjuna  believed  in war. He had fought  the Kaurava Hosts  many times  before.  But 
he was unnerved  when  the two armies  were  drawn  up in battle  array  and when  he 
suddenly realized that he had to fight his nearest  kinsmen and revered  teachers.  It 
was not love of man or the hatred of war that had actuated the questioner.  
Krishna  could  give no other  answer  than he did. The immortal  author  of the 
Mahabharata, of  which  the Gita is one – no doubt the brightest – of the many gems  
contained in that literary mine, has  shown  to the world  the futility  of war by 
giving  the victors  an empty glory, leaving  but seven  victors  alive out of millions  
said to have been engaged  in the fight in which  unnamable  atrocities  were  used on 
either  side. But the Mahabharata has a better  message  even than the 
demonstration  of war as a delusion  and folly.  It is the spiritual  history  of man 
considered  as an immortal  being  and has used with a magnifying  lens an historical  
episode considered  in his times  of moment  for the tiny world  round  him, but  in 
terms  of present -day values  of no significance.  In those  days the globe  had not 
shrunk  to a pinhead, as  it has to-day, on  which  the slightest  movement  on one 
spot affects  the whole . The Mahabharata depicts  for all time the eternal  struggle  
that goes on daily between  the forces  of good and evil in the human breast and in 
which  though good is ever victorious  evil does put up a brave  show  and baffles  
even the keenest  conscience.  It shows also the only way to right action.  
But whatever  the true message  of the Bhagavadgita may be, what matters  to the 
leaders  of the peace  movement  is not what the Gita says but what  the Bible, 
which  is their spiritual  dictionary, says, and then too not what meaning  the Church  
authorities  give to it, but  what meaning  a prayerful  reading  of it yields  to the 
reader.  What  matters  most of all is the objectors’  knowledge  of the implications  
of the law of love or ahimsa, inadequately rendered  in English  as non-violence.1
 
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62 Letters  from Tolstoy  to Gandhi  
Kotchety, Russia.  
September  7, 1910.  
I received  your journal  and was pleased to learn  all contained  therein  concerning  
the passive  resisters.  And I felt like telling  you all the thoughts  which  that reading  
called  up in me. 
The longer  I live and especially  now, when  I vividly  feel the nearness  of death, I  
want to tell others  what I feel so particularly clearly and what to my mind is of 
great importance – namely, that which  is called  passive  resistance, but  which  is in 
reality nothing  else than the teaching  of love, uncorrupted  by false 
interpretations.  That love – i.e. the striving  for the union of human souls and the 
activity  derived from this striving – is the highest  and only law of human life, and  
in the depth  of his soul every  human being (as  we most clearly  see in children)  
feels and knows  this; he  knows  this until he is entangled by the false teachings  of 
the world.  This law was proclaimed by all – by the Indian  as by the Chinese, 
Hebrew, Greek  and Roman  sages  of the world.  I think  this law was most clearly  
expressed  by Christ, who  plainly said that ‘in  this only is all the law and the 
prophets’.  But besides  this, foreseeing  the corruption  to which  this law is and may 
be subject, he  straightaway pointed out the danger  of its corruption, which  is 
natural  to people  who live in worldly interests, the danger, namely, which justifies 
the defences of these interests by the use of force  or, as  he said, ‘with  blows  to 
answer  blows, by  force  to take back things  usurped’. Et c. He knew, as  every  
sensible  man must know, that  the use of force  is incompatible  with love as 
fundamental  law of life, that  as soon as violence  is permitted, in  whichever  case it 
may be, the  insufficiency  of the law of love is acknowledged, and by this the very 
law is denied.  The whole  Christian  civilization, so  brilliant  outwardly, grew  upon Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63 this self-evident and strange  misunderstanding  and contradiction, sometimes  
conscious, but  mostly  unconscious.  
In reality, as  soon as force  was admitted into love, i t was no more, and there  
could  be no love as the law of life, and  as there  was no law of life, there  was no 
law at all except  violence – i.e. the power  of the strongest.  So lived Christian  
humanity  for nineteen  centuries.  It is true that in all times  peopl e were  guided by 
violence  in arranging  their lives.  The difference  between  the Christian  nations  and 
all other  nations  is only that in the Christian  world  the law of love was expressed  
clearly  and definitely, whereas  it was so expressed  in the religious  teaching, and  
that the people  of the Christian  world  have solemnly  accepted this law, whilst  at 
the same  time they have permitted violence, and  built their lives on violence, and  
that is why the whole  life of the Christian  peoples  is a continuous  contradicti on 
between  that which  they profess  and the principles  on which  they order  their lives 
– a contradiction  between  love accepted as the law of life and violence  which  is 
recognized  and praised, acknowledged even as a necessity  in different  phases  of 
life, suc h as the power  of the ruler, courts  and armies.  This contradiction  always  
grew with the development  of the people  of the Christian  world, and  lately  it 
reached  the highest  stage.  The question  now evidently stands  thus: either  to 
admit that we do not recogn ize any religion -moral  teaching, and  we guide  
ourselves  in arranging  our lives only by power  of the stronger, or  that all our 
compulsory  taxes, court and police  establishments, but mainly our armies, must  
be abolished.  
This year, in  spring, at a Scripture  examination  in a girls’  high school  in Moscow, 
the teacher  and the bishop present  asked the girls questions  on the 
commandments, and especially on the sixth.  After  a correct  answer  the bishop  
generally  put another  question, whether  murder  was always  in all cases  forbidden  
by God’s  law and the unhappy  young  ladies  were forced  by previous  instruction  to 
answer ‘Not  always’ – that murder  was permitted in war and in execution  of Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64 criminals.  Still, when  one of these  unfortunate  young  ladies (what I am telling  is 
not an invention, but  a fact told me by an eye-witness)  after her first answer, was  
asked the usual  question, if  killing  was always  sinful, she, agitated and blushing, 
decisively  answered,  ‘Always’ , and to all the usual  sophisms  of the bishop, she  
answere d with decided conviction  that killing  always  was forbidden  in the Old 
Testament and forbidden  by Christ, not  only killing, but  even every  wrong  against 
a brother.  Notwithstanding  all his grandeur  and arts of speech, the  bishop became  
silent  and the girl reminded  victorious.  
Yes, we  can talk in our newspapers  of the progress  of aviation, of  complicated  
diplomatic  relations, of  different  clubs  and conventions, of  unions  of different  
kinds, of  so-called  productions  of art, and keep silent  about what that young lady 
said. But it cannot  be passed over in silence  because  it is felt, more  or less dimly, 
but always  felt by every  man in the Christian  world.  Socialism, Communism, 
Anarchism, Salvation  Army, increasing  crime, unemployment, the  growing  insane  
luxury  of the rich and misery  of the poor, the  alarmingly increasing  number  of 
suicides – all these  are the signs of that ‘internal  contradiction  which must be 
solved  and cannot  remain  unsolved’.  And of course  solved  in the sense  of 
acknowledging  the law of love and denying  violence.  And so your activity in the 
Transvaal, as  it seems  to us, at  the end of the world, is  the most essential  work, 
the most important of all the work now being  done in the world, and in which  not 
only the nations  of the Christians, but of all the world, will  unavoidably  take part.  
I think that you will be pleased to know that here, in Russia, this activity is also 
fast developing in the way of refusals to serve in the Army, the number of which 
increases from year to year. However insignifican t is the number of our people 
who are passive resisters in Russia, who refuse to serve in the Army, these and the 
others can boldly say that God is more powerful than man.  
In acknowledging  Christianity, even  in the corrupt  form in which  it is professed  
amongst the Christian  nations  and at the same  time in acknowledging  the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65 necessity  of armies  and armament for killing  on the greatest scale  in wars, there  is 
such a clear  clamouring  contradiction, that it must sooner  or later, possibly very 
soon, inevitably reveal itself  and annihilate  either  the porfessing  of the Christian  
religion, which  is indispensable  in keeping  up these  forces  or the existence  of 
armies  and all the violence  kept-up by them, which is not less necessary  for 
power.  This contradiction  is felt by all governments, by  your British  as well as by 
our Russian  Government, and  out of a general  feeling  of self-preservation  the 
prosecution  by them (as  seen in Russia  and in the journal  sent by you) against such 
anti-government  activity as those  abovementioned, is  carried  on with more  energy  
than against any other  form of opposition.  The governments  know  where  their 
chief danger  lies, and  they vigilantly  guard in this question, not  only their 
interests, but the question : ‘To be or not to be?’ 
Yours  very faithfully,  
LEO TOLSTOY.  
(TRANSLATED FROM  THE Russian  by Pauline  Padlas hul) 
 
1. Extracts from Yeravda Mandir by M. K. Gandhi, Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedebad.  
2. Extract from Non -violence in Peace and War by M. K. Gandhi.  
3. Idem 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66  
 
 
 
 
Part Three  
----------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------  
The Practice  of Satyagraha or Civil Disobedience;  
the Passive  Resister’s  Discipline  and Method; The  Growth  of Congress;  
Satyagraha  and Nazism; Satyagraha  as a Means  of National  Defence;  
An Appeal  to England; Ahimsa  and Himsa;  
Fasting  as a Method  of Passive  Resistance  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------- 
 
 
 
 
 
                           
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67 Chapter 03  
THE PRACTICE  OF SATYAGRAHA  
For the past thirty years, I  have been preaching  and practicing  satyagraha.  The 
principles  of satyagraha, as  I know  it to-day, constitute  gradual  evolution.1 
Satyag raha differs  from Passive  Resistance  as the North  Pole from the South.  The 
latter  has been conceived  as a weapon  of the weak  and does not exclude  the use 
of physical  force  or violence  for the purpose  of gaining  one’s  end, whereas  the 
former  has been conceived  as a weapon  of the strongest  and excludes  the use of 
violence  in any shape  or form. 
The term satyag raha was coined  by me in South  Africa  to express  the force  that 
the Indians  there  used for full eight  years, and it was coined  in order  to distinguish  
it from the movement  then going  on in the United Kingdom  and South Africa  under  
the name of Passive  Resistance.  
On the political  field, the  struggle  on behalf  of the people  mostly consists  in 
opposing  error in the shape  of unjust  laws.  When  you have failed to bring  the error 
home  to the law-giver by way of petitions  and the like, the  only remedy open to 
you, if  you do not wish to submit to error, is  to compel  him by physical  force  to 
yield to you or by suffering  in your own person  by inviting  the penalty for the 
breach of the law. Hence  satyagraha largely appears  to the public  as Civil 
Disobedience  or Civil Resistance.  It is civil in the sense  that it is not criminal.  
The law-breaker  breaks  the law surreptitiously and tries to avoid the penalty; not  
so the civil resister.  He ever obeys  the laws of the state  to which  he belongs, not  
out of fear of the sanctions, but because  he considers  them  to be good for the 
welfare  of society.  But there  come  occasions, generally rare , when  he considers 
certain  laws to be so unjust  as to render  obedience  to them  a dishonour.  He then 
openly and civilly  breaks  them  and quietly suffers  the penalty  for their breach.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68 And in order  to register  his protest against the action  of the law-givers, it  is open 
to him to withdraw  his co-operation  from the state  by disobeying  such other  laws 
whose  breach  does not involve  moral turpitude.  
In my opinion, the  beauty and efficacy  of satyagraha are so great and the doctrine  
so simple  that it can be preached  even to children.  It was preached  by me to 
thousands  of men, women  and children  commonly  called  indentured  Indians  with 
excel lent results.  
The spirit  of non-violence  necessarily  leads  to humility.  Non-violence  means  
reliance  on God, the  Rock of Ages.  If we would  seek His aid, we  must approach  
Him with a humble  and a contrite  heart.  Non-co-cooperationists  may not trade  
upon their amazing  success  at the Congress.  We must act, even  as the mango  tree 
which  droops  as it bears  fruit.  Its grandeur  lies in its majestic  lowliness.  
Non-co-operation  is not a movement  of brag, bluster, or  bluff.  It is a test of our 
sincerity.  It requires  solid and silent  self-sacrifice.  It challenges  our honesty and 
our capacity  for national  work.  It is a movement  that aims at translating  ideas  into 
action.  And the more  we do, the  more  we find that much  more  must be done than 
we had expected.  And this thought  of our imperfection  must make  us humble.  
A non-co-operation  strives  to compel  attention  and to set an example  not by his 
violence, but  by his unobtrusive  humility.  He allows  his solid action  to speak  for 
his creed.  His strength  lies in his reliance  upon the correctness  of his position.  And 
the conviction  of it grows  most in his opponent  when  he least interposes  his 
speech  between  his action  and his opponent.  Speech, especially when  it is 
haughty, betrays  want of confidence  and it makes  one’s  opponent sceptical about  
the reality of the act itself.  Humility  therefore  is the key to quick  success.  I hope 
that every  non-co-operationist will recognize  the necessity  of being  humble  and 
self-restrained.  It is because  so little is really  required  to be done and because all Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69 of that depends  entirely  upon ourselves  that I have ventured  the belief  that 
Swaraj  is attainable  in less than one year.  
I am sorry that I find a nervous  fear among  some  Hindus  and Mohammedans  that I 
am undermining  their faith, and that I am even doing irreparable  harm  to India by 
my uncompromising  preaching  of non-violence.  They seem  almost to imply that 
violence  is their creed.  I touch  a tender  spot if I talk about extreme non-violence  
in their presence.  They confound  me with texts  from the Mahabh arata and the 
Koran  eulogizing  or permitting  violence.  Of the Mahabharata I can write  without  
restraint, but the most devote  Mohammedan  will not, I  hope, deny me the 
privilege  of understanding  the message  of the Prophet.  I make  bold to say that 
violence  is the creed  of no religion  and that, whereas  non-violence  in most cases  is 
obligatory in all, violence  is merely  permissible  in some  cases.  But I have not put 
before  India the final form of non-violence.  The non-violence  that I have preached  
from Congress  platforms  is non-violence  as a policy.  But even policies  require  
honest  adherence  in thought, word  and deed.  If I believe  that honesty  is the best 
policy, surely  whilst  I so believe, I  must be honest  in thought, word  and deed; 
otherwise  I become  an impostor . Non-violence  being  a policy  means  that it can 
upon due notice  be given  up when  it proves  unsuccessful  or ineffective.  But simple  
morality  demands  that, whilst  a particular  policy is pursued, it must be pursued  
with all one’s  heart.  It is simple  policy  to march  along  a certain  route, but  the 
soldier  who marches  with an unsteady step along  that route  is liable  to be 
summarily  dismissed.  I become  therefore  incredulous  when  people  talk to me 
sceptically about non-violence  or are seized  with fright  at the very mention  of the 
word non-violence.  If they do not believe  in the expedient  of non-violence, they  
must denounce  it but not claim  to believe in the expedient  when  their heart  
resists  it. How disastrous  it would  be, if, not  believing  in violence  even as an 
expedient, I  joined, say  a violence  party  and approached  a gun with a perturbed  
heart !  The reader  will believe  me when  I say that I have the capacity  for killing  a Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70 fly. But I do not believe  in killing  even flies.  Now suppose  I joined  an expedition  
for fly-killing  as an expedient.  Will I not be expected, before  being  permitted  to 
join the expedition, to use  all the available  engines  of destruction, whilst  I 
remained  in the army of fly-killers ? If those  who are in the Congress  and the 
Khilafat committees  will perceive this simple  truth, we  shall certainly  either  finish  
the struggle  this year to a successful  end, or  be so sick of non-violence  as to give 
up the pretention  and set about  devising  some  other  programme.  
I hold that Swami  Shraddhanandji  has been needl essly criticized  for the 
proposition  he intended to move.  His argument  is absolutely  honest.  He thinks  that 
we, as  a body, do  not really believe  in non-violence  even as a policy.  Therefore, 
we shall never  fulfil the programme  of non-violence.  Therefore, he  says, let  us go 
to the councils  and get what crumbs  we may. He was trying  to show  the unreality  
of the position  of those  who believe  in the policy with their lips, whereas  they are 
looking  forward  to violence  for final deliverance.  I do say that, if  Congr essmen  do 
not fully believe in the policy, they are doing  an injury  to the country  by 
pretending  to follow  it. If violence  is to be the basis of future  government, the  
councilors  are undoubtedly the wisest.  For it is through the council  that, by  the 
same  devices  by which  the present  administrators  rule us, the  councilors  hope to 
seize power  from the former’s  hands.  I have little doubt that those  who nurse  
violence  in their bosoms  will find no benefit  from the lip-profession  of non-
violence.  I urge, therefore, with  all the vehemence at my command, that  those  
who do not believe  in non-violence  should  secede  from the Congress  and form non-
co-operation  and prepare  to seek election  or rejoin  law courts  or Government  
colleges  as the case may be. Let there  be no manner of doubt  that Swaraj  
established by non-violent  means  will be different in kind from the Swarak that 
can be established by armed rebellion. Police and punishments there will be , even  
under  such Swaraj. But there  would  be no room  for brutalities  such as we witness  
to-day both on the part of the people  and the Government.  And those, whether  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71 they call themselves  Hindus  or Mussulmans, who  do not fully believe  in the policy  
of non-violence, should  abandon  both non-co-operation  and non-violence.  
For me, I  am positive  that neither  in the Koran  nor in the Mahabharata  is there  any 
sanction  for and approval  of the triumph  of violence.  Though there  is repulsion  
enough in Nature, she  lives by attraction.  Mutual  love enables  Nature  to persist.  
Man does not live by destruction.  Self-love compels  regard  for others.  Nations  
cohere, because there  is mutual  regard  among  the individuals  composing  them.  
Some day we must extend  the national  law to the universe, even  as we have 
extended  the family  law to form nations – a larger family.  God has ordained that 
India should  be such a nation.  For so far as reason  can perceive, India  cannot  
become  free by armed rebellion  for generations.  India can become  free by 
refraining  from national  violence.  India has now become  tired of rule based upon 
violence.  That to me is the message  of the plains.  The people  of the plain do not 
know  what it is to put up an organized armed fight.  And they must become  free, 
for they want freedom.  They have realized that power  seized  by violence  will only 
result in their greater  grinding.  
Such, at  any rate, is  the reasoning  that has given  birth to the policy, not the 
dharma, of  non-violence.  And even as a Mussulman or a Hindu, believing  in 
violence, applies  the creed  of non-violence  in his family, so  are both called  upon 
without  question  to apply the policy  of non-violence  in their mutual  relations  and 
in their relation  to other  races  and classes, not  excluding  Englishmen.  Those  who 
do not believe in this policy  and do not wish to live up to it in full, retard the 
movement  by remaining  in it. 
When  a person  claims  to be non-violent, he  is expected not to be angry with one 
who has injured  him. He will not wish him harm; he  will wish him well; he  will not 
swear  at him; he  will not cause  him any physical  hurt.  He will put up with all the 
injury  to which  he is subjected  by the wrong -doer.  Thus non-violence  is complete  
innocence.  Complete  non-violence  is complete  absence  of ill-will against all that Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72 lives.  It therefore  embraces  even subhuman  life, not  excluding  noxious  insects  or 
beasts.  They have not been created  to feed our destructive  propensities.  If we 
only knew  the mind of the Creator, we  should  find their proper  place  in His 
creation.  Non-violence  is therefore  in its active  form good will towards  all life. It 
is pure Love.  I read it in the Hindu  scripture s, in the Bible, in  the Koran.  
Non-violence  is a perfect  state.  It is a goal towards  which  all mankind  moves  
naturally  though unconsciously.  Man does not become  divine  when  he personifies  
innocence  in himself.  Only then does he become  truly man.  In our present state, 
we are partly  men and partly  beasts  and in our ignorance  and even arrogance  say 
that we truly fulfil the purpose  of our species, when  we deliver  blow for blow and 
develop  the measure  of anger  required  for the purpose.  We pretend  to believe 
that retaliation  is the law of our being, whereas  in every  scripture  we find that 
retaliation  is nowhere  obligatory but only permissible.  It is restraint that is 
obligatory.  Retaliation  is indulgence  requiring  elaborate  regulating.  Restraint is 
the law of our being.  For highest  perfection  is unattainable  without  highest  
restraint.  Suffering  is thus the badge  of the human tribe.  
The goal ever recedes  from us. The greater  the progress, the  greater  the 
recognition  of our unworthiness.  Satisfaction  lies in the effort, not  in the 
attainment.  Full effort  is full victory.  
Therefore  though I realize  more  than ever how far I am from that goal, for  me the 
Law of Complete  Love is the law of my being.  Each time I fail, my  effort  shall be 
all the more  determined for my failure.  
I know  my own limitations  only too well.  I know  that any such attempt is 
foredoomed  to failure.  To expect  a whole  mass of men and women  to obey that 
law all at once is not to know  its working.  But I do preach  from the Congress  
platform the deductions of the law. What the congress and the Khilafat  
organizations  have accepted  is but a fragment  of the implications  of that law. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73 Given  true workers, the  limited measure of its application  can be realized  in 
respect  of vast masses  of people  within  a short  time.  But the little measure  of it 
to be true must satisfy the same  test as the whole.  A drop of water  must yield to 
the analyst the same  results  as a lakeful.  The nature  of my non-violence  towards  
my brother  cannot  be different  from that of my non-violence  to the universe.  
When  I extend  the love for my brother  to the whole  universe, it  must still satisfy  
the same  test. 
A particular  practice  is a policy  when  its application  is limited  to time or space.  
Highest policy is therefore  fullest  practice.  But honesty  as policy  while  it lasts is 
not anything  different  from honesty  as a creed.  A merchant  believing  in honesty  as 
a policy  will sell the same  measure  and quality of cloth  to the yard as a merchant 
with honesty  as a creed. The difference  between  the two is that, while  the 
political  merchant  will leave  his honesty  when  it does not pay, the  believing  one 
will continue  it, even  though he should  lose his all.The  political  non-violence  of 
the non-co-operator  does not stand  this test in the vast majority  of cases.  Hence  
the prolongation  of the struggle.  Let no one blame  the unbending  English  nature.  
The hardest fibre must melt in the fire of Love.  It cannot  be dislodged  from that 
position  because  I know  it. When  British  or other nature  does not respond, the  fire 
is not strong  enough, if it is there  at all. 
Our non-violence  need not be of the strong, but it has to be of the truthful.  We 
must not intend  harm  to the English  or to our co-operating  countrymen, if  and 
whilst  we claim  to be non-violent.  But the majority  of us have intended  harm, and  
we have refrained  from doing  it because  of our weakness  or under  the ignorant  
belief  that mere  refraining  from physical  hurt amounted to a due fulfillment  of our 
pledge.  Our pledge  of non-violence  excludes  the possibility of future  retaliation.  
Some of us seem  unfortunately to have merely  postponed  the date of revenge.  
Let me not be misunderstood.  I do not say that the policy  of non-violence  excludes  
the possibility of revenge when  the policy  is abandoned.  But it does most Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74 emphatically exclude  the possibility of future  revenge after a successful  
termination  of the struggle.  Therefore, whilst  we are pursuing  the policy  of non-
violence, we are bound  to be actively  friendly  to English  administrators  and their 
co-operators.  I felt ashamed  when  I was told that in some  parts  of India it was not 
safe for Englishmen or well-known  co-operators  to move  about safely.  The 
disgraceful  scenes  that took place  at a recent  Madras  meeting  were a complete  
denial  of non-violence.  Those  who howled  down  the chairman  because  he was 
supposed to have insulted  me, disgraced themselves  and their policy.  They 
wounded  the heart of their friend  and helper, Mr. Andrews.  They injured  their 
own cause.  If the chairman  believed  that I was scoundrel, he  had a perfect  right to 
say so. 
We must try patiently to convert  our opponents.  If we wish to evolve  the spirit  of 
democracy  out of slavery, we  must be scrupulously  exact  in our dealings  with 
opponents.  We may not replace  the slavery of the Government  by that of the non-
co-operationists.   We must concede  to our opponents  the freedom  we claim  for 
ourselves  and for which  we are fighting.  The stoutest  co-operationist will bend to 
the stern  realities  of practice  if there  is real response  from the people.  
But there  is a non-violent  boycott which  we shall be bound practice, if  we are to 
make  any impression.  We must not compromise  with what we believe  to be an 
untruth, whether  it resides  in a white  skin or a brown.  Such boycott is political  
boycott.  We may not receive  favours  from the new councilors.  The voters, if  they 
are true to their pledge, will  be bound  to refrain  from making  use of the services  
of those  whom  they have declined  to regard  as their representatives.  They must 
ratify their verdict  by complete  abstention  from any encouragement  of the so-
called  representatives.  
The public  will be bound, if  they are non-co-operationists, to  refrain  from giving  
these  representatives  any prestige  by attending  their political  functions  or parties.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75 I can conceive  the possibility of non-violent  social  ostracism  under  certain  extreme  
conditions, when a defiant minority  refuses  to bend to the majority, not  out of 
any regard for principle, but from sheer  defiance  or worse.  But that time has 
certainly not arrived.  Ostracism  of a violent  character, such  as the denial  of the 
use of public  wells  is a species  of barbarism, which  I hope will never  be practiced  
by any body of men having  any desire  for national  self-respect  and national  uplift.  
We will free neith er Islam  nor India by processes  of coercion, whether  among  
ourselves  or against  Englishmen.  
Non-co-operation  being  a movement  of purification  is bringing  to the surface  all 
our weaknesses  as also excesses  of even our strong  points.  Social  boycott is an 
age-old institution.  It is coeval  with caste.  It is the one terrible  sanction  exercised  
with great  effect.  It is based upon the notion  that a community  is not bound  to 
extend  its hospitality or service  to an excommunicate.  It answered  when  every  
village  was a self-contained unit, and the occasions  of recalcitrancy  were  rare. But 
when  opinion  is divided, as  it is to-day, on  the merits  of non-co-operation,  when  
its new application  is having  a trial, a summary  use of social  boycott in order  to 
bend a minority to the will of the majority  is a species  of unpardonable  violence.  
If persisted  in, such boycott  is bound  to destroy the movement.  Social  boycott is 
applicable  and effective when  it is not felt as a punishment  and accepted by the 
object  of boycott as a measur e of discipline.  Moreover, social  boycott to be 
admissible  in a campaign  of non-violence  must never  savour  of inhumanity.  It must 
be civilized.  It must cause  pain to the party using  it, if it causes  inconvenience  to 
its object.  Thus, depriving  a man of the services  of a medical  man, as  is reported  
to have been done in Jhansi, is  an act of inhumanity  tantamount in the moral  code 
to an attempt to murder.  I see no difference  in murdering  man and withdrawing  
medical  aid from a man who is on the point of dying.  Even the laws of war, I  
apprehend, require  the giving  of medical  relief  to the enemy  in need of it. To 
deprive  a man of use of an only village  well is notice  to him to quit that village.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76 Surely, non- co-operators  have acquired  no right to use that extreme pressure  
against those  who do not see eye to eye with them.  Impatience  and intolerance  
will surely  kill this great religious  movement.  We may not make  people  pure by 
compulsion.  Much  less may we compel  them  by violence  to respect  our opinion .2 It 
is utterly against the spirit  of democracy we want to cultivate.  
There  are no doubt serious  difficulties  in our way. The temptation  to resort  to 
social  boycott is irresistible  when  a defendant, who  submits  to private  arbitration, 
refuses  to abide  by its award.  Yet it is easy to see that the application  of social  
boycott is more  than likely  to arrest  the splendid movement  to settle  disputes  by 
arbitration  which, apart from its use as a weapon  in the armoury of non-co-
operation, is  a movement  fraught  with great good to the country.  People  will take 
time before  they accommodate  themselves  to private  arbitration.  Its very 
simplicity  and inexpensiveness  will repel  many people  even as palates  jaded by 
spicy foods  are repelled  by simple  combinations.  All awards  will not always be 
above  suspicion.  We must therefore  rely upon the intrinsic  merits  of the 
movement  and the correctness  of awards  to make  themselves  felt. 
It is much  to be desired  if we can bring  about a complete  voluntary  boycott of law 
courts.  That one event  can bring about Swaraj.  But it was never  expected  that we 
would  reach  completion  in any single  item of non-co-operation.  Public  opinion  has 
been so far developed as to recognize  the courts  as signs not of our liberty but of 
our slavery.  It has made  it practically impossible  for lawyers  to practice  their 
profession  and be called  popular  leaders.  
Non-co-operation  has greatly demolished  the prestige  of law courts  and to that 
extent  of the Government.  The disintegrating  process  is slowly  but surely  going  on. 
Its veloc ity will suffer  diminution  if violent  methods  are adopted  to hasten  it. This 
Government  of ours is armed to the teeth  to meet  and check  forces  of non-
violence.  How can a handful  of Englishmen resist  a voluntary  expression  of opinion  
accompanied  by the voluntary self-denial  of thirty crores  of people ? Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77 I hope, therefore, that non-co-operation  workers  will beware  of the snares  of 
social  boycott.  But the alternative  to social  boycott is certainly not social  
intercourse.  A man who defies  strong  clear  public  opinion on vital matters  is not 
entitled to social  amenities  and privileges.  We may not take part in his social  
functions  such as marriage  feasts, we  may not receive gifts from him. But we dare 
not deny social  service.  The latter  is a duty.  Attendance  at dinne r parties  and the 
like is a privilege  which  it is optional  to withhold  or extend.  But it would  be 
wisdom  to err on the right side and to exercise  the weapon  even in the limited  
sense  described by me on rare and well- defined  occasions.  And in every  case the 
user of the weapon  will use it at his own risk. The use of it is not as yet in any 
form of a duty.  No one is entitled  to its use, if there  is any danger  of hurting  the 
movement.  
Popular  imagination  has pictured satyagraha as purely and simply civil 
disobe dience, if  not in some  cases  even criminal  disobedience.  The latter  is the 
very opposite  of satyagraha.  The former, i.e. civil disobedience, is  undoubtedly an 
important branch  but by no means  always  the main part of satyagraha.  To-day, for  
instance, on  the question  of Rowlatt legislation  civil disobedience  has gone into 
the background.  As satyagraha is being  brought  into play on a large  scale  in the 
political  field for the first time, it  is an experimental  stage.  I am therefore  ever 
making  new discoveries.  And my error in trying  to let civil disobedience  take the 
people  by storm, appears  to me to be Himalayan  because  of the discovery  I have 
made, namely, that he only is able and attains  the right to offer civil disobedience  
who has known  how to offer volunta ry and deliberate  obedience  to the laws of the 
state  in which  he is living.  It is only after  one has voluntarily  obeyed such laws a 
thousand  times  that an occasion  rightly comes  to him civilly  to disobey certain  
laws.  Nor is it necessary  for voluntary obedience  that the laws to be obeyed must 
be good.  There  are many unjust  laws which  a good citizen  obeys  so long as they do 
not hurt his self-respect  or the moral  being, and  when  I look back upon my life, I  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78 cannot  recall  a single  occasion  when  I have obeyed a law whether  of society  or the 
state  because  of the fear of punishment.  I have obeyed bad laws of the society  as 
well as of the state, believing  that it was good for me and the state  or the society  
to which  I belonged  to do so, and  I feel that having  regula rly and in a disciplined  
manner  done so, the  call for disobedience  to a law of society  came  when  I went to 
England  in 1888, and  to a law of the state  in South  Africa  when  the Asiatic  
Registration  Act come  to the conclusion  that civil disobedience, if  it has to be 
renewed, shall  be offered  in the first instance  only by me as being  the fittest to do 
so, and  the duty of fellow  satyagrahis  will be to assimilate  for the time being  the 
first essential  just mentioned  of civil disobedience.  In the instruction  I have drawn  
up, I have suggested  that civil disobedience  by the others  should  not be taken  up 
for at least one month  after I have been taken  charge  of by the Government.  And 
then too by one or two chosen  satyagrahis , chosen  in the sense  above  mentioned, 
and only if it is found  that no violence  has been offered  after  my incarceration  by 
the satyagrahis  so-called  or others  acting  in co-operation  with them.  The next 
duty then is for the remaining  satyagrahis  themselves  to observe  perfect  calm and 
quiet and to see that others  do likewise.  You will, therefore, see  to it that after I 
have offered  civil disobedience, if  I do, there  is no hartal, no  public  meetings  and 
no demonstrations  of any kind whatsoever  so as to give excitement.  And I feel sure 
that if perfect  peace is observed after  my incarceration, Rowlatt legislation  will 
go, by  reason  of that very fact. But it is quite  likely  that the Government  may 
remain  perfectly  obstinate.  In that event, under  the conditions  I have already  
mentioned, it will be open to the satyagrahis  to offer further  civil disobedience  
and continue  to do so till every  satyagrahi  has rendered  a good account  of 
himself.3 
 
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 79 The Growth  of Congress  
The communal  riots in Allahabad – the headquarter  of the Congress, and  the 
necessity  of summon ing the assistance  of the police  and even the military show  
that the Congress  has not yet become  fit to substitute  the British  authority.  It is 
best to face this naked truth, however  unpleasant it may be. 
The Congress  claims  to represent  the whole  of India, not  merely  those  few who 
are on the Congress  register.  It should  represent  even those  who are hostile  to it 
and who will even crush  it, if they can. Not until we make  good that claim, shall  
we be in a position  to displace  the British  Government  and funct ion as an 
independent nation.  
This proposition  holds  good whether  we seek to displace  British  rule by violent  
action  or non-violent.  
Most probably by the time these  lines appear  in print, peace  will have been 
established in Allahabad and the other  parts.  That, however, will  not take us 
further  in our examination  of the fitness  of the Congress  as an organization  ready  
to displace  British  authority  in its entirety.  
No Congressman  will seriously  doubt  that the Congress  is not at the present  
moment  capable  of delivering  the goods  if it was called  upon to do so. If it was 
capable, it would  not wait for the call. But every  Congressman  believes  that the 
Congress  is fast becoming  such a body. The brilliant success  at Haripura will be 
cited  as the most conclusive  proof of the fact. 
The riots and certain  other  things  I can mention  should  make  us pause  and ask 
ourselves  whether  the Congress  is really  growing  from strength  to strength.  I must 
own that I have been guilty  of laying  that claim.  Have I been over-hasty in doing 
so? Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 80 It is my conviction  that the phenomenal  growth  of the Congress  is due to its 
acceptance  and enforcement, however  imperfect, of the policy of non-violence.  
Time  has arrived  to consider  the nature  of Congress  non-violence.  Is it non-
violence  of the weak and the helpless, or  of the strong  and the powerful ? If it is 
the former, it  will never  take us to our goal and, if  long practiced, may  even 
render  us for ever unfit for self-government.  The weak  and helpless  are non-
violent  in action  because  they must be. But in reality they harbor  violence  in their 
breasts  and simply await opportunity for its display.  It is necessary  for 
Congressmen  individually and collectively  to examine  the quality  of their non-
violence.  If it does not come  out of real strength, it would  be best and honest  for 
the Congress  to make  such a declaration  and make  the changes  in its behaviour.  
By this time, i.e. after seventeen  years’  practice  of non-violence, the  Congress 
should  be able to put forth  a non-violent  army f volunteers  numberi ng not a few 
thousands  but lacs who would  be equal  to every  occasion  where  the police  and 
military are required.  Thus, instead  of one brave  Pashupatinath  Gupta  who died in 
the attempt to secure  peace, we  should  be able to produce  hundreds.  And non-
violent  army acts unlike  armed men, as  well in times  of peace  as of disturbances.  
They would  be constantly engaged  in constructive  activities  that make  riots 
impossible.  Theirs  will be the duty of seeking  occasions  for bringing  warring  
communities  together, carryi ng on peace  propaganda, engaging  in activities  that 
would  bring  and keep them  in touch  with every  single  person, male  and female, 
adult and child, in  their parish  or division.  Such an army should  be ready to cope 
with any emergency, and  in order  to still the frenzy  of mobs  should  risk their lives 
in numbers  sufficient  for the purpose.  A few hundred, may  be a few thousands, 
such spotless  deaths  will once for all put an end to the riots.  Surely  a few hundred  
young  men and women  giving  themselves  deliberately to mob fury will be any day 
a cheap  and braver  method of dealing  with such madness  than the display and use 
of the police  and the military.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 81 It has been suggested  that when  we have our independence  riots and the like will 
not occur.  This seems  to me to be an empty  hope, if  in the course  of struggle  for 
freedom  we do not understand and use the technique  of non-violent  action  in 
every  conceivable  circumstance.  To the extent  that the Congress  ministers  have 
been obliged to make  use of the police  and the militar y, to  that extent, in  my 
opinion, we  must admit  our failure.  That the ministers  could  not have done 
otherwise  is unfortunately  only too true.  I should  like every  Congressman, I  should  
like the working  committee, to  ask themselves  why we have failed, if  they think  
with me that we have.  
(Harijan, 26th March  1938)  
 
Satyagraha  and Nazism  
One must feel happy that the danger  of war has been averted for the time being.  
Is the price  paid likely  to be too great ? Is it likely  that honour  has been sold? Is it a 
trium ph of organized violence ? Has Herr Hitler  discovered  a new technique  of 
organizing  violence  which  enables  him to gain his end without  shedding  blood ? I do 
not profess  to know  European  politics.  But it does appear  to me that small  
nationalities  cannot  exist in Europe  with their heads  erect.  They must be absorbed  
by their larger  neighbours.  They must become  vassals.  
Europe  has sold her soul for the sake of a seven -days’  earthly existence.  The 
peace  Europe  gained at Munich is a triumph  of violence; it  is also its defeat.  If 
England  and France  were  sure of victory, they would  certainly  have fulfilled  their 
duty of saving  Czechoslovakia  or of dying  with it. But they quailed before  the 
combined  violence  of Germany and Italy.  But what have Germany and Italy gained ? 
Have they added anything  to the moral  wealth  of mankind ? 
In penning  these  lines my concern  is not with the great powers.  Their  height  dazes  
me. Czechoslovakia  has a lesson  for me and us in India.  The Czechs  could  not have Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 82 done anything  else when  they found themselves  deserted  by their two powerful  
allies.  And yet I have the hardihood to say that, if  they had known  the use of non-
violence  as a weapon  for the defence  of national  honour, they  would  have faced  
the whole  might  of Germany with that of Italy thrown in. They would  have spared  
England  and France  the humiliation  of suing  for a peace  which  was no peace; and  
to save their honour  they would  have died to a man without  shedding  the blood  of 
the robber.  I must refuse  to think  that such heroism, or  call it restraint, is  beyond  
human nature.  Human  nature  will only find itself  when  it fully realizes  that to be 
human it has to cease  to be beastly or brutal.  Though we have the human  form, 
without  the attainment  of the virtue  of non-violence, we  still share  the qualities  
of our remote  reputed  ancestor, the  orang -outang.  
(Harijan, 8th October  1938)  
 
If I have called  the arrangement with Herr Hitler ‘peace  without honour’. It  was 
not to cast any reflection  on British  or French  statesmen.  I have no doubt that Mr. 
Chamberlain  could  not think  of anything  better.  He knew  his nation’s  limitations.  
He wanted to avoid war, if  it could  be avoided at all. Short  of going  to war, he  
pulled  his full weight  in favour  of the Czechs.  That it could  not save honour  was no 
fault of his. It would  be so every  time there  is a struggle  with Herr Hitler  or Signor  
Mussolini.  
It cannot  be otherwise.  Democracy  dreads  to spill blood.  The philosophy for which  
the two dictators  stand calls it cowardice  to shrink  from carnage.  They exhaust  
the resources  of poetic  art in order  to glorify  organized  murder.  There  is no 
humbug  about their word  or deed.  They are ever ready for war. There  is nobody in 
Germany  or Italy to cross  their path.  Their  word  is law. 
It is different  with Mr. Chamberlain  or Mr. Da ladier.  They have their Parliaments  
and chambers  to please.  They have parties  to confer  with.  They cannot  maintain  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 83 themselves  on a perpetual  war footing, if  their language  is to have a democratic  
accent  about  it. 
Science  of war leads  one to dictatorship pure and simple.  Science  of non-violence  
can alone  lead one to pure democracy.  England, France  and America have to make  
their choice.  That is the challenge  of the two dictators.  
Russia  is out of the picture  just now. Russia  has a dictator  who dreams  of peace  
and thinks  he will wade  to it through a sea of blood.  No one can say what Russian  
dictatorship will mean  to the world.  
It was necessary  to give this introduction  to what I want to say to the Czechs  and 
through them  to all those  nationalities  which  are called ‘small’  or ‘weak’. I want  
to speak  to the Czechs  because  their plight moved  me to the point of physical  and 
mental  distress, and I felt that it would  be cowardice  on my part not to share  with 
them  the thoughts  that were  welling  up within  me. It is clear that the small  
nations  must either  come  or be ready to come  under  the protection  of the 
dictators  or be a constant menace  to the peace  of Europe.  In spite of all the 
goodwill  in the world  England  and France  cannot  save them.  Their  intervention  
can only mean bloodshed and destruction  such as has never  been seen before.  If I 
were a Czech, therefore, I  would  free these  two nations  from the obligation  to 
defend  my country.  And yet I must live. I would  not be a vassal  to any nation  or 
body.  I must have absolute  independence  or perish.  To seek to win in a clash  of 
arms would  be pure bravado.  Not so, if  in defying  the might  of one who would  
deprive  me of my independence  I refuse  to obey his will and perish  unarmed  in the 
attempt.  In so doing, though I lose the body, I save my soul, i.e.  my honour.  
This inglorious  peace  should  be my opportunity.  I must live down  the humiliation  
and gain real independence.  
But, says  a comforter, ‘ Hitler knows  no pity. Your spiritual  effort  will avail nothing  
before  him.’  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 84 My answer  is: ‘You  may be right.  History has no record  of a nation  having  adopted  
non-violent  resistance.  If Hitler  is unaffected by my suffering, it  does not matter.  
For I shall have lost nothing  worth.  My honour  is the only thing  worth  preserving.  
That is independe nt of Hitler’s  pity. But as a believer  in non-violence  I may not 
limit its possibilities.  Hitherto  he and his likes have built upon their invariable  
experience that men yield to force.  Unarmed men, women  and children  offering  
non-violent  resistance  without any bitterness  in them  will be a novel  experience  
for them.  Who can dare say it is not in their nature  to respond to the higher  and 
finer forces ? They have the same  soul that I have.’  
But says another  comforter, ‘What  you say is all right for you. But how do you 
expect  your people  to respond to the novel  call? They are trained to fight.  In 
personal  bravery  they are second  to none in the world.  For you now to ask them  to 
throw  away their arms and be trained for non-violent  resistance  seems  to me to be 
a vain attempt.’  
‘You may be right.  But I have a call I must answer.  I must deliver  my message  to 
my people.  This humiliation  has sunk too deep in me to remain  without  an outlet.  
I, at least, must  act up to the light that has dawned on me.’ 
This is how I should , I believe, act  if I was a Czech.  When  I first launched  out on 
satyagraha, I  had no companion.  We were thirteen  thousand  men, women  and 
children  against a whole  nation  capable  of crushing  the existence out of us. I did 
not know  who would  listen  to me. It all came  as in a flash.  All the 13,000 did not 
fight.  Many fell back.  But the honour  of the nation  was saved.  New history was 
written  by the South  African  satyagraha.  
A more  apposite  instance, perhaps, is  that of Khansaheb  Abdul  Gaffar  Khan, the  
servant  of God as he calls himself, the  pride  of Afghan  as the Pathans  delight  to 
call him. He is sitting  in front  of me as I pen those  lines.  He has made  several  
thousands  of his people  throw  down  their arms.  He thinks  he has imbibed the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 85 lesson  of non-violence.  He is not sure of his people.  I have come  to the Frontier  
province, or  rather  he has brought  me, to  see with my own eyes what his men 
here are doing.  I can say in advance  and at once that these  men know  very little  
of non-violence.  All the treasure  they have on earth  is their faith in their leader.  I 
do not cite these  soldiers  of peace  as at all a finished  illustration.  I cite them  as 
an honest  attempt  being  made  by a soldier  to convert  fellow -soldiers  to the ways 
of peace.  I can testify that it is an honest  attempt, and whether  in the end it 
succeeds  or fail, it  will have its lessons  for satyahrahis  of the future.  My purpose  
will be fulfilled, if I succeed  in reaching  these  men’s  hearts  and making  them  see 
that, if  their non-violence  does not make  them  feel much braver  than the 
possession  of arms and the ability to use them, they must give up their non-
violence, which  is another  name  for cowardice, and resume  their arms, which  
there  is nothing  but their own will to prevent  them  from taking  back.  
I present  Dr. B enes with a weapon  not of the weak  but of the brave.  There  is no 
bravery greater  than a resolute  refusal  to bend the knee to an earthly  power, no  
matter  how great, and  that without  bitterness  of spirit  and in fullness  of faith that 
the spirit  alone  lives, nothing  else does.  
(Harijan, 15th October  1938)  
 
Passive  Resistance  and Anti-Semitism  
Several  letters  have been received  by me asking  me to declare  my views  about the 
Arab-Jew question  in Palestine  and the persecution  of Jews in Germany.  It is not 
without  hesitation  that I venture  to offer  my views  on this very difficult  question.  
My sympathies  are all with the Jews. I have known  them  intimately in South  
Africa.  Some of them  became  lifelong  companions.  Through these  friends  I came  
to learn  much  of their age-long persecution.  They have been the untouchables  of 
Christianity.  The parallel between  their treatment by Christians  and the treatment  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 86 of untouchables  by Hindus  is very close.  Religious  sanction  has been invoked  in 
both cases  for the justification  of the inhuman treatment meted  out to them.  
Apart from the friendships, therefore, there  is the more  common  universal  reason  
for my sympathy  for the Jews.  
But my sympathy does not blind me to the requirements  of justice. The cry for the 
national  home  for the Jews does not make  much  appeal  to me. The sanction  for it 
is sought  in the Bible  and the tenacity  with which  the Jews have hankered  after  
return  to Palestine.  Why should  they not, like  other  peoples  of the earth , make  
that country  their home  where  they are born and where  they earn their livelihood ? 
Palestine  belongs  to the Arabs  in the same  sense  that England  belongs  to the 
English  or France  to the French.  It is wrong  and inhuman to impose  the Jews on 
the Arabs.  What  is going  on in Palestine  to-day cannot  be justified  by any moral  
code of conduct.  The mandates  have no sanction  but that of the last war. Surely  it 
would  be a crime  against humanity  to reduce  the proud Arabs  so that Palestine  
can be restored  to the Jews partly or wholly  as their national  home.  
The nobler  course  would  be to insist  on a just treatment of the Jews wherever  
they are born and bred.  The Jews born in France  are French  in precisely  the same  
sense  that Christians  born in France  are French.  If the Jews have no home  but 
Palestine, will  they relish the idea of being  forced  to leave  the other  parts  of the 
world  in which  they are settled ? Or do they want a double  home  where  they can 
remain  at will? This cry for the national  home  affords  a colourable  justification  for 
the German  expulsion  of the Jews. 
But the German  persecution  of the Jews seems  to have no parallel in history.  The 
tyrants  of old never  went so mad as Hitler  seems  to have gone.  And he is doing  it 
with religious  zeal. For, he  is propounding  a new religion  of exclusive  and militant  
nationalism  in the name  of which  any inhumanity  becomes  an act of humanity to 
be rewarded  here and hereafter.  The crime  of an obviously  mad but intrepid youth  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 87 is being  visited  upon his whole  race with unbelievable  ferocity.  If there  ever could  
be a justifiabl e war in the name  of and for humility, a  war against Germany, to  
prevent  the wanton  persecution  of a whole  race would  be completely justified.  
But I do not believe  in any war. A discussion  of the pros and cons of such a war is, 
therefore, outside  my horizo n or province.  
But if there  can be no war against  Germany, even  for such a crime  as is being  
committed  against the Jews, surely  there  can be no alliance  with Germany.  How 
can there  be alliance  between  a nation  which  claims  to stand  for justice  and 
democracy  and one which  is the declared enemy  of both? Or is England  drifting  
towards  armed  dictatorship and all it means ? 
Germany is showing  to the world  how efficiently  violence  can be worked  when  it is 
not hampered by any hypocrisy or weakness  masquerading  as humanitarianism.  It 
is also showing  how hideous, terrible  and terrifying  it looks  in its nakedness.  
Can the Jews resist  this organized  and shameless  persecution ? Is there  a way to 
preserve  their self-respect, and not to feel helpless, neglected  and forlorn ? I 
submit there  is. No person  who has faith in a living  God need feel helpless  or 
forlorn.  Jehovah  of the Jews is a God more  personal  than the God of the 
Christians, the  Mussulmans  or the Hindus, though as a matter  of fact, in  essence, 
He is common  to all and one without  a second  and beyond description.  But as the 
Jews attribute  personality  to God and believe  that He rules every  action  of theirs, 
they ought  not to feel helpless.  If I were a Jew and were born in Germany and 
earned  my livelihood  there, I  would claim  Germany as my home  even as the tallest  
gentile  German  might, and challenge  him to shoot  me or cast me in the dungeon; I  
would  refuse  to be expelled  or to submit to discriminating  treatment.  And for 
doing  this I should  not wait for the fellow -Jews to join me in civil resistance, but  
would  have confidence  that in the end the rest were  bound  to follow  my example.  
If one Jew or all the Jews were  accept  the prescription  here offered, he or  they 
cannot  be worse  off than now. And suffering  voluntarily undergone  will bring  them  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 88 an inner  strength  and joy which  no number  of resolutions  of sympathy passed in 
the world  outside  Germany can. Indeed, even  if Britain, France  and America  were  
to declare  hostilities  against Germany, they can bring  no inner  joy, no  inner  
strength.  The calculated  violence  of Hitler  may even result  in a general  massacre  
of the Jews by way of his first answer  to the declaration  of such hostilities.  But if 
the Jewish  mind could  be prepared for voluntary suffering, even  the massacre  I 
have imagined could  be turned  into a day of thanksgiving  and joy that Jehovah  had 
wrought  deliverance  of the race even at the hands  of the tyrant.  For to the God-
fearing, death  has no terror.  It is a joyful  sleep  to be followed  by a waking  that 
would  be all the more  refreshing  for the long sleep.  
It is hardly necessary  for me to point out that it is easier  for the Jews than for the 
Czechs  to follow  my prescription.  And they have in the Indian  satyagraha campaign  
in South  Africa  an exact  parallel.  There  the Indian s occupied  precisely  the same  
place  that the Jews occupy  in Germany.  The persecution  had also a religious  
tinge.  President  Kruger used to say that the White  Christians  were the chosen  of 
God and Indians  were inferior  beings  created to serve  the Whites.  A fundamental  
clause  in the Transvaal  constitution  was that there  should  be no equality between  
the Whites  and coloured  races  including  Asiatics.  There, too, the  Indians  were  
consigned  to ghettoes  described as locations . The other  disabilities  were  almost of 
the same  type as those  of the Jews in Germany.  The Indians, a mere  handful, 
resorted  to satyagraha without  any backing  from the world  outside  or the Indian  
Government.  Indeed the British  officials  tried to dissuade  the satyagrahis  from 
their contemplated step. World  opinion  and the Indian  Government came  to their 
aid after eight  years  of fighting.  And that too was by way of diplomatic  pressure, 
not of a threat of war. 
But the Jews of Germany can offer satyagraha under  infinitely  better  auspices  
than the Indians of South  Africa.  The Jews are a compact, homogeneous  
community  in Germany.  They are far more  gifted  than the Indians  of South  Africa.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 89 And they have organized world  opinion  behind  them.  I am convinces  that, if  
someone  with courage  and vision  can arise among  them  to lead them  in non-
violent  action, the  winter  of their despair  can in the twinkling  of an eye be turned  
into the summer  of hope.  And what has to-day become  a degrading  man-hunt can 
be turned  into a calm and determined stand offered  by unarmed  men and women  
possessing  the strength  of suffering  given  to them  by Jehovah.  It will be then a 
truly religious  resistance  offered  against the godless  fury of dehumanized  man.  
The German  Jews will score  a lasting  victory  over the German  gentiles  in the sense  
that they will have converted  the latter  to an appreciation  of human  dignity.  They 
will have rendered  service  to fellow -Germans  and proved their title to be the real 
Germans  as against those  who are to-day dragging, however  unknowingly, the  
German  name  into the mire.  
And now a word to the Jews in Palestine . I have no doubt that they are going  
about things  in the wrong  way. The Palestine  of the Biblical  conception  is not a 
geographical  tract.  It is in their hearts.  But if they must look to the Palestine  of 
geography as their national  home, it  is wrong  to enter  it under  the shadow  of the 
British  gun. 
A religious  act cannot  be performed  with the aid of the bayonet  or the bomb.  They 
can settle  in Palestine  only by the goodwill  of the Arabs.  They should  seek to 
convert  the Arab heart.  The same  God rules the Arab heart who rules the Jewish  
heart.  They can offer  satyagraha in front  of the Arabs  and offer themselves  to be 
shot or thrown  into the Dead  Sea without  raising  a little finger  against them.  They 
will find the world  opinion  in their favour  in their religious  aspiration.  There  are 
hundreds  of ways of reasoning  with the Arabs, if  they will only discard the help of 
the British  bayonet.  As it is, they  are co-sharers  with the British  in despoiling  a 
people  who have done no wrong  to them.  
I am not defending  the Arab excesses.  I wish they had chosen  the way of non-
violence  in resisting  what they rightly regarded as an unwarrantable  encroachment  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 90 upon their country.  But according  to the accepted  canons  of right and wrong, 
nothing  can be said against the Arab resistance  in the face of overwhelming  odds.  
Let the Jews who claim  to be the chosen  race prove  their title by choosing  the 
way of non-violence  for vindicating  their position  on earth.  Every  country  is their 
home, including  Palestine, not by aggression  but by loving  service.  A Jewish  friend  
has sent me a book called  The Jewish  Contribution  to Civilization  by Cecil Roth.  It 
gives  a record  of what the Jews have done to enrich  the world’s  literature, art, 
music, drama, science, medicine, agriculture, etc.  Given  the will, the  Jew can 
refuse  to be treated as the outcast of the West to be despised or patronized.  He 
can command  the attention  and respect  of the world  by being  man, the  chosen  
creation  of God, instead of being  man who is fast sinking  to the brute  and forsaken  
by God. They can add to their many contributions  the surpassing  contribution  of 
non-violent  action.  
(Harijan, 26th November  1938)  
 
I do not think  that the sufferings  of Pastor  Niemo eller and others  have been in 
vain. They have preserved  their self-respect  intact.  They have proved  that their 
faith was equal  to any suffering.  That they have not proved sufficient  for melting  
Herr Hitler’s  heart merely  shows  that it is made  of harder  material  than stone.  But 
the hardest metal  yields  to sufficient  heat.  Even so must the hardest heart melt 
before  sufficiency  of the heat of non-violence.  And there  is no limit to the 
capacity  of non-violence  to generate  heat.  
Every  action  is a resultant  of a multitude  of forces  even of a contrary nature.  
There  is no waste  of energy.  So we learn  in the books  on mechanics.  This is 
equally true of human  actions.  The difference  is that in the one case we generally  
know  the forces  at work, and  when  we do, we  can mathematically  foretell  the 
resultant.  In the case of the human actions , they  result  from a concurrence  of Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 91 forces, of  most of which  we have no knowledge.  But our ignorance  must not be 
made  to serve  the cause  of disbelief  in the power  of these  forces.  Rather  is our 
ignorance  a cause  for greater  faith.  And non-violence  being  the mightiest force  in 
the world  and also the most elusive  in its working, it  demands  the greatest  
exercise of faith.  Even as we believe  in God in faith, so  have we to believe in non-
violence  in faith.  
(Harijan, 7th January  1939)  
 
Satyagraha  as a means  of National  Defence  
In the course  of the conversation  with the members  of the working -committee, I  
discovered  that their non-violence  had ever gone beyond fighting  the British  
Government  with that weapon.  I had hugged the belief  that Congressmen  had 
appreciated the logical  result  of the practice  of non-violence  for the past twenty  
years  in fighting  the biggest  imperialist  power  in the world.  But in great 
experiments  like that of non-violence, hypothetical  questions  have hardly any 
play. I myself  used to say in answer  to questions  that when we had actually  
acquired independence  we would  know  whether  we could  defend  ourselves  non-
violently  or not. But to-day the question  is no longer  hypothetical . Whether  there  
is on the part of the British  Government  a favourable  declaration  or not, the  
Congress  has to decide  upon the course  it would  adopt in the event  of an invasion  
of India.  For though there  may be no settlement  with the Government, the  
Congress  has to declare  its policy and say whether  it would  fight the invading  host 
violently  or non-violently.  
So far as I can read the working  committee’s  mind after a fairly  full discussion, the  
members  think  that congressmen  are unprepared for non-violent  defence  against  
armed invas ion. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 92 This is tragic.  Surely  the means  adopted for driving  an enemy  from one’s  house  
must, more  or less, coincide  with those  to be adopted  for keeping  him out of the 
house.  If anything, the  latter  process  must be easier.  The fact, however, is  that 
our fight has not been one of non-violent  resistance  of the strong.  It has been one 
of passive  resistance  of the weak.  Therefore  there  is no spontaneous  response  in 
our hearts, at this supreme  moment, to  an undying  faith in the efficacy  of non-
violence.  The working  committee, therefore, wisely  said that they were  not ready  
for the logical  step.  The tragedy of the situation  is that, if  the Congress  is to throw  
in its lot with those  who believe in the necessity  of armed defence of India, the  
past twenty years  will have been years  of gross  neglect  of the primary  duty of 
Congressmen  to learn  the science  of armed  warfare.  And I fear that history will 
hold me, as  the general  of the fight, responsible  for the tragedy.  The future  
historian  will say that I should  have perceiv ed that the nation  was learning  not 
non-violence  of the strong  but merely  passivity of the weak, and that I should  
have, therefore, provided  for Congressmen’s  military  training.  
Being  obsessed  with the idea that somehow  or other  India will learn  true non-
violence, it  would  not occur  to me to invite  my co-workers  to train themselves  for 
armed defence.  On the contrary, I  used to discountenance  all sword -play and the 
display  of stout lathis.  Nor am I even now repentant for the past.  I have the 
unquenchable  faith that, of  all the countries  in the world, India is the one country  
which  can learn  the art of non-violence, that  if the test were applied  even now, 
there  would  be found, perhaps, thousands  of men and women  who would  be 
willing  to die without  harbouring  malice against their persecutors.  I have 
harangued  crowds  and told them  repeatedly that they might  have to suffer  much, 
including  death  by shooting.  Did not thousands  of men and women  brave  hardships  
during  the salt campaign  equal  to any that soldiers  are called upon to bear? No 
different  capacity  is required  from what  has been already  evinced, if  India has to 
contend  against  an invader.  Only it will have to be on vaster  scale.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 93 One thing  ought  not to be forgotten.  India unarmed  would  not require  to be 
destro yed through poison  gas or bombardment.  It is the Maginot Line that has 
made  the Siegfried  Line necessary.  And vice versa.  Defence of India by the present  
methods  has been necessary  because  she is an appendage  of Britain.  Free India 
can have no enemy.  And if her people  have learnt the art of saying  resolute ‘No’  
and acting  up to it, I daresay no one would  want to invade  her. Our economy  
would  be so modeled as to prove  no temptation  for the exploiter.  
But some  Congressmen  will say: ‘Apart  from the British, In dia has so many  martial  
races  within  her border  that they will want to put up a fight for the country  which  
is as much  theirs  as ours.’  This is perfectly  true.  I am therefore  talking, for  the 
moment, only  of Congressmen.  How would  they act in the event  of an invasion ? 
We shall never  convert  the whole  of India to our creed  unless  we are prepared to 
die for it. 
The opposite  course  appeals  to me. Already, the  bulk of the Army is manned  by 
the Mussulmans  of the North, Sikhs  and Gurkhas.  If the masses  of the South and 
Centre  wish to become  militarized, the  Congress, which  is supposed  to represent  
them, will  have to enter  into competition  with the former.  The Congress  will then 
have to be party to an enormous  military budget.  There  may be all these  things  
without  the Congress  consent.  It will make  all the difference  in the world  whether  
the Congress  is party to them  or not. The world  is looking  for something  new and 
unique  from India.  The Congress  will be lost in the crowd, if  it wears  the same  old 
outworn  armour  that the world  is wearing  to-day. The Congress  has a name  
because  it represents  non-violence  as a political  weapon  par excellence.  If the 
Congress  helps  the Allies  as a representative  of non-violence, it  will give to the 
Allied  cause  a prestige  and a power  which  will be invaluable  in deciding  the 
ultimate  fate of the war. But the members  of the working  committee  have 
honestly  and bravely  not made  the profession  of such non-violence.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 94 My position  is, therefore, confined  to myself  alone.  I have to find out whether I 
have any fellow -traveller  along  the lonely  path.  If I am in the minority  of one , I 
must try to make converts. Whether one or many, I must declare  my faith that it is 
better  for India to discard violence  altogether  even for defending  her borders,  For 
India to enter  into the race for armaments  is to court  suicide.  With the loss of 
India to non-violence  the last hope of the world  will be gone.  I must live up to the 
creed  I have professed  for the last half-century, and hope to the last breath  that 
India will make  non-violence  her creed, preserve man’s  dignity, and prevent  him 
from reverting  to the type from which  he is supposed  to have raised himself.  
 (Harijan, 14th October  1939)  
 
An Appeal  to Every  Briton  
In 1896 I addressed an appeal  to every  Briton  in South Africa  on behalf  of my 
countrymen  who had gone there  as labourers  or traders  and their assistants.  It had 
its effect.  However  important it was from my viewpoint, the  cause  which  I 
pleaded then was insignificant  compared with the cause  which  prompts  this 
appeal.  I appeal  to every  Briton, wherever he may be now, to  accept  the method  
of non-violence  instead of that of war, for  the adjustment of relations  between  
nations  and other  matters.  Your statesmen  have declared that this is a war on 
behalf  of demo cracy.  There  are many other  reasons  given  in justification.  You 
know  them  all by heart.  I suggest  that, at the end of the war, whichever  way it 
ends, there  will be no democracy  left to represent  democracy.  This war has 
descended upon mankind  as a curse  and a warning.  It is a curse  inasmuch as it is 
brutalizing  man on a scale  hitherto  unknown.  All distinctions  between  combatants  
and non-combatants  have been abolished.  No one and nothing  is to be spared.  
Lying  has been reduced  to an art. Britain  was to defend  small  nationalities.  One by 
one they have vanished, at  least for the time being.  It is also a warning.  It is a 
warning  that, if  nobody reads  the writing  on the wall, man  will be reduced  to the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 95 state  of the beast, whom  he is shaming  by his manners.  I read the writing  when  
the hostilities  broke  out. But I had not the courage  to say the word.  God has given  
me the courage  to say it before  it is too late. 
I appeal  for cessation  of hostilities, not  because  you are too exhausted to fight, 
but because  war is bad in essence.  You want to kill Nazism.  You will never  kill it 
by its indifferent  adoption.  
Your soldiers  are doing  the same  work of destruction  as the Germans.  The only 
difference  is that perhaps  yours  are not as thorough as the Germans.  If that be so, 
yours  will soon acquire  the same  thoroughness  as theirs, if  not much  greater.  On 
no other  condition  can you win the war. In other  words, you  will have to be more  
ruthless  than the Nazis.  No cause, however  just, can  warrant the indiscriminate  
slaughter  that is going on minute  by minute.  I suggest  that a cause  that demands  
the inhumanities  that are being  perpetrated to-day cannot  be called  just. 
I do not want Britain  to be defeated, nor  do I want her to be victorious  in a trial of 
brute  strength, whether  expressed  through the muscle  or the brain.  Your muscular  
bravery is an established  fact. Need  you demonstrate  that your brain  is also as 
unrivalled  in destructive  power  as your muscle ? I hope you do not wish to enter  
into such an undignified  competition  with the Nazis. I venture  to present  you with 
a nobler  and braver  way, worthy  of the bravest soldier.  I want you to fight Nazism  
without  arms, or, if  I am to retain  the military terminology, with  non-violent  arms.  
I would  like you to lay down  the arms you have as being useless  for saving  you or 
humanity.  You will invite  Herr Hitler  and Signor  Mussolini  to take what they want 
of your beautiful  island, with  your many beautiful  buildings.  You will give all these  
but neither  your souls, nor  your minds.  If these  gentlemen  choose  to occupy  your 
homes, you  will vacate  them.  If they do not give you free passage  out, you  will 
allow  yourselves  man, woman  and child, to  be slaughtered, but  you will refuse  to 
owe allegiance  to them.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 96 This process  or method, which  I have called  non-violent  non-co-operation, is  not 
without  considerable  success  in its use in India.  Your representatives  in India may 
deny my claim.  If they do, I shall feel sorry for them.  They may tell you that our 
non-co-operation  was not wholly  non-violent, that it was born of hatred.  If they 
give that testimony , I will not deny it. Had it been wholly  non-violent, if  all the 
non-co-operators  had been filled  with goodwill  towards  you, I  make  bold to say 
that you who are India’s  masters  would  have become  her pupils  and, wit h much  
greater  skill than we have, perfected  this matchless  weapon  and met the German  
and Italian  friends’  menace  with it. Indeed  the history of Europe  during  the past 
few months  would  then have been written  differently.  Europe  would  have been 
spared seas of innocent  blood, the  rape of so many small  nations, and the orgy of 
hatred.  
This is no appeal  made  by a man who does not know  his business.  I have been 
practicing  with scientific  precision  non-violence  and its possibilities  for an 
unbroken period of over fifty years.  I have applied it in every  walk of life, 
domestic, institutional, economic  and political.  I know  of no single  case in which  it 
has failed.  Where  it has seemed  sometimes  to have failed, I  have ascribed  it to my 
imperfections.  I claim  no perfec tion for myself.  But I do claim  to be a passionate  
seeker  after Truth, which  is but another  name  for God. In the course  of that 
search,  the discovery  of non-violence  came  to me. Its spread is my life mission.  I 
have no interest  in living  except  for the prosecution  of that mission.  
I claim  to have been a lifelong  and wholly  disinterested friend  of the British  
people.  At one time I used to be also a lover  of your empire.  I thought  that it was 
doing  good to India.  When  I saw that in the nature  of things  it could do no good, I  
used, and am still using, the  non-violent  method  to fight imperialism.  Whatever  
the ultimate  fate of my country, my love for you remains, and will remain, 
undiminished.  My non-violence  demands  universal  love, and  you are not a small  
part of it. It is that love which  has prompted my appeal  to you. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 97 May God give power  to every  word of mine.  In His name,  I began  to write  this, and  
in His name,  I close  it. May your states  men have the wisdom  and courage  to 
respond to my appeal.  I am telling  His Excellency  the Viceroy  that my services  are 
at the disposal  of His Majesty’s  Government, should  they consider  them  of any 
practical  use in advancing  the object  of my appeal.  
(Harijan, 6th July 1940)  
 
By writing  that ‘Appeal  to Every  Briton’ I  have invited  upon my head and extra  
load of work which  without  God’s  help I would  be ill able to bear.  If it is His will 
that I should  shoulder  it, He  will give me the strength  to carry  on. 
When  I decided to confine  myself  mostly to writing  in Gujarati  or Hindustani, I had 
no notion  that I would  have to write  the appeal.  It came  to me like a flash, and  
the courage  to write  it came  with it. I had resisted  till then all pressure  from 
English  and American  friends  to give guidance.  But I could  not see my way. Now, 
having  addres sed that appeal, I must follow up the reactions to it. A large amount 
of correspondence is pouring in upon me. Save for one angry telegram, I had 
nothing but friendly criticism from Englishmen and even appreciation from some.   
I was grateful  to H. E. the Viceroy  for forwarding  my offer to His Majesty’s  
Government.  The correspondence  with regard  to it the readers  have already  seen 
or will see in this issue.  Though no better  response  to the appeal  was to be 
expected, I  cannot  help saying  that it was the knowledge  of the determination  to 
carry  the war to a victorious  end that had prompted my appeal.  No doubt the 
determination  is natural  and worthy of the best British  tradition.  Nevertheless  the 
awful  slaughter  that the determination  involves, should  induce  a search  for a 
better  and braver  way to achieve  the end. For peace  has its victories  more  
glorious  than those  of war. The non-violent  method  would  have meant  no abject  
surrender.  It would  have confounded  all modern  tactics  of war, indeed rendered  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 98 them  of no use. The new world  order, which  all dream  of, would  surely  have been 
found.  I hold a new order  to be impossible, if  the war is fought  to a finish  or 
mutual  exhaustion  leads  to a patched- up peace.  
Let me, therefore, examine the argument  advanced in a letter received  from a 
friend.  Here it is: 
‘Two English  friends, who  admire  you, say your appeal  to every  Briton  cannot  have 
any effect  just now. It is impossible  to expect  the man in the street to do a 
complete  volte  face with any degree of understanding – indeed it is impossible  for 
the understanding  to do, as  you say, without a heart- belief  in non-violence.  The 
time to mould  a new world  on your lines will be after the war. They realize  your 
way is the right one, but they say it needs  endless  preparation  and instruction  and 
big leadership – none of which  they possess.  Regarding  India, they  say the attitude  
of the present  authority  is deplorable.  Long ago India should  have been declared  
as independent as Canada, and her people  should  be allowed to work out their 
own constitution.  But what they are extremely  perplexed about  now is that you 
want absolute  independence  straight away, and the next step you will take is “no  
further  help to Britain  in the prosecution  of war, surrender  to Germany, and  
opposition  to her by non-violent  means”.  You must explain  what you mean  in more  
detail  so as to remove  this misunderstanding.  This is an honest  reaction.’  
The appeal  was intended to produce  the effect  now. It could  not come  out of the 
mathematical  calculation.  If the convi ction  could  have come, action  was an easy 
matter.  The mass mind responds  under  pressure.  That the appeal  has not 
produced the intended result  shows  that either  my word  has no power  or that God 
has a purpose  of which  we have no knowledge.  The appeal  has come from an 
anguished  heart.  I could  not suppress  it. It was not written  for the moment.  I am 
quite  sure that it enunciates  a truth  of eternal  value.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 99 If the ground  is not prepared from now, there  may be no time left after  a dismal  
termination  of the war for evolving  a new order.  Whatever  the order, it  will be in 
no response  to a conscious  or unconscious  effort  from now. Indeed  the effort  
began  before  my appeal  I hope that it has stimulated  it, perhaps  given  it a definite  
direction.  I suggest  to the non-offici al leaders  and moulders  of British  opinion, if  
they are convinced  of the truth  of my position, to  work for its adoption.  Compared  
to the big issue raised in my appeal, the  question  of Indian  independence  pales  
into insignificance.  But I hold with the two Englishmen that the British  
Government’s  attitude  is deplorable.  The two friends  are wholly  wrong  in the 
deduction  they have drawn  from the assumed  recognition  of India’s  independence.  
They forget  that I am out of the picture.  Those  who are responsible  for the 
working  committee’s  last resolution  have meant  free India’s co-operation  with 
Britain.  With them, there  is no question  of surrender  to Germany  or non-violent  
opposition.  
But I must here tarry on Indian  independence  and its implications, tempting  
though the subject  is. 
The cuttings  and correspondence  before  me say that the Congress  rejections  of my 
advice  to abstain  from preparation  for military defence of India precludes  me from 
making  the appeal  to Britain  or from expecting  a favourable  response.  The 
argument  is plausible, but  only plausible.  The critics  say that, if  I have failed  with 
my people, I  have no right to expect  Britain  whilst  she is in the midst  of a life and 
death  struggle  to listen  to me. I am a man with a mission.  India’s  millions  have 
never tasted the bitters  of war as British  have.  Britain, if  she is to fulfil her 
declared  purpose, needs  a radical  change  in her policy.  I feel that I know  the 
change  that is needed.  My inability  to persuade  the working  committee  is 
irrelevant  to the theme  under discussion.  There  is no analogy between  India’s  case 
and Britain’s.  I am, therefore, wholly  unrepentant, I  maintain  that in issuing  my 
appeal  I have acted  wholly  as a lifelong  friend  of Britain.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 100 A writer, however, retorts : ‘Address  your appeal  to Hitler.’ In the first place, I  did 
write  to Herr Hitler.  My letter  was published  in the Press  some  time after I 
addressed it. In the second  place, there  can be no meaning  in my appeal  to Herr 
Hitler  to adopt  non-violence.  He is marching  from victory  to victory , I can only 
appeal  to him to desist.  That I have done.  But to Britain, which  is just now on the 
defensive, I  can present  the really effective  weapon  of non-violent  non-co-
operation.  Let my method  be rejected  on merits, not by bringing  inapt analogies  
or untenable  arguments.  The issue raised by me, I venture  to think, is  of universal  
importance.  The usefulness  of non-violent  methods  seems  to be granted by all the 
critics.  They gratuitously assume  the impossibility  of human nature, as  it is 
constituted, responding  to the strain  involved  in non-violent  preparation.  But that 
is begging the question.  I say, ‘You  have never  tried the method on any scale.  In 
so far as it has been tried, it  has shown  promising  results.’  
(Harijan, 21sth  July 1940)  
 
A friend  quotes  from a letter  received  from an English  friend : 
‘Do you think  that Mahatma’s  appeal  to every  Briton  is going  to produce  right 
reactions  in the mind  or heart of a single  Briton ? That appeal  has probably created  
more  ill-will than anything  else recently.  We live in astonishing  and critical  times, 
and it is frightfully  difficult  to decide  what should  be done.  At any rate we should  
try to avoid obvious  dangers.  So far as I can see, Mahatma’s  unadulterated policy  
must inevitably lead to disaster  for India.  How far he himself  intends  following  it I 
do not know, for  he has a wonderful  way of adapting  himself  to his material.’  
Well, I  happen  to know  that many more  than one single  heart have been touched  
by my ‘Appeal  to Every  Briton’. I know  that many English  friends  were anxious  for 
me to take some  such step.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 101 But I do not want to take comfort  from the approbation, however  pleasing  in 
itself, of English  friends.  What  is of value  for me is to know  that at least one 
Englishman thinks  as stated in the extract.  Such knowl edge should  put me on my 
guard.  It should  make  me more  careful, if possible, in  the selection  of the words  I 
use to express  my thought.  But no displeasure  even of the dearest friends  can put 
me off the duty I se clearly  in front  of me. And this duty of making the appeal  was 
so peremptory that it was impossible  for me to put it off. As certain  as I am 
writing  this, the  world  has to come  to the state  to which  I have invited  Britain.  
Those  who will be witnesses  of that happy and not far-off event  will recall  my 
appeal  with gladness.  I know  that the appeal  has hastened  its advent.  
Why should  a single  Briton  resent  an appeal  to him to be braver  than he is, to  be 
better  than he is in every  respect ? He may plead inability, but he cannot  be 
displeased  by an appeal  to his nobler  nature.  
Why should  the appeal  breed  any ill-will at all? There  is no cause given  for it by 
the manner  or the matter  of the appeal.  I have not advised cessation  of fight.  I 
have advised lifting  it to a plane  worthy  of human nature, of  the divinity man 
shares  with God Himself.  If the hidden  meaning  of the remarks  is that by making  
the appeal  I have strengthened  Nazi hands, the  suggestion  does not bear scrutiny.  
Herr Hitler  can only be confounded  by the adoption  by Britain  of the novel  method  
of fighting.  At one single  stroke  he will find that all his tremendous  armament has 
been put out of action.  A warrior lives on his wars whether  offensive  or defensive.  
He suffers  a collapse, if  he finds that his warring  capacity is unwanted.  
My appeal  is not from a coward  to brave  people  to shed their bravery, nor  is it a 
mockery  from a fair-weather  friend  to one in distress.  I suggest  to the writer  to re-
read my appeal  in the light of my explanation.  
One thing  Herr Hitler, as  every  critic, may say: I  am a fool without  any knowledge  
of the world  or human nature.  That would  be a harmless  certificate  which  need Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 102 excite  neither  ill-will nor anger.  It would  be harmless  because  I have earned such 
certificates before  now. This one would  be the latest of the many editio n, and  I 
hope not the last, for  my foolish  experiments  have not yet ended.  
So far as India is concerned, my  unadulterated policy  can never  harm  her, if  she 
adopts  it. If India as a whole  rejects  it, there  can be no harm  accruing  except  to 
those  who may foolishly  pursue  it. The correspondent has lighted upon my strong  
point when  he says: ’Mahatma has a wonderful  way of adapting  himself  to his 
material.’  My instinctive  knowledge  of my material  has given  me a faith which  
cannot  be moved.  I feel within  me that the material  is ready.  My instinct  has not 
betrayed me once.  But I must not build much  upon past experience. ‘One step 
enough for me.’ 
(Harijan, 28th July 1940)  
 
Ahimsa and Himsa  
If we turn our eyes to the time of which  history has any record  down  to our own 
time, we  shall find that man has been steadily progressing  towards  ahimsa.  Our 
remote  ancestors  were cannibals.  Then came  a time when  they were fed up with 
cannibalism  and they began  to live on chase.  Next came  a stage  when  man was 
ashamed of leading  the life of a wandering  hunter.  He therefore took to 
agriculture  and depended  principally  on mother  earth  for his food.  Thus  from 
being  a nomad he settled down  to civilized  stable  life, founded  villages  and towns, 
and from member  of a family  he became  memb er of a community  and a nation.  All 
these  are signs of progressive  ahimsa and diminishing  himsa.  Had it been 
otherwise, the  human species  should  have been extinct by now, even  as many of 
the lower  species  have disappeared.  
Prophets  and avatars  have also taught  the lesson  of ahimsa more  or less. Not one 
of them  has professed  to teach  himsa.  And how should  it be otherwise ? Himsa does Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 103 not need to be taught.  Man as animal  is violent, but as spirit  is non-violent.  The 
moment  he awakes  to the spirit within  he cannot remain  violent.  Either  he 
progresses  towards  ahimsa or rushes  to his doom.  That is why the prophets  and 
avatars  have taught the lessons  of truth, harmony, brotherhood, justice, etc. – all 
attributes  of ahimsa.  
And yet violence  seems  to persist, even  to the extent  of thinking  people  like the 
correspondent regarding  it as the final weapon.  But, as  I have shown, history  and 
experience are against him. 
If we believe  that mankind  has steadily progressed  towards  ahimsa, it  follows  that 
it has to progress  towar ds it still further.  Nothing  in this world  is static, everything  
is kinetic.  If there  is no progression, then  there  is inevitable  retrogression.  No one 
can remain  without  the eternal  cycle, unless  it be God Himself.  
The present  war is the saturation  point in violence.  It spells  to my mind  also its 
doom.  Daily I have testimony  of the fact that ahimsa was never  before  
appreciated by mankind  as it is to-day. All the testimony from the West that I 
continue  to receive  points  in the same  direction.  The Congress  has pledged itself  
to ahimsa however  limited.  I invite  the correspondent  and doubters  like him to 
shed their doubts  and plunge  confidently into the sacred  sacrificial  fire of ahimsa.  
Then I have little doubt  that the Congress  will retrace  its step. ‘It  is always  
willing.’  Well has Pritan, our  poet, sung : 
Happiest are those  that plunge  in the fire, 
The lookers -on are all but scorched  by flames.  
(Harijan, 11th August  1940)  
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 104 Fasting  in Non-violent  Action  
If the struggle  which  we are seeking  to avoid with all our might  has to come, and  
if it is to remain  non-violent  as it must in order  to succeed, fasting  is likely  to play 
an important part in it. It has its place  in the tussle  with authority and with our 
own people  in the event  of wanton  acts of violence  and obstinate  riots, for  
instance.  
There  is a natural  prejudice  against it as part of a political  struggle.  It has a 
recognized  place  in religious  practice.  But it is considered  a vulgar  interpolation  in 
politics  by the ordinary politician  though it has always  been resorted  to by 
prisoners  in a haphazard way with more  or less success.  By fasting, however, they  
have always  succeeded  in drawing  public  attention  and disturbin g the peace  of jail 
authorities . 
My own fasts have always, as  I hold, been  strictly  accordi ng to the law of 
satyagraha.  Fellow  satyagrahis  too in South  Africa  fasted partially or wholly.  My 
fasts have been varied.  There was  the Hindu -Muslim  unity  fast of twenty- one days 
in 1924, started  under  the late Maulana  Mohomed  Ali’s roof in Delhi.  The 
indeterminate  fast against the MacDonald  Award was taken  in the Yeravda Prison  
in 1932.  The twenty -one days’  purificatory fast was begun  in the Yeravda prison  
and was finished  at Lady Thakersey’s, as  the Government  would  not take the 
burden  of my being  in the prison  in that condition.  Then followed  another  fast in 
the Yeravda prison  in 1933 against the Government  refusal  to let me carry  on anti-
untouchability  work through Harijan (issued  from prison)  on the same  basis as 
facilities  had been allowed  me four months before.  They would  not yield, but they 
discharged me when  their medical  advisers  thought  I could  not live many days if 
the fast was not given  up. Then followed  the ill-fated  Rajkot  fast in 1939.  A false 
step taken  by me thoughtlessly  during  that fast thwarted the brilliant  result  that 
would  otherwise  certainly have been achieved.  In spite of all these  fasts, fasting  
has not been accepted as recognized  part of satyagraha.  It has only been tolerated  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 105 by the politicians.  I have, however, been  driven  to the conclusion that fasting  unto 
death  is an integral  part of satyagraha programme, and it is the greatest and most 
effective  weapon  in its armoury under  given  circumstances.  Not every  one is 
qualified for undertaking  it without  a proper  course  of training.  
I may not burden  this note with an examination  of the circumstances  under  which  
fasting  may be resorted  to and the training  required  for it. Non-violence in its 
positive  aspect as benevolence (I  do not use the word  love as it has fallen  into 
disrepute) is  the greatest force  because  of the limitless  scope  it affords  for self-
suffering  without  causing  or intending  any physical  or material  injury  to the 
wrong -doer.  The object  always  is to evoke  the best in him. Self-suffering  is an 
appeal  to his better  nature, as  retaliation  is to his baser.  Fasting  under  proper  
circumstances  is such an appeal  par excellence.  If the politician  does not perceive  
its propriety in political  matters, it is because  it is a novel  use of this very fine 
weapon.  
To practice  non-violence  in mundane  matters  is to know  its true value.  It is to 
bring  heaven  upon earth.  There  is no such thing as the other  world.  All worlds  are 
one. There  is no ‘here’  and no ‘there’. As Jeans  has demonstrated, the  whole  
universe  including  the most distant stars,  invisible  even through the most powerful  
telescope  in the world, is  compressed  in an atom.  I hold it therefore  to be wrong  
to limit the use of non-violence  to cave dwellers  and for acquiring  merit  for a 
favoured  position  in the other  world.  All virtue  ceases to have use if it serves  no 
purpose  in every  walk of life. I would  therefore  plead with the purely political -
minded people  to study non-violence  and fasting  as its extreme manifestation  with 
sympathy and understanding.  
(Harija n 26th July 1942)  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 106 1. Extracts from Young India. Vol. I by M. K. Gandhi (Navajiwan Publishing House, 
Ahmedebad)   
2. In Young India of 9th March 1922, commenting on a letter received by him from a well -
known resident of Feni in the Noakhali district alleg ing that the Congress Volun teer Corps 
had become an organization for bad characters, that the whole country thereabout was 
under it and that these were guilty of extortion, terrorism and humiliating rowdyism, Mr. 
Gandhi wrote asking the Congress Committee to inquire.  
‘An inquiry the refore is a simple matter. Meanwhile, as I know that publication is also half 
the remedy, I gladly place the columns of Young India at the disposal of those who can send authentic instances of intimidation, coercion, assaults, social boycott by or on behal f of non -
co-operators whether Congressmen or Khilafatists. Indeed every Congressman is a 
Khilafatist, and every Khilafatist is a Congressman, but since we have two organizations in 
the country I appeal to both to be merciless in exposing our own wrong -doing. I could find a 
thousand excuses for the wrong -doing of the administrators if only because we impute to 
them nothing better, whereas we claim to be immaculate so far as non -violence and honesty 
are concerned. We shall bring the struggle to a successful i ssue far more quickly by being 
strict with ourselves. There is no excuse whatsoever for intimidation, coercion, assault or 
social boycott on our part. I would urge the correspondents, who may send me letters of 
complaints, to be brief, strictly accurate an d to write in a clear hand on one side of the 
paper only. It is not an easy matter to go through the heavy correspondence pouring in from day to day. Compliance with this simple request will ensure quicker attention. 
Correspondents will take care to avoid vague generalizations. Specific details as in the 
Nokhali letter are absolutely necessary to inspire belief and to assist Inquiry.  
3. Extract from Young India, Vol. III by M. K. Gandhi (Navajiwan Publishing House, 
Ahmedebad)  
                                                    
 
 
 
 
 
  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 107  
 
   
 
Part Four 
------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------  
A Reply  to the Poet, Tagore; Politics  and Religion;  
Advice  to Satyagrahis  in an Industrial  Strike; A Letter  to the Viceroy  
Inaugurating  the Non-Co-operative  Move -Ment;  
An Appeal  to his Followers; The  Swadeshi  Movement  
------------------------------------------------------------ --------------------------  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 108 Chapter 04  
A REPLY  TO TAGORE  
The Poet of Asia, as  Lord Hardinge  called  Dr. Tagore, is  fast becoming, if  he has 
not already become, the  poet of the world.  Increasing  prestige  has brought to him 
increasing  responsibility.  His greatest service  to India must be his poetic  
interpretation  of India’s  message  to the world.  The poet is therefore  sincerely  
anxious  that India should  deliver  no false or feeble message  in her name.  He is 
naturally jealous  of his country’s  reputation.  He says he has striven  hard to find 
himself  in tune with the present  movement.  He confesses  that he is baffled.  He 
can find nothing  for his lyre in the din and the bustle  of non-co-operation.  In three  
forceful  letters,1 he has endeavoured to give expression  to his misgivings, and  he 
has come  to the conclusion that non-co-operation  is not dignified  enoug h for the 
India of his vision, that  is a doctrine  of negation  and despair.  He fears  that it is a 
doctrine  of separation, exclusiveness, narrowness  and negation.  
No Indian  can feel anything  but pride  in the poet’s  exquisite  jealousy  of India’s  
honour.  It is good that he should  have sent to us his misgivings  in language  at once 
beautiful  and clear.  
In all humility, I  shall endeavour  to answer  the poet’s  doubts.  I may fail to 
convince  him or the reader  who may have been touched  by his eloquence, but  I 
would  like to assure  him and India that non-co-operation  in conception  is not any 
of the things  he fears, and he need have no cause  to be ashamed of his country  for 
having  adopted non-co-operation.  If, in actual  application, it appears  in the end to 
have failed, i t will be no more  the fault of the doctrine, than  it would  be of Truth, 
if those  who claim  to apply it in practice  do not appear  to succeed.  Non-co-
operation  may have come  in advance  of its time.  India and the world  must then 
wait, but there  is no choice  for India save between  violence  and non-co-operation.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 109 Nor need the poet fear that non-co-operation  is intended to erect  a Chinese  wall 
between  India and the West.  On the contrary, non -co-operation  is intended to 
pave the way to real, honourable  and voluntar y co-operation  based on mutual  
respect  and trust.  The present  struggle  is being  waged against compulsory  co-
operation , against one-sided combination, against the armed imposition  of modern  
methods  of exploitation  masquerading  under  the name  of civilization . 
Non-co-operation  is a protest against an unwitting  and unwilling  participation  in 
evil. 
The poet’s  concern  is largely about the students.  He is of opinion  that they should  
not have been called  upon to give up Government  schools  before  they had other  
schools to go. Here I must differ  from him. I have never  been able to make  a fetish  
of literary training.  My experience  has proved to my satisfaction  that literary  
training  by itself  adds not an inch to one’s  moral  height  and that character -
building  is indepen dent of literary training.  I am firmly  of opinion  that the 
Government  schools  have unmanned  us, rendered  us helpless  and Godless.  They 
have filled  us with discontent, and providing  no remedy  for the discontent, have  
made  us despondent.  They have made  us what we were intended  to become – 
clerks  and interpreters.  A government  builds  its prestige  upon the apparently  
voluntary association  of the governed.  And if it was wrong  to co-operate  with the 
Government  in keeping  us slaves, we  were  bound  to begin  with those institutions  
in which  our association  appeared  to be most voluntary.  The youth  of a nation  are 
its hope.  I hold that, as  soon as we discovered  that the system  of government  was 
wholly, or  mainly  evil, it  became  sinful  for us to associate  our children  with it. 
It is no argument  against the soundness  of the proposition  laid down  by me that 
the vast majority  of the students  went back after the first flush of enthusiasm.  
Their  recantation  is proof  rather  of the extent  of our degradation  than of the 
wrongness  of the step.  Experience has shown  that the establishment of national  
schools  has not resulted  in drawing  many more  students.  The strongest and the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 110 truest of them  came  out without  any national  schools  to fall back upon, and I am 
convinced  that these  first withdrawals  are rendering  service  of the highest  order.  
But the poet’s  protest against the calling  out of the boys is really a corollary  to his 
objection  to the very doctrine  of non-co-operation.  He has a horror of everything  
negative.  His whole  soul seems  to rebel  against the negative commandments  of 
religion.  I must give his objection  in his own inimitable  language  ‘R. in support of 
the present  movement  has often  said to me that passion  for rejection  is a stronger  
power  in the beginning  than the acceptanc e of an ideal.  Though I know  it to be a 
fact, I  cannot  take it as a truth…..Brahmavidya in India has for its object  Mukti 
(emancipation), while  Buddhism  has Nirvana (extinction).  Mukti  draws  our 
attention  to the positive  and Nirvana to the negative  side of truth.  Therefore, he  
emphasized the fact of dukha (misery)  which  had to be avoided and the 
Brahmavidya emphasized the fact of Ananda (joy)  which  had to be attained.’  In 
these  and kindred passage, the  reader  will find the key to the poet’s  mentality.  In 
my humble  opinion, rejection  is as much  an ideal as the acceptance  of a thing.  It 
is as necessary  to reject  untruth as it is to accept  truth.  All religions  teach that 
two opposite  forces  act upon us and that the human endeavour  consists  in a series  
of eterna l rejections  and acceptances.  Non-co-operation  with evil is as much  a 
duty as co-operation  with good.  I venture  to suggest  that the poet has done an 
unconscious  injustice  to Buddhism  in describing  Nirvana as merely  a negative  
state.  I make  bold to say that Mukti (emancipation)  is as much  a negative  state  as 
Nirvana.  Emancipation  from or extinction  of the bondage  of the flesh leads  to 
Ananda (eternal  bliss).  Let me close  this part of my argument  by drawing  attention  
to the fact that the final word  of the Upanishads (Brahmavidya)  is Not. Neti2 was 
the best description  the authors  of the Upanishads  were  able to find for Brahman.  
Correspondents  have written  to me in pathetic  language  asking  me not to commit  
suicide  in January, should  Swaraj  be not attained by then, and  should  find myself  
outside  the prison  walls.  I find that language  but inadequately express  ones’  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 111 thought, especially when  the thought  itself  is confused  or incom plete. My writing  
in the Navajivan  was, I  fancied, clear  enough.  But I observe  that its translation  has 
been misunderstood by many.  The original  too has not escaped  the tragedy that 
has overtaken  the translation.  
One great reason  for the misunderstanding  lies in my being  considered  almost a 
perfect  man.  Friends  who know  my partiality for the Bhagavad- Gita have thrown  
relevant  verses  at me, and  shown  how my threat to commit  suicide  contradicts  the 
teachings  which  I am attempting  to live. All these  mentors  of mine  seem  to forget  
that I am but a seeker  after  Truth.  I claim  to have found  the way to it. I claim  to 
be making  a ceaseless  effort  to find it. But I admit  that I have not yet found  it. To 
find Truth  completely  is to realize  oneself  and one’s  destiny, i.e.  to become  
perfect.  I am painfully  conscious  of my imperfections, and therein  lies all the 
strength  I possess, because  it is a rare thing  for a man to know  his own limitations.  
If I was a perfect  man, I  own I should  not feel the miseries  of my neighbours  as I 
do. As a perfect  man, I  should  take note of them, prescribe  a remedy  and compel  
adoption  by the force  of unchallengeable  Truth  in me. But as yet, I  only see as 
through a glass darkly and, therefore, have  to carry  conviction  by slow and 
labourious  processes, and  then too, not  always  with success.  That being  so, I 
would  be less than huma n if, with  all my knowledge  of avoidable  misery  pervading  
the land and of the sight of mere  skeletons  under  the very shadow  of the Lord of 
the Universe, I  did not feel with and for all the suffering  but dumb  millions  of 
India.  The hope of a steady decline  in that misery  sustains  me; but  suppose  that, 
with all my sensitiveness  to sufferings, to  pleasure  and pain, cold  and heat, and  
with all my endeavour  to carry  the healing  message  of the spinning  wheel  to the 
heart, I  have reached  only the ear and never  pierced the heart, suppose  further  
that at the end of the year I find that the people  are as sceptical  as they are to-
day about the present  possibility  of attainment  of Swaraj  by means  of the 
peaceful  revolution  of the wheel.  Suppose  further, that I find that the excitement  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 112 during  the past twelve  months  and more  has been only an excitement  and 
stimulation, but no settled belief  in the programme, and lastly suppose  that the 
message  of peace has not penetrated the hearts  of Englishmen, should  I not doubt  
my tapasya  and feel my unworthiness  for leading  the struggle ? As a true man, what  
should  I do? Should  I not kneel  down  in all humility  before  my Maker, and  ask Him 
to take away  this useless  body and make  me a fitter  instrument  of service ? 
Swaraj  does consist  in the change  of government  and its real control  by the 
people, but that would  be merely  the form.  The substance  that I am hankering  
after is a definite  acceptance  of the means  and, therefore, a  real change  of heart 
on the part of the people.  I am certain  that it does not require  ages for Hindus  to 
discard  the error of untouchability, for  Hindus  and Mussulmans  to shed enmity and 
accept  heart friendship  as an eternal  factor  of national  life, for  all to adopt the 
charkha  as the only universal  means  of attaining  India’s  economic  salvation  and 
finally  for all to believe that India’s  freedom  lies only through non-violence, and  
no other  method.  Definite, intelligent  and free adoption  by the nation  of this 
programme, I  hold, as  the attainment of the substance.  The symbol, the  transfer  
of power, is  sure to follow, even  as the seed truly laid must develop  into a tree.  
The reader  will thus perceive that, what I accidentally stated to friends  for the 
first time in Poona  and then repeated to others, was  but a confession  of my 
imperfections  and an expression  of my feeling  of unworthiness  for the great  cause  
which, for  the time being, I  seem  to be leading.  I have enunciated  no doctrine  of 
despair.  On the contrary, I  have never  felt so sanguine, as  I do at the time of 
writing, t hat we shall gain the substance  during  this year.  I have stated at the 
same  time as practical  idealist that I should  no more  feel worthy to lead a cause  
which  I might  feel myself  diffident  of handling.  The doctrine  of laboring  without  
attachment means  as much a relentless  pursuit of truth  as a retracing  after  
discovery  of error and a renunciation  of leadership  without a pang after  discovery  
of unworthiness.  I have put shadowed forth  my intense  longing  to lose myself  in Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 113 the Eternal  and become  merely  a lump of clay in the potter’s  divine  hands, so  that 
my service  may become  more  certain, because  uninterrupted  by the baser  self in 
me. 
 
Politics  and Religion  
The politician  in me has never  dominated a single  decision  of mine, and  if I seem  
to take part in politi cs, it  is only because  politics  encircle  us to-day like the coil of 
a snake  from which  one cannot  get out, no  matter  how much  one tries.  I wish 
therefore  to wrestle  with the snake, as  I have been doing  with more  or less 
success  consciously  since  1894, unco nsciously, as  I have now discovered, ever  
since  reaching  years  of discretion.  Quite  selfishly, as  I wish to live in peace  in the 
midst of a bellowing  storm  howling  round  me, I  have been experimenting  with 
myself  and my friends  by introducing  religion  into politics.  Let me explain  what I 
mean  by religion.  It is not the Hindu  religion  which  I certainly prize  above  all other  
religions , but  the religion  which  transcends  Hinduism, which changes  one’s  very 
nature, which  binds  one indissolubly to the truth  within  and which  ever purifies.  It 
is the permanent element  in human nature  which  counts  no cost too great  in order  
to find full expression  and which  leaves  the soul utterly restless  until it has found  
itself, known  its Maker  and appreciated the true corresponden ce between  the 
Maker  and itself.3 
What  was the larger  ‘symbiosis’  that Buddha  and Christ  preached ?  Buddha  
fearlessly  carried  the war into the enemy’s  camp  and brought  down  on its knees  
an arrogant priesthood.  Christ  drove  out the money -changers  from the temple  of 
Jerusalem  and drew down  curses  from Heaven  upon the hypocrites  and the 
pharisees.  Both were for intensely  direct  action.  But even as Buddha and Christ  
chastised, they showed  unmistakable  gentleness  and love behind  every  act of 
theirs.  They would  not raise a finger  against their enemies, but  would  gladly  
surrender themselves  rather  than the truth  for which  they lived.  Buddha  would  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 114 have died resisting the priesthood, if the majesty of his love had not  proved to be 
equal to the task of bending the pri esthood.  Christ  died on the cross  with a crown  
of thorns  on his head defying  the might  of a whole  empire.  And if I raise 
resistances  of a non-violent  character, I  simply  and humbly  follow  in the footsteps  
of the great  teachers.  
Lastly, the  writer of the paragraph  quarrels  with my ‘grouping  unities’  and would  
have me to take up ‘the larger  mission  of uniting  the world’.  I once told him under  
a common  roof that I was probably more  cosmopolitan  than he. I abide  by that 
expression.  Unless  I group  unities, I  shall never  be able to unite  the whole  world.  
Tolstoy  once said that, if  we would  but let off the blacks  of our neighbours, the  
world  would  be quite  all right without  any further  help from us. And if we can only 
serve  our immediate  neighbours  by ceasing  to prey upon them, the  circle  of 
unities  thus grouped in the right fashion  will ever grow in circumference  till at last 
it is conterminous  with that of the whole  world.  More than that it is not given  to 
any man to try or achieve.  Yatthaa pinde  thatthaa brahmande  is as true to-day as 
ages ago when  it was first uttered  by an unknown Rishi.  
 
Advice  to Satyahrahis  in an Industrial  Strike  
I do not propose  to examine  the duty of the capitalist.  If the labourer  alone  were  
to understand his rights  and responsibilities  and confine  himself  to the purest  
means, both  must gain. But two things  are needful – both the demands  and the 
means  adopted  to enforce  them  must be just and clear.  It is an unlawful  demand  
which  seeks  merely  to take advantage  of the capitalists’  position.  But it is an 
altogether  lawful  demand when  the labourer  asks for enough wages  to enable  him 
to maintain  himself  and to educate  his children d ecently.  To seek justice  without  
resorting  to violence  and by an appeal  to the good sense  of the capitalist by 
arbitration  is lawful  means.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 115 In order  to achieve  the end, you  must have Unions.  A beginning  has already been  
made.  I trust that the mill-hands  in every  department will form their unions  and 
every  one should  scrupulously  observe  the rules that may be formed  for them.  You 
will then approach  the mill-owners  through your unions, and  if the decisions  of the 
former  do not satisfy you, you  will appeal  to arbitration.  It is a matter  of 
satisfaction  that both parties  have accepted  the principle  of arbitration.  I hope 
that that principle  will be fully developed and that strikes  will for ever become  an 
impossibility . I know  that strikes  are an inherent  right of the working  men for the 
purpose  of securing  justice, but  they must be considered  a crime  immediately the 
capital ists accept  the principle  of arbitration.  Ways  are improving  and there  is 
every  possibility of a continuous  improvement.  But there  is equal  need for 
reducing  hours  of labour.  The mill-hands  seem  to be working  twelve  hours  or 
more.  
The mill-owners  tell me that the mill-hands  are lazy, they do not give full time to 
their work and they are inattentive.  I for one cannot  expect  attention  and 
application  from those  who are called  upon to work twelve  hours  per day. But I 
would  certainly  hope that when  the hours  are reduced  to ten the labourers  will 
put in better  and almost  the same  amount  of work as in twelve  hours.  Reduction  
in hours  of labour  has brought  about happy results  in England.  When  mill-hands  
learn  to identify themselves  with the interest  of the mill-owners, they  will rise 
and with them  will rise the industries  of our country.  I would  therefore  urge the 
mill-owners  to reduce  the hours  of labour  to ten and urge the mill-hands  to give as 
much  work in ten, as  they have been doing  in twelve.  
It is now time to examine  the use we should  make  of the increasing  wages  and the 
hours  saved.  It would  be like going  into the frying -pan out of the fire to use the 
increase  in wages  in the grog-shop and the hours  saved from the gambling  den. 
The money  received, it  is clear , should  be devoted to education  of our children, 
and the time saved to our education.  In both these  matters  the mill-owners  can Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 116 render  much  assistance . They can open cheap  restaurants  for the working  men 
where  they can get pure milk and wholesome  refreshm ents.  They can open 
reading -rooms  and provide  harmless  amusements  and games  for them.  Provided  
such healthy surroundings, the  cravings  for drink  and gambling  will leave  them.  
The unions  also should  attempt similar  things.  They will be better  employed in 
devising  means  of improvement  from within  than in fighting  the capitalists.  
It is a sign of national  degradation  when  little children  are removed  from schools  
and are employed in earning  wages.  No nation  worthy  of the name  can possibly  
afford  so to misuse  her children.  At least up to the age of sixteen  they must be 
kept in schools.  Similarly  women  also must be gradually  weaned from mill labour.  
If man and woman  are partners  in life and complementary  each of the other, they  
become  good householders  only by dividing their labour, and a wise mother  finds 
her time fully occupied  in looking  after her household  and children.  But where  
both husband  and wife have to labour  for mere  maintenance, the  nation  must 
become  degraded.  It is like a bankrupt living  on his capital.  
And just as it is necessary  for the labourers  to develop  their minds  by receiving  
education  and to educate  their children, so  it is necessary  to develop  the moral  
faculty  in them.  Development  of the moral  faculty  means  that of the religious  
sense.  The world  does not quarrel  with those  who have a true faith in God and 
who understand the true nature  of religion.  And if it does, such  men turn away the 
wrath  of their adversaries  by their gentleness.  Religion  here does not mean  merely  
offering  one’s  namaz  or going  to the temple.  But it means  knowledge  of one’s  self 
and knowledge  of God, and just as a person  does not become  a weaver  unless  he 
knows  the art of weaving  so does he fail to know  himself  unless  he complies  with 
certain  rules.  Chief  amongst these  are three  that are of universal  observance.  The 
first is observance  of Truth.  He who does not know  what it is to speak  the truth  is 
like a false coin, valueless.  The second  is not to injure  others.  He who injures  
others, is  jealous  of others, is  not fit to live in the world.  For the world  is at war Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 117 with him, and  he has to live in perpetual  fear of the world.  We all are bound  by 
the tie of love. There  is in everything  a centripetal  force  without  which  nothing  
could  have existed.  Scientists  tell us that without  the presence of the cohesive  
force  amongst the atoms  that comprise  this globe  of ours, it  would  crumble  to 
pieces  and we would  cease  to exist, and even as there  is cohesive  force  in blind  
matter, so  much  must there  be in all things  animate  and the name  for that 
cohesive  force  among  animate  beings  is Love.  We notice  it between  father  and 
son, between  brother  and sister, friend  and friend.  But we have to learn  to use 
that force  among  all that lives, and  in the use of it consists  our knowledge  of God. 
Where  there is love there  is life; hatred  leads  to destruction.  
 
Self-restraint  and Self-indulgence  
The third rule is that we have to conquer  our passions.  It is called  Brahmacharya  in 
Sanskrit.  I do not use it here merely  in its accepted narrow sense.  He is not a 
Brahmachari, who, although  he may be a celibate  or may be living  a chaste  life as 
a married  man, otherwise  gives  himself  up to a variety of indulgences.  He alone  is 
capable  of knowing  himself  who brings  under  complete  subjection  all his passions.  
He who exercises  self-restraint in its widest sense  is also a Brahmachari – a man of 
faith, a true Hindu  or a true Mohammedan.  
It is a breach  of Brahmacharya to hear questionable  language  or obscene  songs.  It 
is licentiousness  of the tongue  to utter  foul abuse, i nstead  of reciting  the name  of 
God, and so with the other  senses.  He alone  can be considered  the true man who 
having  subjected his passions  become  perfectly  self-restrained.  We are like a rider 
who cannot  keep his horse  under  control  and is  quickly  brought  down.  But one 
who, drawing  in the reins keeps  the animal  under  subjection, stands  a fair chance  
of reaching  his destination.  Even so does a man who can control  his passions  make  
for the goal. He alone  is fit for swarajya.  He alone  is a seeker  after  truth.  He 
alone  becomes  capable  of knowing  God. It is my earnest  wish that you will not Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 118 reject  these  remarks  as if they were  copybook  maxim s. I ask you to believe that 
we shall never  go forward  until we have learnt the value  of observing  these  truths.  
What  I have told you is a fragment  of my own experiences.  My service  of you is 
due simply  to my love for you and I partake  of your sorrows, because  I hope 
thereby  to justify  myself  before  my Maker.  What though your wages  were 
quadrupled and you had to work only a quarter  of the time you are doing  now, if  
notwithstanding, you  did not know  the value  of true speech, if  Rakshasa in you 
injured  others  and gave the reins to your passions.  We must have more  wages, we  
must have less work, because  we want clean  houses, clean bodies, clean  minds  
and clean  soul, and  we strive  for better  wages  and less work in the belief  that 
both are essential  for this fourfold  cleanliness.  But if that be not the object  to be 
achieved, it would  be a sin to attempt to get better  wages  and reduce  the hours  of 
labour.  
 
A Letter  to the Viceroy, inaugurating  the Non-co-operation  Movement  
It is not without  a pang that I return  the Kaisar -i-Hind gold medal  granted to me 
by your predecessor  for my humanitarian  work in South  Africa, the  Zulu War medal  
granted in South  Africa  for my services  as officer  in charge  of the Indian  Volunteer  
Ambulance  Corps  in 1906 and the Boer War medal  for my services  as assistant  
superintendent of the Indian  Volunteer  Stretcher -bearer  Corps  during  the Boer 
War of 1899-1902.  I venture  to return  these  medals  in pursuance  of the scheme  of 
non-co-operation  inaugurated to-day in connection  with the Khilafat  movement.  
Valuable  as these  honours  have been to me, I  cannot  wear them  with an easy 
conscience  so long as my Mussulman countr ymen  have to labour  under  a wrong  
done to their religious  sentiment.  Events  that have happened during  the past 
month  have confirmed  me in the opinion  that the Imperial  Government  have acted  
in the Khilafat  matter  in an unscrupulous, immoral  and unjust  manner  and  have Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 119 been moving  from wrong  to wrong  I order  to defend  their immorality.  I can retain  
neither  respect  nor affection  for such a government.  
The attitude  of the Imperial  and Your Excellency’s  Governments  on the Punjab  
question  has given  me additional  cause  for grave  dissatisfaction.  I had the honour, 
as Your Excellency  is aware, as  one of the congress  commissioners, to  investigate  
the causes  of the disorders  in the Punjab during  the April of 1919.  And it is my 
deliberate  conviction  that Sir Michael  O’Dwyer  was totally unfit to hold the office  
of Lieutenant -Governor  of Punjab and that his policy  was primarily responsible  for 
infuriating  the mob at Amritsar.  No doubt the mob excesses  were unpardonable; 
incendiarism, murder  of five innocent  Englishmen and the cowardly assault on Miss 
Sherwood  were most deplorable  and uncalled  for. But the punitive  measures  taken  
by General  Dyer,  Colonel  Frank  Johnson, C olonel  O’Brien, Mr. Bosworth  Smith, Rai  
Shri Ram Sud, Mr. Mallik  Khan and other  officers  were out of all proportion  to the 
crime  of the people  and amounted to wanton  cruelty  and inhumanity  almost  
unparalleled in modern  times.  
Your Excellency’s  light-hearted treatment of the official  crime, your  exoneration  
of Sir Michael  O’Dwyer, Mr. Montagu’s  dispatch  and above  all the shameful  
ignorance  of the Punjab  events  and callous  disregard of the feelings  of Indians  
betrayed  by the House  of Lords, have  filled  me with the gravest  misgivings  
regarding  the future  of the Empire, have  estranged me completely  from the 
presen t Government  and have disabled me from tendering, as  I have hitherto  
whole -heartedly  tendered, my  loyal co-operation.  
In my humble  opinion  the ordinary method of agitating  by way of petitions, 
deputations  and the like is no remedy  for moving  to repentance  a government  so 
hopelessly  indifferent  to the welfare  of its charge  as the Government  of India has 
proved  to be. In Europeans  countries, condonation  of such grievous  wrongs  as the 
Khilafat and the Punjab would  have resulted  in a bloody revolution  by the people.  
They would  have resisted  at all cost national  emasculation  such as the said wrongs  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 120 imply.  But half of India is too weak  to offer violent  resistance  and the other  half is 
unwilling  to do so. I have therefore  ventured  to suggest  the remedy  of non-co-
operation  which  enables  those  who wish, to  dissociate  themselves  from the 
Government  and which, if  it is unattended by violence  and undertaken  in an 
ordered  manner, must  compel  it to retrace  its steps  and undo the wrongs  
committed.  But while  I shall pursue  the policy  of non-co-operation  in so far as I 
can carry the  people  with me, I  shall not lose hope that you will yet see your way 
to do justice. I therefore  respectfully ask Your Excellency  to summon  a conference  
of the recognized  leaders  of the people  and in consultation  with them  find a way 
that would  placate  the Mussulmans  and do  reparation  to the unhappy  Punjab. 
 
An Appeal  to his Followers  
No country  has ever risen without  being  purified  through the fire of suffering.  
Mother  suffers  so that her child may live. The condition  of wheat- growing  is that 
the seed grain  should  perish.  Life comes  out of death.  Will India rise out of her 
slavery  without  fulfilling  this eternal  law of purification  through suffering ? 
If my advisers  are right, evidently India will realize her destiny without  travail.  For 
their chief  concern  is that the events  of April 1919 should  not be repeated.  They 
fear non-co-operation, because  it would  involve  the sufferings  of many.  If 
Hampden  had argued  thus, he  would  not have withheld  payment of ship-money, 
nor would  Wat Tyler  have raised the standard of revolt.  English  and French  
histories  are replete with instances  of men continuing  their pursuit of the right, 
irrespective  of the amount of suffering  involved.  The actors  did not stop to think  
whether  ignorant  people  would  not have involuntarily to suffer.  Why should  we 
expect  to write  our history differently ? It is possible  for us, if  we would, to  learn  
from the mistakes  of our predecessors  to do better, but it is impossible  to do away  
with the law of suffering  which  is the one indispensable  condition  of our being.  
The way to do better  is to avoid, if  we can, violence from our side and thus Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 121 quicken the rate of progress and to introduce greater purity in the methods of 
suffering. We can, if  we will, refrain, in  our impatience, from  bending  the wrong -
doer to our will by physical  force  as Sinn Feiners  are doing  to-day, or  from 
coercing  our neighbors  to follow  our methods, as  was done last year by some  of us 
in bringing  about hartal.  Progress  is to be measured  by the amount  of suffering  
undergone  by the sufferer.  The purer  the suffering, the  greater  is the progress.  
Hence  did the sacrifice  of Jesus  suffice  to free a sorrowing  world?  In his onward  
march, he  did not count  the cost of suffering, entailed  upon his neighbors , 
whether  they underwent it voluntarily  or otherwise.  Thus did the sufferings  of 
Harishchandra suffice  to re-establish  the kingdom  of truth.  He must have known  
that his subjects  would  suffer  involuntarily  by his abdication.  He did not mind, 
because  he could  not do otherwise  than follow  truth.  
I have already stated that I do not deplore  the massacre  of Jallinwala  Bagh so 
much  as I deplore  the murders  of Englishmen and destruction  of property by 
ourselves.  The frightfulness  at Amritsar  drew away public  attention  from greater, 
though slower,  frightfulness  at Lahore  where  attempt was made  to emasculate  the 
inhabitants  by slow process es many more  times, till  they teach  us to take up 
suffering  voluntarily  and to find joy in it. I am convinced  that the Lahorians  never  
deserved  the cruel  insults  that they were  subjected to; they never  hurt a single  
Englishman; they  never  destroyed any property.  But a willful  ruler was determined  
to crush  the spirit of a people  just trying  to throw  off his chafing  yoke. And if I am 
told that all this was due to my preaching  satyagraha, my answer  is that I would  
preach  satyahraha all the more  forcibly  for that, so  long as I have breath  left in 
me, and  tell the people  that next time they would  answer  O’Dwyerean  insolen ce, 
not by opening  shops  by reason  of threats  of forcible  sales, but by allowing  the 
tyrant to do his worst  and let him sell their all but their unconquerable  souls.  
Sages  of old mortified  the flesh, so  that the spirit  within  might  be set free, so  that 
their trained bodies  might  be proof  against any injury  that might  be inflicted  on Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 122 them  by tyrants  seeking  to impose  their will on them.  And if India wishes  to revise  
her ancient  wisdom  and to avoid the errors  of Europe, if  India wishes  to see the 
Kingdom  of God established on earth, instead of that of Satan  which  has 
enveloped  Europe, then  I would  urge her sons and daughters  not to be deceived  by 
fine phrases, the  terrible  subtleties  that hedge  us in, the  fears of suffering  that 
India may have to undergo, but  to see what is happening  to-day in Europe, and  
from it understand that we must go through the suffering  even as Europe  has gone 
through, but  not the process  of making  others  suffer.  Germany wanted to 
dominate  Europe  and the Allies  wanted to do likewise  by crushing  Germany.  
Europe  is no better  for Germany’s  fall. The Allies  have proved themselves  to just 
as deceitful, cruel, greedy  and selfish  as Germany was or would  have been.  
Germany would  have avoided the sanctimonious  humbug  that one sees associated  
with the many dealings  of the Allies.  
The miscalculation  that I deplored  last year was not in connection  with the 
sufferings  imposed upon the people, but about the mistakes  made  by them  and 
violence  done by them, owing  to their not having  sufficiently  understo od the 
message  of satyagraha.  What, then  is the meaning  of non-co-operation  in terms  of 
the Law of suffering ? We must voluntarily put up with the losses  and 
inconv enience  that arise from having  to withdraw  our support  from a government  
that is ruling  again st our will. Possession  of power  and riches  is a crime  under  an 
unjust  government, poverty  in that case is a virtue, says  Thoreau.  It may be that, 
in the transition  state, we  may make  mistakes; there  may be avoidable  suffering.  
These  things  are preferable  to national  emasculation.  
We must refuse  to wait for the wrong  to be righted till the wrong -doer has been 
roused  to a sense  of his iniquity.  We must not, for  fear of ourselves  or others  
having  to suffer, remain  participators  in it. But we must combat  the wrong by 
ceasing  to assist  the wrong -doer directly  or indirectly.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 123 If a father  does an injustice, it  is the duty of his children  to leave  the parental  
roof. If the headmaster  of a school  conducts  his institution  on an immoral  basis, 
the pupils  must leave  the school.  If the chairman  of corporation  is corrupt, the  
members  thereof  must wash their hands  clean  of his corruption  by withdrawi ng 
from it; even  so, if  a government  does a grave  injustice, the  subject  must 
withdraw  co-operation  wholly  or partially, suffi ciently  to wean  the ruler from his 
wickedness.  In each of the cases  conceived  by me, there is an element  of suffering  
whether  mental  or physical.  Without  such suffering  it is not possible  to attain  
freedom.4 
I still believe that man not having  been given  the power  of creation  does not 
possess  the right of destroying  the meanest  creature  that lives.  The prerogative  of 
destruction  belongs  solely  to the creator  of all that lives.  I accept  the 
interpretation  of ahimsa, namely, that it is not merely  a negative  state of 
harmlessness  but it is a positive  state  of love, of  doing  good even to the evil-doer.  
But it does not mean  helping  the evil-doer to continue  the wrong  or tolerating  it 
by passive  acquiescence.  On the contrary, love, the  active  state  of ahimsa, 
requires you to resist  the wrong -doer by dissociating  yourself  from him even 
though it may offend  him or injure  him physically.  Thus if my son lives a life of 
shame, I  may not help him to do so by continuing  to support him; on  the contrary, 
my love for him requires me to withdraw  all support  from him although  it may 
mean  even his death.  And the same  love imposes  on me the obligation  of 
welcoming  him to my bosom  when  he repents.  But I may not by physical  force  
compel  my son to become  good.  That, in  my opinion, i s the moral  of the story of 
the Prodigal  Son. 
Non-co-operation  is not a passive  state, it is an intensely  active  state - more  
active  than physical  resistance  or violence.  Passive  resistance  is a misnomer.  Non-
co-operation  in the sense  used by me must be non-violent  and therefore  neither  
punitive  nor vindictive  nor based on malice, ill -will or hatred.  It follows  therefore  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 124 that it would  be sin for me to serve  General  Dyer and co-operate  with him to shoot  
innocent  men.  But it would  be an exercise of forgivenes s or love for me to nurse  
him back to life, if he was suffering  from a physical  malady.  I would  co-operate  a 
thousand  times  with this Government  to wean  it from its career  of crime, but  I will 
not for a single  moment  co-operate  with it to continue  that career. And I would  be 
guilty of wrong -doing  if I retained a title from it or ‘a service  under  it or supported  
its law courts  or schools’.  Better  for me a beggar’s  bowl than the richest  
possession  from hands  stained with the blood  of the innocents  of Jallianw ala. 
Better  by far a warrant  of imprisonment  than honeyed  words  from those  who have 
wantonly wounded the religious  sentiment  of my seventy  million  brothers.  
I do not believe that the Gita teaches  violence  for doing  good.  It is pre-eminently  
a description  of the duel that goes on in our own hearts.  The divine  author  has 
used a historical  incident  for inculcating  the lesson  of doing  one’s  duty even at the 
peril of one’s  life. It inculcates  performance  of duty irrespective  of the 
consequences, for, we  mortals,  limited  by our physical  frames, are  incapable  of 
controlling  actions  save our own. The Gita distinguishes  between  the powers  of 
light and darkness  and demonstrates  their incompatibility.  
Jesus, in  my humble  opinion, was  a prince  among  politicians.  He did render  unto 
Caesar  that which  was Caesar’s.  He gave the devil his due. He ever shunned  him 
and is reported never  once to have yielded to his incantations.  The politics  of his 
time consisted  in securing  the welfare  of the people  by teaching  them  not to be 
seduced  by the trinkets  of the priests  and Pharisees.  The latter  then controlled  
and moulded the life of the people.  To-day the system  of government  is so devised  
as to affect  every  department of our life. It threatens  our very existence.  If 
therefore  we want to conserve  the welfare  of the nation, we  must religiously  
interest  ourselves  in the doings  of the governors  and exert  a moral  influence  on 
them  by insisting  on their obeying  the law of morality.  General  Dyer did produce  a 
‘moral  effect’  by an act of butchery.  Those  who are engaged  in forwarding  the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 125 movement  of non-co-operation, hope  to produce  a moral  effect  by a process  of 
self-denial, self -sacrifice  and self-purification.5
 
The Swadeshi  Movement  
After  much  thinking , I have arrived  at a definition  of Swadeshi  that perhaps  best 
illustrates  my meaning.  Swadeshi  is that spirit  in us which  restricts  us to the use 
and service  of our immediate  surroundings  to the exclusion  of the more  remote.  
Thus, as  for religion, in  order  to satisfy the requirements  of the definition, I  must 
restrict  myself  to my ancestral  religion.  That is the use of my immediate  religious  
surrounding.  If I find it defective, I  should  serve  it by purging  it of its defects.  In 
the domain  of politics  I should  make  use of the indigenous  instit utions  and serve  
them  by curing  them  of their proved defects.  In that economics  I should  use only 
things  that are produced by my immediate  neighbours  and serve  those  industries  
by making  them  efficient  and complete  where  they might  be found  wanting.  It is 
suggested  that such Swadeshi, if  reduced  to practice, will  lead to the millennium.  
And as we do not abandon  our pursuits  after the millennium, because  we do not 
expect  quite  to reach  it within  our times, so may we not abandon  Swadeshi, even  
though it may not be fully attained for generations  to come.  
Let us briefly examine  the three  branches  of Swadeshi  as sketched  above.  
Hinduism  has become  a conservative  religion  and therefore  a mighty force, 
because  of the Swadeshi  spirit  underlying  it. It is the most tolerant because  it is 
non-proselytizing, and it is as capable  of expansion  to-day as it has been found  to 
be in the past. It has succeeded, not  in driving  out, as  I think  it has been 
erroneously  held, but in absorbing  Buddhism.  By reason  of the Swadeshi  spirit, a  
Hindu  refuses  to change  his religion, not  necessarily  because  he considers  it to be 
the best, but because  he knows  that he can complement  it by introducing  reforms.  
And what I have said about Hinduism  is, I suppose, true  to other  great faiths  of the 
world, only  it is held that it is specially so in the case of Hinduism.  But here comes  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 126 the point I am labouring  to reach.  If there  is any substance  in what I have said, 
will not the great missionary  bodies  of India, to  whom  we owe a deep debt of 
gratitude  for what they have done and are doing, do  still better  and serve  the 
spirit  of Christianity better  by dropping  the goal of proselytizing, while  continuing  
their philanthropic  work? I hope you will not consider  this to be an impertinence  
on my part. I make  the suggestion  in all sincerity  and with due humility.  Moreover  
I have some  claim  upon your attention.  I have endeavoured  to study the Bible.  I 
consider  it as part of my scriptures.  The spirit  of the Sermon  on the Mount  
competes  almost on equal  terms  with the Bhagavad Gita for the domination  of my 
heart.  I yield to no Christian  in the strength  of devotion  with which  I sing ‘Lead  
kindly Light’ and  several  other  inspired  hymns  of a similar  nature.  I have come  
under  the influence  of noted  Christian  missionaries  belonging  to different  
denominations, and  I enjoy  to this day the privilege  of friendship  with some  of 
them.  You will perhaps, therefore, allow  that I have offered  the above  suggestion  
not as a biased Hindu, but as a humble  and impartial  student of religion with great  
leanings  towards  Christianity.  May it not be that the ‘Go  ye unto all the world’ 
message  has been somewhat narrowly  interpreted  and the spirit  of it missed ? It 
will not be denied, I  speak  from experience, that  many of the conversions  are only 
so-called.  In some  cases  the appeal  has gone not to the heart but to the stomach.  
And in every  case a conversion  leaves  a sore behind  it which, I  venture  to think, is  
avoidable.  Quoting  again  from experience, a  new birth, a  change  of heart, is  
perfectly possible  in every  one of the great  faiths.  I know  I am now treading  upon 
thin ice. But I do not apologize, in  closing  this part of my subject, for  saying  that 
the frightful  outrage  that is just going  on in Europe, perhaps  shows  that the 
message  of Jesus  of Nazareth  the Son of Peace, has  been little understood  in 
Europe  and that light upon it may have to be thrown  from the East.  
I have sought  your help in religious  matters, which  it is yours  to give in a special  
sense.  But I make  bold to seek it even in political  matters.  I do not believe that Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 127 religion  has nothing  to do with politics.  The latter  divorced  from religion  is like a 
corpse  only fit to be buried.  As a matter  of fact, in  your own silent  manner  you 
influence  politics  not a little.  And I feel that if the attempt to separate  politics  
from religion  had not been made  as it is even now made, they  would  not have 
degenerated as they often  appear  to have done.  No one considers  that the 
political  life of the country  is in a happy state.  Following  out the Swad eshi spirit, I  
observe  the indigenous  institutions  and the village  panchayat hold me. India is 
really  a republican  country, and  it is because  it is that that it has, survived  every  
shock  hitherto  delivered.  Princes  and potentates  whether  they were Indian  born or 
foreigners  have hardly touched  the vast masses  except  for collecting  revenue.  The 
latter  in their turn seem  to have rendered  unto Caesar  what was Caesar’s, and for 
the rest have done much  as they have liked.  The vast organization  of caste  
answered  not only the religious  wants  of the community, but it answered  to its 
political  needs.  The villagers  managed their internal  affairs  through  the caste  
system, and through it they dealt with any oppression  from the ruling  power  or 
powers.  It is not possible  to deny of a nation  that was capable  of producing  the 
caste  system  its wonderful  power  of organization.  One had but to attend the great  
Kumbha  Mela at Hardwar  last year to know  how skilful  that organization  must have 
been, which without  any seeming  effort  was able effectively  to cater  for more  
than a million  pilgrims.  Yet it is the fashion  to say that we lack organizing  ability.  
This is true, I  fear, to  a certain  extent, of  those  who have been nurtured  in the 
new traditions.  We have laboured under  a terrible  handicap owing  to an almost 
fatal departure  from the Swadeshi  spirit.  We, the  educated  classes  have received  
our education  through a foreign  tongue.  We have therefore  not reacted  upon the 
masses.  We want to represent  the masses,  but we fail. They recogniz e us not 
much  more  than they recognize  the English  officers.  Their  hearts  are an open book 
to neither.  Their  aspirations  are not ours.  Hence  there  is a break.  And you witness, 
not in reality, failure  to organize  but want of correspondence  between  the 
repre sentatives  and represented.  If during  the last fifty years  had we been Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 128 educated through the vernaculars, our  elders  and our servants  and our neighbours  
would  have partaken  of our knowledge; the  discoveries  of a Bose or a Ray would  
have been household  treas ures as are the Ramayan  and Mahabharat.  As it is, so  far 
as the masses  are concerned, those  great discoveries  might  as well have been 
made  by foreigners.  Had instruction  in all the branches  of learning  been given  
through the vernaculars, I  make  bold to say that they would  have been enriched  
wonderfully.  The question  of village  sanitation, etc., would have been solved  long 
ago. The village  panchayats  would  be now a living  force  in a special  way, and India 
would  almost be enjoying  self-government  suited to its requirements  and would  
have been spared the humiliating  spectacle  of organized assassination  on its 
sacred  soil. It is not too late to mend.  And you can help if you will, as  no other  
body or bodies  can. 
And now for the last division  of Swadeshi.  Much  of the deep poverty of the masses  
is due to the ruinous  departure  from Swadeshi  in the economic  and industrial  life. 
If not an article  of commerce  had been brought  from outside  India, she  would  be 
to-day a land flowing  with milk and honey.  But that was not to be. We were  
greedy  and so was England.  The connection between  England  and India  was based  
clearly  upon an error.  But she (England)  does not remain  in India in error.  It is her 
declared  policy that India is to be held in trust for her people.  If this be true, 
Lancashire  must stand aside.  And if the Swadeshi  doctrine  is a sound  doctrine, 
Lancashire  can stand aside  without  hurt, though it may sustain  a shock  for the 
time being.  I think  of Swadeshi  not as a boycott  movement  undertaken  by way of 
revenge.  I conceive  it as a religious  principle  to be followed  by all. I am no 
economist, but I have read some  treatises  which  show  that England  could  easily  
become  a self-sustained  country, growing  all the produce  she needs.  This may be 
an utterly ridiculous  proposition , and  perhaps  the best proof  that it cannot  be true 
is that England  is one of the largest importers  in the world.  But India cannot  live 
for Lancashire  or any other  country  before  she is able to live for herself.  And she Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 129 can live for herself  only if she produces  and is helped to produce  everything  for 
her requirements , within  her own borders.  She need not be, she  ought  not to be 
drawn  into the vortex  of mad and ruinous  competition  which  breeds  fratricide, 
jealousy  and many other  evils.  But who is to stop her great  millionaires  from 
entering  on to the world  competition ? Certainly not legislation.  Force  of public  
opinion, proper  education, however, can  do a great  deal in the desired  direction.  
The handloom  industry is in a dying  condition.  I took special  care during  my 
wanderings  last year to see as many  weavers  as possible, and  my heart ached  to 
find how much  they had lost, how  families  had retired  from this once flourishing  
and honourable  occupation.  If we follow  the Swadeshi  doctrine, it would  be your 
duty and mine  to find out neighbours  who can supply our wants  and to teach  them  
to supply them  where  they do not know  how to proceed, assuming  that there  are 
neighbours  who are in want of healthy occupation.  Then every  village  of India will 
almost be a self-suppo rting and self-contained  unit, exchanging  only such 
necessary  commodities  with other  villages  where  they are not locally  producible.  
This may all sound  nonsensical.  Well, India  is a country  of nonsense.  It is 
nonsensical  to parch  one’s  throat  with thirst  when a kindly Mohammedan  is ready  
to offer pure water  to drink.  And yet thousands  of Hindus  would  rather  die of 
thirst than drink  water  from a Mohammedan  household.  These  nonsensical  men 
can also, once  they are convinced  that their religion  demands  that they should  
wear garments  manufactured in India only and eat food only grown  in India, 
decline  to wear any other  clothing  or eat any other  food.  Lord Curzon  set the 
fashion  of tea-drinking.  And that pernicious  drug now bids fair to overwhelm  the 
nation.  It has already undermined  the digestive  apparatus  of hundreds  of 
thousands  of men and women  and constitutes  an additional  tax upon their slender  
purses.  Lord Hardinge  can set the fashion  for Swadeshi, and almost  the whole  of 
India will forswear  foreign  goods.  There  is a verse  in the Bhagavadgita which, 
freely  rendered, means  masses  follow  the classes.  It is easy to undo the evil of the 
thinking  portion  if the community  were to take the Swadeshi  vow, even  though it Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 130 may for a time cause  considerable  inconvenience.  I hate legislative  interference  in 
any department of life. At best, it is the lesser  evil. But I would  tolerate, 
welcome, indeed  plead  for a stiff protective  duty upon foreign  goods.  Natal, a  
British  Colony, protected its sugar  by taking  the sugar  that came from another  
British  colony, Mauritius.  England has sinned  against India by forcing  free trade  
upon her. It may have been food for her, but it has been poison  for this country.  
It has often  been urged  that India cannot  adopt Swadeshi  in the economic life at 
any rate. Those  who advance  this objection  do not look upon Swadeshi  as a rule of 
life. With them  it is a mere  patriotic  effort, not  to be made  if it involved  any self-
denial.  Swadeshi, as  defined  here, is  a religious  discipline  to be undergone  in utter  
disregarded  of the physical  discomfort  it may cause  to individuals.  Under  its spell 
the deprivation  of a pin or a needle, because  these  are not manufactured in India, 
need cause  no terror.  A Swadeshi  will learn  to do without  hundreds  of things  which  
to-day he considers  necessary.  Moreover, those  who dismiss  Swadeshi  from their 
minds  by arguing  the impossible  forget  that Swadeshi  after all is a goal to be 
reached  by steady effort.  And we would  be making  for the goal, even  if we 
confined  Swadeshi  to a given set of articles; allowing  ourselves  as a temporary  
measure  to use such things  as might  not be procurable  in the country.  
There  now remains  for me to consider  one more  objection  that has been raised 
against Swadeshi.  The objectors  consider  it to be a most selfish  doctrine  without  
any warrant in the civilized  code of morality.  With them, to  practice  Swadeshi  is 
to revert  to barbarism.  I cannot  enter  into a detailed analysis  of the proposition.  
But I would  urge the Swade shi is the only doctrine  consistent  with the law of 
humility  and love.  It is arrogance  to think  of launching  out to serve  the whole  of 
India, when  I am hardly able to serve  even my own family.  It were  better  to 
concentrate  my effort  upon the family, and consider  that through them  I was 
serving  the whole  nation, and  if you will, the  whole  humanity.  This is humility  and 
it is love. The motive  will determine  the quality of the act. I may serve  my family, Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 131 regardless  of the sufferings  I may cause  to others, as  if for instance, I  may accept  
an employment  which  enables  me to extort  the money  from people; I  enrich  
myself  thereby and then satisfy  many unlawful  demands  of the family.  Here I am 
neither  serving  the family nor the state.  Or I may recognize  that God has given  me 
hands  and feet only to work with for my sustenance  and for that of those  who may 
be dependent upon me. I would  then at once simplify  my life and that of those  
whom  I can directly  reach.  In this instance  I would  have served  the family  without  
causing  injury  to anyone  else. Supposing  that everyone followed  this mode  of life, 
we should  have at once an ideal state.  All will not reach  that state  at the same  
time.  But those  of us who, realizing  its truth, enforce  it in practice  will clearly  
anticipate  and accelerate  the coming  of that happy day. Under  this plan of life, in  
seeming  to serve  India to the exclusion  of every  other  country, I  do not harm  any 
other  country.  My patriotism  is both exclusive  and inclusive.  It is exclusive  in the 
sense  that in all humility  I confine  my attention  to the land of my birth.  But it is 
inclusive  in the sense  that my service  is not of a competitive  or antagonistic  
nature.  Sic utere  tuo ut alienum  non laedas.   It is not merely  a legal maxim, but it 
is a grand doctrine  of life. It is the way to a proper  practice  of ahimsa or love. It is 
for you, the  custodians  of a great  faith, to  set the fashion  and show  by your 
preaching, sanctified by practice, that patriotism  based on hatred ‘killeth’, and  
that patriotism  based on love ‘giveth  life’.  
 
1. Omitted for this sele ction.  
2. Meaning ‘Not This’  
3. Extract from Young India, Vol. II by M. K. Gandhi (Navajivan Publishing House).  
4. Young India, Vol. II  
5. Idem 
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 132          
 
   
                                   
 
Part Five 
--------------------------------------------------- ---------  
Report of the Trial of Mahatma Gandhi;  
A Letter  from Prison  
------------------------------------------------------------  
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 133 Chapter 05  
REPORT  OF THE TRIAL  OF MAHATMA GANDHI  
At the Circuit  House  at Shahi  Bag, the  trial of Mr. Gandhi  and Mr. Ba nker 
commenced  on Saturday noon, 18th March  1922, before  Mr. C. N. Broomsfield, 
I.C.S, District  and Sessions  Judge  of Ahmedabad.  
Sir J. T. Strangman  with Rao Bahadur  Girdharlal  conducted the prosecution, while  
the accused  were undefended.  The judge  took his seat at 12 noon, and  said there  
was a slight  mistake  in the charges  framed, which  he corrected.  The charges  were  
then read out by the Registrar, the  offence  being  in three  articles 1 published  in 
the Young  India of September  29th, December  15th, of 1921 and February 23rd, 
1922.  The offending  articles  were then read out: first  of them  was ‘Tampering  
with Loyalty’; the  second, ‘The  Puzzle  and Its Solution’; and  the last was ‘Shaking  
the Manes’.  
The judge  said the law required  that the charge  should  not only be read out, but  
explained.  In this case, it  would  not be necessary  for him to say much  by way of 
explanation.  The charge  in each case was that of bringing  or attempting  to bring  
into hatred or contempt  or exciting  or attempting  to excite  disaffectio n towards  
His Majesty’s  Government, established  by law in British  India.  Both the accused  
were charged  with the three  offences  under  Section  124A, contained in the 
articles  read out, written  by Mr. Gandhi  and printed by Mr. Banker  The words  
’hatred  and contempt’  were words  the meaning  of which  was sufficiently  obvious.  
The word ‘disaffection’  was defined  under  the section, where  they were  told that 
disaffection  included  disloyalty and feelings  of enmity, and the word used in the 
section  had also been interpreted by the High Court  of Bombay in a reported  case 
as meaning  political  alienation  or discontent, a spirit of disloyalty to government  
or existing  authority.  The charges  having  been read out, the  judge  called  upon the 
accused  to plead to the charges.  He asked Mr. Gandhi  whether  he pleaded guilty  
or claimed  to be tried.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 134 Mr. Gandhi : I plead guilty  to all the charges.  I observe  that the King’s  name  has 
been omitted from the charge, and it has been properly omitted.  
The Judge : Mr. Banker, do  you plead guilty,  or do you claim  to be tried? 
Mr. Banker : I plead guilty.  
Sir J. Strangman  then wanted the judge  to proceed  with the trial fully, but the 
Judge  said he did not agree  with what had been said by the Counsel.  The Judge  
said that from the time he knew  he was going to try the case, he  had thought  over 
the question  of sentence, and  he was prepared  to hear anything  that the Counsel  
might  have to say, or  Mr. Gandhi  wished  to say, on  the sentence.  He honestly did 
not believe  that the mere  recording  of evidence  in the trial which  Counsel  had 
called  for would  make  no [sic] difference  to them, one  way or the other.  He, 
therefore, proposed to accept  the pleas.  
Mr. Gandhi  smiled  at this decision.  
The Judge  said nothing  further  remained but to pass sentences, and  before  doing 
so, he  liked to hear Sir J.T. Strangman.  He was entitled to base his general  
remarks  on the charges  against  the accused  and on their pleas.  
Sir J. T. Strangman : It will be difficult  to do so. I ask the court  that the whole  
matter  may be properly consid ered.  If I stated what has happened before  the 
committing  magistrate, then  I can show  that there  are many things  which  are 
material  to the question  of the sentence.  
The first point, he  said, he  wanted to make  out, was  that the matter  which  
formed  the subje ct of the present  charg es formed  a part of the campaign  to 
spread  disaffection  openly  and systematically to render  government  impossible  
and to overthrow  it. The earliest  article  that was put in from Young  India was 
dated 25th May 1921, which  said that it was the duty of a non-co-operator  to Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 135 creat e disaffection  towards  the Government.  The counsel  then read out portion  of 
articles  written  by Mr. Gandhi  in the Young  India.  
Court  said, nevertheless, it seemed  to it that the court  could  accept  plea on the 
mater ials on which  the sentence had to be based.  
Sir J. Strangman  said the question  of sentence  was entirely  for the court  to 
decide.  The court  was entitled to deal in a more  general  manner  in regard  to the 
question  of the sentence, than the particular  matter  resulting  in the conviction.  
He asked leave  to refer to articles  before  the court, and  what result  might  have 
been produced, if  the trial had proceeded  in order  to ascertain  what the facts 
were.  He was not going  into any matter  which  involved  dispute.  
The Judge said there  was not the least objection . 
Sir J. Strangman  said he wanted to show  that these  articles  were not isolated.  
They formed  part of an organized campaign, but so far as Young  India was 
concerned, they  would  show  that from the year 1921.  The counsel then read out 
extracts  from the paper, dated June 8th, on the duty of a non-co-operator, which  
was to preach  disaffection  towards  the existing  Government  and preparing  the 
country  for civil disobedience.  Then in the same  number, there  was an article  on 
disaffection. Then in the same number there was an article on Disaffectin - a 
virtue’ or  something  to that effect.  Then there  was an article  on 28th July 1921, in  
which  it was stated that ‘we have to destroy the system’.  Again  on 30th September  
1921, ther e was an article  headed ‘Punjab  Prosecutions’, where  it was stated  that 
a non-co-operator  worth  his name  should  preach  disaffection.  That was all so far 
as Young  India was concerned.  They were earlier  in date than the article, 
‘Tampering  with Loyalty’, and it was referred  to the Government  of Bombay.  
Continuing, he  said the accused  was a man of high educational  qualifications  and 
evidently from his writings  a recognized  leader.  The harm  that was likely  to be 
caused  was considerable.  They were the writings  of an educated man, and  not the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 136 writings  of an obscure  man, and the court  must consider  to what the results  of a 
campaign  of the nature  disclosed  in the writings  must inevitably lead.  They had 
examples  before  them  in the last few months.  He referred  to the occurrences  in 
Bombay last November  and Chauri  Chaura, leading  to murder  and destruction  of 
property, involving  many  people  in misery  and misfortune.  It was true that in the 
course  of those  articles  they would  find non-violence  was insisted  upon as an item 
of the campaign  and as an item of the creed.  But what was the use of preaching  
non-violence  when  he preached disaffection  towards  government  or openly  
instigated others  to overthrow it? The answer  to that question  appeared to him to  
come  from Chauri  Chaur a, Madras  and Bombay.  These  were circumstances  which  
he asked the court  to take into account  in sentencing  the accused, and it would  be 
for the court  to consider  those  circumstances  which  involve  sentences  of severity.  
As regards  the second  accused, his  offence  was lesser.  He did the publication  and 
he did not write.  His offence  nevertheless  was a serious  one. His instructions  were 
that he was a man of means  and he asked the court  to impose  a substantial  fine in 
addition  to such term of imprisonment  as might be inflicted.  He quoted  Section  10 
of The Press  Act as bearing  on the question  of fine. When  making  a fresh  
declaration, he  said a deposit of Rs. 1,000  to Rs. 10,000 was asked in many cases.  
Court : Mr. Gandhi, do  you wish to make  a statement on the question  of sentence? 
Mr. Gandhi : I would  like to make  a statement.  
Court : Could  you give me it in writing  to put it on record ? 
Mr. Gandhi : I shall give it as soon as I finish  reading  it. 
Before  reading  his written  statement, Mr. Gandhi  spoke  a few words  as 
introductory remarks  to the whole  statement.  He said: Before  I read this 
statement, I  would  like to state  that I entirely  endorse  the learned  Advocate -
General’s  remarks  in connection  with my humble  self. I think  that he was entirely  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 137 fair to me in all the statements  that he has made, because  it is very true and I 
have no desire  whatsoever  to conceal  from this court  the fact that to preach  
disaffection  towards  the existing  system  of government  has become  almost a 
passion  with me, and  the learned Advocate -General  is also entirely in the right 
when  he says that my preaching  of disaffection  did not commence  with my 
connection  with Young  India, but that it commenced   much  earlier; and  in the 
statement that I am about to read, it  will be my painful  duty to admit befor e this 
court  that it commenced  much  earlier  than the period  stated by the Advocate -
General.  It is the most painful  duty with me, but  I have to discharge  that duty 
knowing  the responsibility  that rests upon my shoulders, and  I wish to endorse  all 
the blame  that the learned Advocate -General  has thrown  on my shoulders  in 
connection  with the Bombay occurrences, Madras  occurrences  and the Chauri  
Chaura  occurrences.  Thinking  over these  deeply and sleeping  over them  night  
after night, it  is impossible  for me to dissociate  myself  from the diabolical  crimes  
of Chauri  Chaura  or the mad outrages  of Bombay.  He is quite  right when  he says 
that as a man of responsibility, a man having  received  a fair share  of education, 
having  had a fair share  of experience of this world,  I should  have known  the 
consequences  of every  one of my acts. I knew  that I was playing  with fire. I ran 
the risk, and  if I was set free, I  would  still do the same.  I have felt it this morning  
that I would  have failed  in my duty, if  I did not say what  I said here just now. 
I wanted to avoid violence.  Non-violence  is the first article  of my faith.  It is also 
the last article  of my creed.  But I had to make  my choice.  I had either  to submit 
to a system  which  I considered  had done an irreparable  harm  to my country, or  
incur  the risk of the mad fury of my people  bursting  forth, when  they understood  
the truth  from my lips. I know  that my people  have sometimes  gone mad.  I am 
deeply sorry for it and I am therefore  here to submit not to a light penalty but to 
the highest  penalty.  I do not ask for mercy.  I do not plead any extenuating  act. I 
am here, therefore, to  invite  and cheerfully  submit to the highest  penalty that can Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 138 be inflicted  upon me for what in law is a deliberate  crime  and what appears  to me 
to be the highest duty of a citizen.  The only course  open to you, the  Judge, is, as  I 
am just going  to say in my statement, either  to resign  your post, of  inflict  on me 
the severest  penalty, if  you believe that the system  and law you are assisting  to 
administer  are good for the people.  I do not expect  that kind of conversion, but  by 
the time I have finished  with my statement, you  will perhaps  have a glimpse  of 
what is raging  within  my breast to run this maddest  risk which  a sane man can run. 
The statement was then read out. 
 
Statement  
‘I owe it perhaps  to the Indian  public  and to the public  in England  to placate  which  
this prosecution  is mainly  taken  up that I should  explain  why from a staunch  
loyalist and co-operator  I have become  an uncompromising  disaffectionist  and non-
co-operator.  To the court  too I should  say why I plead  guilty  to the charge  of 
promoting  disaffection  towards  the Government  established by law in India.  
‘My public  life began  in 1893 in South  Africa  in troubled weather.  My first contact  
with British  authority  in that country  was not of a happy character.  I discovered  
that as a man and an Indian  I had no rights.  More correctly, I  discovered  that I had 
no rights  as a man, because  I was an Indian.  
‘But I was not baffled.  I thought  that this treatment of Indians  was an excrescence  
upon a system  that was intrinsically  and mainly good.  I gave the Government  my 
voluntary and hearty co-operation, criticizing  it freely  where  I felt it was faulty  
but never  wishing  its destruction.  
‘Consequently  when  the existence  of the Empire  was threatened  in 1899 by the 
Boer challenge, I  offered  my services  to it, raised  a volunteer  ambulance  corps  
and served  at several  actions  that took place  for the relief  of Ladysmith.  Similarly  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 139 in 1906, at  the time of the Zulu revolt, I  raised a stretcher -bearer  party and 
served  till the end of the “rebellion”.  On both these  occasions  I received  medals  
and was even mentioned  in dispatches.  For my work in South  Africa  I was given  by 
Lord Hardinge  a Kaisar -i-Hind gold medal.  When  the war broke  out in 1914 
between  England  and Germany, I  raised a volunteer  ambulance  corps in London  
consisting  of the then resident  Indians  in London, chiefly  students.  Its work was 
acknowledged by the authorities  to the valuable.  Lastly, in  India, when  a special  
appeal  was made  at the War Conference in Delhi  in 1918 by Lord Chelmsford  for 
recruits, I  struggled  at the cost of my health  to raise a corps  in Kheda and the 
response  was being  made  when  the hostilities  ceased  and orders  were  received  
that no more  recruits  were wanted.  In all these  efforts  at service  I was actuated  
by the belief  that it was possible  by such services  to gain a status  of full equality  
in the Empire  for my countrymen.  
‘The first shock  came  in the shape  of the Rowlatt Act, a  law designed  to rob the 
people  of all real freedom.  I felt called  upon to lead an intensive  agitation  against 
it. Then  followed  the Punjab  horrors  beginning  with the massacre  at Jallianwala  
Bagh and culminating  in crawling  orders, public  floggings and other  indescribable  
humil iations.  I discovered  too that the plighted word of the Prime  Minister  to the 
Mussulmans  of India regarding  the integrity of Turkey  and the holy places  of Islam  
was not likely  to be fulfilled.  But in spite of the forebodings  and the grave  
warnings  of friends, at the Amritsar  Congress  in 1919, I  fought  for co-operation  in 
working  the Montagu -Chelmsford  reforms, hoping  that the Prime  Minister  would  
redeem  his promise  to the Indian  Mussulmans, that  the Punjab  wound  would  be 
healed  and that the reforms, inadequ ate and unsatisfactory though they were, 
marked new era of hope in the life of India.  
‘But all that hope was shattered.  The Khilafat  promise  was not to be redeemed.  
The Punjab  crime  was whitewashed and most culprits  went not only unpunished  
but remained n service  and in some  cases  continued  to draw pensions  from the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 140 Indian  revenue, and  in some  cases  were even rewarded.  I saw too that not only did 
the reforms  not mark  a change  of heart, but they were only a method  of further  
draining  India of her wealth  and of prolonging  her servitude.  
‘I came  reluctantly to the conclusion  that the British  connection  had made  India 
more  helpless  than she ever was before, politically and economically.  A disarmed  
India has no power  of resistance  against  any aggressor  if she wanted to engage  in 
an armed conflict  with him. So much  is this the case that some  of our best men 
consider  that India must take generations  before  she can achieve  Dominion  status.  
She has become  so poor that she has little  power  of resisting  famines.  Before  the 
British  advent, India spun and wove  in her millions  of cottages  just the supplement  
she needed  for adding  to her meager  agricultural  resources.  This cottage  industry, 
so vital for India’s  existence, has  been ruined  by incredibly  heartless  and inhuman  
processes  as described by English  witness.  Little  do town dwellers  know  how the 
semi-starved  masses  of India are slowly  sinking  to lifelessness.  Little  do they know  
that their miserable  comfort  represents  the brokerage  they get for the work they 
do for the foreign  exploiter, that the profits and the brokerage  are sucked  from 
the masses.  Little  do they realize  that the Government  established  by law in 
British  India is carried  on for this exploitation  of the masses . No sophistry, no  
jugglery  in figures  can explain away the evidence that the skeletons  in many  
villages  present  to the naked eye. I have no doubt whatsoever  that both England  
and the town dwellers  of India will have to answer, if  there  is a God above, for  
this crime  against humanity  which  is perhaps  unequalled  in history.  The law itself  
in this country  has been used to serve  the foreign  exploiter.  My unbiased  
examination  of the Punjab  Martial  Law cases  has led me to believe  that at least 
ninety -five per cent of convictions  were wholly  bad. My experien ce of political  
cases  in India leads  me to the conclusion  that in nine out of ten the condemned  
men were totally  innocent.  Their  crime  consisted  in the love of their country.  In 
ninety -nine cases  out of a hundred  justice  has been denied to Indians  as again st Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 141 Europeans  in the courts  of India.  This is not an exaggerated  picture.  It is the 
experience of almost every  Indian  who has had anything  to do with such cases.  In 
my opinion, the  administration  of the law is thus prostituted consciously  or 
unconsciously  for the benefit  of the exploiter.  
‘The greatest misfortune  is that Englishmen and their Indian  associates  in the 
administration  of the country  do not know  that they are engaged  in the crime  I 
have attempted to describe.  I am satisfied that many  Englishmen and Indian  
officials  honestly  believe  that they are administering  one of the best system  
devised  in the world  and that India is making  steady though slow progress.  They do 
not know  that a subtle  but effective  system  of terrorism  and an organized display  
of force  on the one hand, and the deprivation  of all powers  of retaliation  of self-
defence on the other, have  emasculated the people  and induced  in them  the habit  
of simulation.  This awful  habit has added to the ignorance  and the self-deception  
of the adminis trators.  Section  124A under  which  I am happily charged  is perhaps  
the prince  among  the political  sections  of the Indian  Penal  Code  designed  to 
suppress  the liberty of the citizen.  Affection  cannot  be manufactured  or regulated  
by law. If one has no affectio n for a person  or system, one  should  be free to give 
the fullest  expression  of his disaffection, so  long as he does not contemplate, 
promote  or incite  to violence.  But the section  under  which  Mr. Banker  and I are 
charged  is one under  which  mere  promotion  of disaffection  is a crime.  I have 
studied some  of the cases  tried under  it, and  I know  that some  of the most loved  
of India’s  patriots  have been convicted  under  it. I consider  it a privilege, 
therefore, to  be charged  under  that section.  I have endeavoured to give in their 
briefest  outline  the reasons  for my disaffection.  I have no personal  ill-will against  
any single  administrator, much  less can I have any disaffection  towards  the King’s  
person.  But I hold it to be a virtue  to be disaffected  towards  a gover nment  which  
in its totality has done more  harm  to India than any previous  system.  India is less 
manly under  the British  rule than she ever was before.  Holding  such a belief, I  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 142 consider  it to be a sin to have affection  for the system.  And it has been a precious 
privilege  for me to be able to write  what I have in the various  articles, tendered  in 
evidence  against  me. 
‘In fact, I  believe  that I have rendered  a service  to India and England  by showing  in 
non-co-operation  the way out of the unnatural  state  in which both are living.  In 
my humble  opinion, non- co-operation  with evil is as much  a duty as is co-operation  
with good.  But in the past, non -co-operation  has been deliberately expressed  in 
the violence  to the evil doer.  I am endeavouring  to show  to my country men that 
violent  non-co-operation  only multiplied evil and that as evil can only be sustained 
by violence, withdrawal  of support of evil requires  complete  abstention  from 
violence.  Non-violence  implies  voluntary  submission  to the penalty for non-co-
operati on with evil. I am here, therefore, to  invite  and submit cheerfully  to the 
highest  penalty that can be inflicted  upon me for what in law is a deliberate  crime  
and what appears  to me to be the highest  duty of a citizen.  The only course  open 
to you, the  Judge, is either  to resign  your post and thus dissociate  yourself  from 
evil, if  you feel that the law you are called  upon to administer  is an evil and that 
in reality I am innocent; or  to inflict  on me the severest  penalty  if you believe that 
the system  and the law you are assisting  to administer  are good for the people  of 
this country  and that my activity  is therefore  injurious  to the public  weal.’  
Mr. B anker : I only want to say that I had the privilege  of printing  these  articles  and 
I plead guilty  to the charge. I have got nothing  to say as regards  the sentence.  
 
The Judgment  
The following  is the full text of the judgment : 
Mr. Gandhi, you  have made  my task easy in one way by pleading  guilty to the 
charge.  Nevertheless, what  remains, namely, the  determination  of a just 
sentence, is  perhaps  as difficult  a proposition  as a judge  in this country  could  have Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 143 to face.  The law is no respecter  of persons.  Nevertheless, it  will be impossible  to 
ignore  the fact that you are in a different  category from any person  I have ever 
tried or am likely  to have to try. It would  be impossible  to ignore  the fact that, in  
the eyes of the millions  of your countrymen, you  are a great patriot and a great  
leader.  Even those  who differ  from you in politics  look upon you as a man of high 
ideals and of noble  and of even saintly life. I have to deal with you in one 
character  only.  It is not my duty and I do not presume  to judge  or criticize  you in 
any other  character.  It is my duty to judge  you as a man subject  to the law, who  
by his own admis sion has broken  the law and committed what to an ordinary  man 
must appear  to be grave  offence  against the State.  I do not forget  that you have 
consistently preached against violence  and that you have on many occasions, as  I 
am willing  to believe, done  much  to prevent  violence.  But having  regard  to the 
nature  of your political  teaching  and the nature  of many of those  to whom  it was 
addressed, how  you could  have continued  to believe  that violence  would  not be 
the inevitable  consequence, it  passes  my capacity to understand.  
There  are probably  few people  in India who do not sincerely  regret  that you should  
have made  it impossible  for any government  to leave  you at liberty.  But it is so. I 
am trying  to balance  what is due to you against  what appears  to me to be 
necessary  in the interest  of the public, and I propose  in passing  sentence  to follow  
the precedent of a case in many respects  similar  to this case that was decided  
some  twelve  years  ago, I  mean  the case against Bal Gangadhar  Tilak under  the 
same  section.  The sentence that was passed upon him as it finally  stood  was a 
sentence  of simple  imprisonment  for six years.  You will not consider  it 
unreasonable, I  think, that  you should  be classed  with Mr. Tilak, i.e. a  sentence  of 
two years’  simple  imprisonment  on each count  of the charge; six  years  in all, 
which  I feel it my duty to pass upon you, and I should  like to say in doing  so that, 
if the course  of events  in India should  make  it possible  for the Government  to 
reduce  the period  and release  you, no  one will be better  pleased than I. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 144 The Judge  to Mr. Banker : I assume  you have been to a large  extent  under  the 
influence  of your chief.  The sentence  that I propose  to pass upon you is simple  
imprisonment  for six months  on each of the first two counts, that is to say, s imple  
imprisonment  for one year and a fine of a thousand rupees  on the third count, 
with six months’  simple  imprisonment  in default.  
 
Mr. Gandhi on the Judgment  
Mr. Gandhi  said: I would  say one word.  Since  you have done me the honour  of 
recalling  the trial of the late Lokmanya Bal Gangadhar  Tilka, I  just want to say 
that I consider  it to be the proudest privilege  and honour  to be associated with his 
name.  So far as the sentence itself  is concerned, I  certainly consider  that it is as 
light as any judge  would inflict  on me, and  so far as the whole  proceedings  are 
concerned, I  must say that I could  not have expected  greater  courtesy.  
Then the friends  of Mr. Gandhi  crowded  round  him as the Judge  left the court, and  
fell at his feet. There  was much  sobbing  on the part of both men and women.  But 
all the while, Mr. Gandhi  was smiling  and cool and giving  encouragement  to 
everybody who came  to him. Mr. Banker  also was smiling  and taking  this in a light-
hearted way. After  all his friends  had taken  leave  of him, Mr. Ga ndhi was taken  
out of the court  to the Sabarmati  Jail. 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 145 A Letter  to Mahatma Gandhi  from Prison  
Near Etawa,  
En route  to Agra 
Dated  10th morning.  
I feel like one who has long been pent up in a dark and ill-ventilated cell and who 
all at once finds himself inhaling  deep draughts  of the fresh  air of heaven.  You can 
easily imagine  what longing  I must have had to write  to you, I  who was in the habit  
of writing  to you almost daily and of thus easing  the many troubles  of my mind.  
We are permitted  to write  one letter  in a fortnight; the  letter  again  must be in 
English  and must be forwarded  through the Superintendent.  How, then, could  I 
hope to tell you everything  that was happening  behind the prison  walls ? But 
yesternight we were set free, at  least till we reached Agra.  And this morning  we 
are on our way thereto.  
Yesternight, thirty- nine of us started from Naini  in a prison  van comprising  four 
barred compartments, each  being  three  cubits  long and five broad.  The bars were 
apparently not considered  to be an adequ ate safeguard; for  the prison  van has no 
doors  and no windows.  Only there  are crooked  holes, one  inch broad by the side of 
the carriage  for the passage  of air. I asked the Sergeant  who escorts  us whether  
there  was any intention  of repeating  the Moplah  tragedy. The poor fellow  naively  
replied  that there  was no fear, as  it was winter  and that it would  have been 
intolerable, had it been summer.  Besides  the four prisoners’  compartments, there  
was a fifth which  was like ordinary third class and was meant  for our friends, the  
guard.  Should  they not have sufficient  light and air to be able to keep us in a 
suffocated  condition?  
Devdas  and Durga  (Mrs. Desai)  were  at Allahabad Station  to see us. They could  not 
have a view of our faces, but they stood  outside, near  the place  where  I was, and 
we could  have a hearty talk. From  this Prison  van I could  inform  Devdas  of the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 146 many horrors  about which  I had been unable  to tell him anything  in the jail; for  
the police  who escort  us do not act as jailers.  So some  of the things  in this letter  
will have already  appeared in Devdas’  Independent  before  this reaches  you. 
We had had hardly a wink of sleep  from about one or two o’clock, when  at four we 
were roused  at Cawnpore.  The Sergeant  said, ’Desi, Govind  and Krishnakant  
Malaviya, Shahsaheb, and  two others, follow  me. We shall seat you elsewhere, so  
that there  might  be more  room  here.’  I could  not understand  how this selection  
was made, but it looked  like segregation, and so I said that any seven  of us would  
come, but  not the seven  that were named.  The Sergeant  replied  that only those  
whom  he named  must come  as he did not know  the rest and therefore  could  not 
take the risk of seating  any of them  in an ordinary compartment.  As ‘political’  
prisoners, some  of us had our own clothes  on; wit h the exception  of these  three  or 
four, the  rest were in jail dress  and in irons, so  that our shame (even  as it was) 
was boundless.  To it was now added the insult  of being  considered  more  
‘trustworthy’  than the rest. I thought  the three  out of the seven  would be ordinary  
prisoners, and that with the aid of light, I  would  have an opportunity of writing  to 
you, an  opportunity not lightly  to be allowed  to slip as I could  not hope to have it 
anywhere  else; and  so we came  out. I am writing  this in an ordinary  third-class 
compartment.  Seven  policemen  are mounting  guard  over us seven ! 
But I must cut this story short, as  there  is little time and much  to write.  How can I 
give you an idea of the perplexities  we have suffered  on account  of your 
injunction that we shoul d obey all orders  in jail? Every  moment  we are troubled by 
doubts  as to what to obey and what not to obey, as  always  the sun sets on novel  
experiences  and on various  oppressions.  So I am not all certain  as to the propriety  
of my conduct  on every  occasion  when I have been anxious  to obey.  
I am not going  to detail  here all the experiences  in jai. That would  take many  
letters  like this, and  this is hardly the time for it. I am going  to give such select  
information  as I think  ought  to be placed  before  the publi c. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 147 I was take to Naini Jail on the 24th and was at once taken in the presence of the 
Superintendent, who said angrily, ‘Look here, you may be a non -co-operator or 
anything you please, but here you are a prisoner like all the others and will be 
treated acco rdingly. You will tire of your life out here, but I can’t help it. We will 
not trouble you so long as you so long  as you do not trouble us.’  
This homily  over, I  was soon taken  to my own cell. I had previously resolved  that I 
should  accept  everything  cheerf ully including  jail dress  and irons.  So I put on jail 
dress  as soon as it was given  to me. Fifteen  members  of the Provincial  Committee  
had arrived  here a weak  before  me, and  their cell was adjoining  mine.  I got the 
news, after  I had changed  my dress, that one of them  had refused  to put on jail 
dress  and had consequently  received  a flogging.  The jail authorities  were  
somewhat surprise d to find that I had accepted the change  in dress  without  
demur.  I was given  a rough  woollen coat, worn  almost threadbare  by long use, a  
shirt worn out by some  prisoner  of twice  my size and emitting  horrible  stink, an  
equally dirty pair of shorts  and loincloth, along  with two blankets  as bedding.  In a 
few minutes  I felt an itching  sensation, and an inspection  at one or two places  
resulted  in the find of a pretty big louse.  It was difficult  to say whether  the vermin  
lived in the blanket  or the shirt, but  as there  was fairly  bitter  cold, I  had to choose  
between  lice and offensive  smell, I  elected  against the smell, placed  the coat as a 
pillow, put  away the shirt, and decided to pass the night  under  the sole protection  
of the blanket.  I had thought  that as I was dead tired, I  would  sleep  soundly.  But 
the lice in the blanket never  ceased  troubling  me. My friends  in the adjoining  cell 
gave me from their place  an account  of the misbehavior  of the jailer  and the 
Superintendent.  One of them  was flogged  for the grave  offence  of not standing  up 
and pushing  his hand out through the bars, when  the jailer  arrived ! Another  
suffered  the same  punis hment  for refusing  to wear dirty clothes ! Add to the stings  
of lice, the  noisy  cries, rending  the heavens, with  which  prisoners  were  counted  
every  quarte r of an hour from 6 p.m. to 6 a.m. and you can understand that I got Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 148 hardly any sleep.  But I knew  that sheer  physical  necessity  would  induce  sleep  on 
the following  days, no  matter  if I was unable  to sleep  on the first.  
I took no food in the evening, as  I did not feel inclined.  I was given  a large  iron 
bowl for eating  and drinking.  In spite of all the scrubb ing I could  give it, I found  in 
the morning  that the water  in it had turned  blood -red with rust. We were taken  
out thrice  in the day for drinking  water  and for natural  purposes.  There  was a 
paved reservoir from which  all of us were to have our water  by putting our bowls  
into it. Filtering  the water  was out of the question, as  we were not provided with 
any extra  piece  of cloth.  
(At this point the Sergeant  sees me writing  and gives  me notice  that I should  not 
pass any of my writing  to my friends.  So I must be brief.)  
For bathing  purposes, there  was a long paved  channel  joining  with the reservoir  
mentioned  above.  We were all to sit in it and bathe.  As for food, we  were given  
dalia (a porridge  of pounded  wheat)  in the morning, wheat  bread and dal at noon, 
and the same  bread and vegetable  in the evening.  What  shall I say as to how I 
liked this appetizing  menu?  The other  prisoners  were taking  it all right, and so I 
can hardly describe  it as falling  within  your definition  of food unfit for human  
consumption.  
But let me now come  to other  matters.  There  is a rule that a newly  arrived  
prisoner  is only confined  and not given  any work for first ten days of his term.  So 
my friends  of the Provincial  Committee  and myself, having  no work, were  given  
books  which  we read, heard the bitter  language  of the jailer  and the 
Superintendent  in the mornings  and saw prisoners  striking  and abusing  one 
another.  The second  day, I  requested the Superintendent  to give us spinning  
wheels  or let us have them  from our homes.  He replied  that whee ls were given  to 
women  and that the Government  who spent ten rupees  on each prisoner  had 
somehow  to manage  to raise a like amount  out of his labour  and that therefore  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 149 grinding  was given  to him. I said that, if  the Government  had common  sense, they  
could  earn 500 rupees  out of our work.  He angrily asked if he was to get us to 
write  articles.  
In answer  to my companions, the  Superintendent  said, ‘Owing  to you disloyal  
people  having  arrived, I  could  not get my leave  for ten days sanctioned.  We have 
to suffer  much on account  of you. You must behave  properly.  Do not think  I am 
alone.  I have fifty millions  of people  behind  me (referring  to the population  of 
England).’  
This went on for a few days.  The ten days’  period of the Provincial  Committee  
people  was soon over, and  they were made  to wear an iron neckring and a wooden  
tablet, showing  the section  against which  they had offended  and the term of the 
sentence  of imprisonment.  They already had irons on their feet. The same  day 
they lost their lousy  clothes  and got new ones.  My clothes  were still the same, but  
I had remained  bare-bodied for two days, and washed them  thoroughly  with earth.  
Thus the stink had disappeared  and my friends  had combined  for one or two days 
to pick out the lice from my blankets  in the sunshine . 
When  the friends  left, I  felt somewhat lonely  and so gradually grew very friendly  
with the other  prisoners, some  of them  dacoits.  An old man with a term of seven  
years’  imprisonment  came  near my cell and sat near the door.  I read the 
Ramayana to him and he expounded it. He was a man of much  common  sense  and 
knowledge.  He had the Ramayana by heart.  Then we recited  bhajans  and many  
prisoners  began  to sit near my cell. Prisoners  here are finely  divided into two 
classes, national  and Government  prisoners, i.e . ordinary prisoners  and political.  
The political  are gratefully  admired and served  by the others.  
While  my new friendships  were  thus flourishing, I  had heard  that the provincial  
friends  had been given  hard labour.  Eleven  had to grind  fifteen  seers  of corn every  
day, and the deputy jailer  had ordered  the convict  warder  to harass  them  in all Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 150 possible  ways, in  order  that they might  weaken  and apologize.  One or two of these  
poor men fell ill in two days.  All had warts  on their palms, but had in three  or four 
days progressed  up to about nine seers, when  I received  the news  that the 
Government  had directed that I should  be treated  as political  prisoner.  I was sorry  
for this. While  my friends  were given  hard labour , I was denied  the privilege  of 
spiritual  elevatio n through physical  suffering.  My own clothes  in which  I had 
arrived  in jail and in which  I was furbished  up for the day when  Devdas  and Durga  
were to see me in order  that she might  not take fright  at the convict’s  dress, were  
returned  to me, but  the ‘Gandh i cap’ was withheld.  I asked the Superintendent  
what it was. He could  not explain  anything  beyond saying  that it was like the one I 
wore and that I would  not be allowed  to wear it. I might  change  the shape, he  
said, or  wear a fez like Sherwani’s.  I laughed  and said that I would  do neither.  
‘Then  you must go bareheaded,’ he said. I agreed.  I had thought  of refusing  to 
take the other  ordinary clothes, but then I remembered  your ‘Model  Prisoner’  and 
quietly  submitted.  
I passed my first day as political  prisone r in great  trouble.  But the next day I was 
at ease, as  I realized  that even so there  was an opportunity of suffering . Some of 
my friends  described their personal  experience.  There  is a young  man, named  
Kailasnath, still  in his teens, the  son of a well-know n pleader  of Cawnpore, and a 
political  prisoner.  Being  religiously  minded, he  takes  food after bath, worship, and  
the application  of sandal  paint, etc., to  the forehead.  The jailer  had admitted  
sandal  and the other  things  for him, but  when  one day he saw the sandal  mark, he  
ordered  Kailasnath  to rub it out. The young  man obeyed but refused  to take food.  
And so the jailer  arrived  on the scene  and threatened  punishment, but  Kailsnath  
persisted in his refusal  all the same.  For this, he  received  filthy  abuse, w as 
severely  flogged  with a wooden  cudgel  and kicked  with boots.  His utensils  were 
dashed to the ground.  The hero responsible  for this is Hamilton, an  Englishman 
who has been promoted to jailership  for his services  during  the war. This incident  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 151 got into the newspapers, though  not in detail, and there  was an inquiry.  The 
Inspector -General  visited  the prison  and told Kailasnath  that he must obey all 
orders.  Apparently he took the jailer  also to task, as  the latter  came  to Kailasnath  
and abused  the Inspector -General  before  him! 
On hearing  this, I  could  see that life even as a political  prisoner  need not be 
uneventful.  Meanwhile  the attitude  of the jailer  and the Superintendent  towards  
me had changed  and I had friendly conversations  with them  about non-co-
operati on and other  topics.  I did not quite  relish  this development, as  I was afraid  
that these  officers  might  be trying  to win me over as prelude  to oppressing  the 
rest. 
The same  evening  I heard successive  cries of ‘Gandhijiki  Jai’. In the morning, I  had 
read your observations  in Young  India and wished  I could  communicate  them  to the 
friends  who had been given  hard labour.  Here was no means  of doing  so. The cry 
started  from one block  and received  a response  from other  blocks, one  after  
another.  To the Superintendent  and the jailer  it looked  like mutiny.  They ran up. 
One of those  fifteen  friends  was seized  and the warder  fell upon him like a wolf.  
The poor man was greeted  with foul abuse  and flogged  with lathis  along  with an 
ironical  order  to repeat ‘Gandhijiki  Jai’. After  he had received  ten blows  of a 
lathi, one  inch and a half in diameter, his  magnificent  frame  tottered to the 
ground  and then he was beaten  with fists, etc.  
The friend  who thus suffered  is Lakshminarayana Sharma, a  pious  and inoffensive  
young  man of twenty -two, who  used to be secretary, Aligarh  Congress  Committee.  
The other  prisoners  could  not bear the sight of this suffering, and  offered  to 
retaliate  upon the warder.  But Lakshminarayana prevented  them  all and said it 
was their duty to suffer.  The others, however, were  greatly enraged  and 
continued  the cries of ‘Gandhijiki  Jai’ for which  about fifty or sixty of them  were  
cruelly  flogged.  As if this were not enough, the  next morning  all the prisoners  
were taken  outside,  including  the Provincial  Commit tee men, and  in the presence  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 152 of all of them, two  prisoners  who were  suspects  had their hands  fastened with a 
stick and then caned.  The caning  was so severe that the cries of the sufferers  
could  be heard in my cell at a distance  of two or three  furlongs.  When a prisoner 
swooned  after some  blows, he  was given  rest; and  as he revived, the  caning  was 
continued.  In this way, two  of them  received  twenty -three  cuts. It is worthy  of 
remark  that at each cut the sufferer  and his fellow  prisoners  sent up a joint cry of 
‘Gandhijiki  Jai’ in spite of the jailer  and the Superintendent, and these  cries 
stopped only when  the authorities  were tired of inflicting  any more  punishment.  
After  this, three  or four were flogged  with sticks  and fists. One of them  suffered  
so severely  that there  was an involuntary discharge  of excreta  and urine . Two or 
three  are in hospital.  I was told that prisoners  had died in this jail before, in  
consequence  of such oppression.  
Having  performed  his ‘dirty  job’ (Dyer’s  phrase)  in this way, the  jailer  came  to see 
me. I asked him for an explanation  of the trouble.  He replied that there  might  
have been a big mutiny and that severe punishment  was necessary  to prevent  it. I 
told him that, be  that as it might, I  would  fast and pray for the day. He asked me 
why. I said I would  pray not only for my brethren  who were no doubt in error, but  
for those  who despitefully used them.  The jailer  asked me what was the value  of 
prayer.  The talk then turned  upon the Bible.  I explained to him that Jesus  and the 
Bible  were not the sole property of Christians  like himself, but  the joint estate  of 
humanity  at large.  He then appeared to melt somewhat.  I said how good it would  
be, if  I was permitted to read to the prisoners  Mr. Gandhi’s  observations  pertinent  
to their case, and I offered  to meet  all of them  and talk to them  about our duty.  
But this was not at all acceptable  to the jailer. Only last evening, he  was saying  to 
the prisoners, ‘There  is no victory  to Gandhi  here, the  victory  is to Government.  
So you must cry victory  to Government.’  He was however  abashed  a little, said it 
was no use crying  over spilt milk and then left me. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 153 After  the jailer  came  the Superintendent.  He also tried to tease  me, saying  
ironically  how obedient my non-co-operator  friends  were.  I was quiet and only said 
that he at least was amused by the whole  affair.  Then he told me I did not know  
the utility  of punishment.  I replied I did not care to, as  there  was a world  of 
difference  between  his mentality  and mine, and  that he on his part had no 
appreciatio n of our methods.  He then expatiated  upon the value  of ‘force’  and 
said, ‘You  Indians  are unpractical  visionaries.  We are practical.  You only talk big.’ 
I was listening  quietly and contented myself  with asking  whether  it was I or he 
that was talking  big. He said nothing  more  and left me. Meanwhile  I had obtained  
permission  to see Lakshminarayana, that friend  who had been so cruelly  dealt  
with.  I saw him. He showed  me terrible  marks  of the flogging upon his body.  I told 
him we were forbidden  to cry ‘Gandhiji ki Jai’ and that I read about it in the 
papers  only the other  day. On hearing  this the young  man burst into tears  and said 
at once he must then tell the Superintendent  that he had done wrong.  Thus he 
evidenced  the incomparable  tenderness  of his soul. But what does the enemy  
know  or care about our tenderness ? So that we can only learn  to send forth like 
sandalwood  greater  fragrance, the  more  roughly  we are handled.  I assure  you, 
after the experiences  that I have had, that our people  are mastering  this lesson  in 
some  miraculous  method.  
But now I must close.  There  is much  to say, but I shall rest content  if this much  
reaches  you by post for the present.  We are not permitted to post letters, but how 
long should  these  facts be kept from the public ? It is also a question  to be 
considered  how far we should  obey the order  not to give out anything.  
I have had no sleep  last night, am  thoroughly  fatigued and must seize an early  
opportunity of posting  this. I will write  in English  if possible, but perhaps  there  
may be no time.  
We are all on our way to Agra, thirty- nine in all, including  members  of the 
Provincial  Committee  and some  Allahabad volunteers.  Since  he received  the orders  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 154 of removal, the  Superintendent  was kindness  itself  to us. He must have haved a 
sigh of relief at our departure  as of some  great  trouble.  On the last day he said: 
‘You are an awful  nuisance.  I should  get an allowance  of Rs. 50  for each one of 
you.’ We are being  removed, for  fear that we might  influence  the prison  
population  and bring  them  to a knowledge  of their slavery and ignorance.  
 
1. The complaint in respect of the earlier article, ‘Disaffection, a Virtue’ seems to have been 
dropped subsequently after inquiry by the magistrate.  
 
 
 
   
                                   
 
  
 
   
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 155  
 
   
 
 
Part Six 
----------------------------------------------------- ---------------  
Brahmacharya: The  virtue  of Chastity  - Caste,  
and Hindu  Muslim  Unity – Monoculture  in Education – 
The Untouchables – Hinduism  
------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 156 Chapter 06  
BRAHMACHARYA  
If it is contended that birth control  is necessary  for the nation  because  of over-
population, I  dispute  the proposition.  It has never  been proved.  In my opinion  by a 
proper  land system, better  agriculture  and a supplementary industry, this  country  
is capable  of supporting  twice  as many  people  as there  are in it to-day. 
What, then, is  Brahmacharya ? It means  that men and women  should  refrain  from 
carnal  knowledge  of each other.  That is to say, they should  not touch  each other  
with a carnal  thought, they  should  not think  of it even in their dreams.  Their  
mutual  glances  should  be free from all suggestion  of carnality.  The hidden  
strength  that God has given  us should  be conserved  by rigid self-discipline, and  
transmitte d into energy  and power – not merely  of body, but also of mind and 
soul. 
But what is the spectacle  that we actually see around  us? Men and women, old  and 
young, without  exception, are  caught  in the meshes  of sensuality.  Blinded for the 
most part by lust, t hey lose all sense  of right and wrong.  I have myself  seen even 
boys and girls behaving  as if they were mad under  its fatal influence.  I too have 
behaved likewise  under  similar  influences, and  it could  not well be otherwise.  For 
the sake of a momentary pleasure, we  sacrifice  in an instant  all the stock  of vital 
energy  that we have laboriously  accumulated.  The infatuation  over, we  find 
ourselves  in a miserable  condition.  The next morning  we feel hopelessly  weak  and 
tired, and the mind  refuses  to do its work.  Then in order  to remedy the mischief, 
we consume  large  quantities  of milk, bhasmas, yakutis  and what not. We take all 
sorts of ‘nervine  tonics’  and place  ourselves  at the doctor’s  mercy  for repairing  
the waste, and  for recovering  the capacity for enjoyment . So the days pass and 
years, until  at length  old age comes  upon us, and  find us utterly emasculated in 
body and in mind.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 157 But the law of Nature  is just the reverse  of this. The older  we grow the keener  
should  our intellect  be; the  longer  we live the greate r should  be our capacity  to 
communicate  the benefit  of our accumulated experience to our fellow  men.  And 
such is indeed  the case with those  who have been true Brahmacharies.  They know  
no fear of death, and they do not forget  God even in the hour of death; nor do 
they indulge  in vain desires.  They die with a smile  on their lips, and boldly face 
the day of judgment.  They are true men and women; and  of them  alone  can it be 
said that they have conserved  their health.  
We hardly realize  the fact that incontinence  is the root cause  of most vanity, 
anger, fear  and jealousy  in the world.  If our mind is not under  our control, if  we 
behave  once or oftener every  day more  foolishly  than even little  children, what  
sins may we not commit  consciously  or unconsciously ? How can we pause  to think  
of the consequences  of our actions, however  vile or sinful  they may be? 
But you may ask, ‘Who  has ever seen a true Brahmachari  in this sense ? If all men 
should  turn Brahmacharis, would  not humanity  be extinct  and the whole  world  go 
to rack and ruin? We will leave  aside  the religious  aspect of this question  and 
discuss  it simply from the secular  point of view.  To my mind, these  questions  only 
betray our timidity  and worse.  We have not the strength  of will to observe  
Brahmacharya, and therefore  set about finding  pretexts  for evading  our duty.  The 
race of true Brahmacharis  is by no means  extinct; but if they were commonly  to 
be met with, of  what value  would  Brahmacharya be? Thousands  of hardy labourers  
have to go and dig deep into the bowel s of the earth  in search  for diamonds, and  
at length  they get perhaps  merely  a handful  of them  out of heaps  and heaps  of 
rock.  How much  greater, then, should  be the labour  involved  in the discovery  of 
the infinitely  more  precious  diamond  of a Brahmachari ? If the observance  of 
Brahmacharya should  mean  the end of the world, that  is none of our business.  Are 
we God that we should  be so anxious  about its future ? He who crated it will surely  
see to its preservation.  We need not trouble  to inquire  whether  other  people  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 158 practice  Brahmacharya or not. When  we enter  a trade  or profession, do  we ever 
pause  to consider  what the fate of the world  would  be if all men were to do 
likewise ? The true Brahmachari  will, in  the long run, discover  for himself  answer  
to such questi ons. 
But how can men engrossed  in the cares  of the material  world  put these  ideas  into 
practice ? What  about those  who are married ? What  shall they do who have 
children ? And what shall be done by those  people  who cannot  control  themselves ? 
We have already seen what is the highest  state  for us to attain.  We should  keep 
this ideal constantly before  us, and  try to approach  it to the utmost of our 
capacity.  When  little children  are taught to write  the letters  of the alphabet, we  
show  them  the perfect  shapes  of the letters, and they try to reproduce  them  as 
best they can. In the same  way, if  we steadily work up to the ideal of 
Brahmacharya we may ultimately succeed  in realizing  it. What  if we have married  
already ? The law of Nature  is that Brahmacharya  may be broken only when  the 
husband  and wife feel a desire  for progeny.  Those, who, remembering  this law, 
violate  Brahmacharya once in four or five years, will  not become  slaves  to lust, 
nor lose much  of their stock  of vital energy.  But, alas ! How rare are those  men and 
women  who yield to the sexual  craving  merely  for the sake of offspr ing! The vast 
majority  turn to sexual  enjoyment  merely  to satisfy their carnal  passion, with  the 
result  that children  are born to them  quite  against their will. In the madness  of 
sexual  passion, they give no thought  to the consequences  of their acts. In this 
respect, men  are even more  to blame  than women.  The man is blinded so much  by 
his lust that he never  cares  to remember  that his wife is weak  and unable  to bear 
or rear up a child.  In the West, indeed, people  have transgressed  all bounds.  They 
indulge  in sexual  pleasures  and devise  measures  in order to evade  the 
responsibilities  of parent- hood.  Many books  have been written  on this subject  and 
a regular  trade  is being  carried  on in contraceptives.  We are as yet free from this 
sin, but  we do not shrink  from imposing  heavy burden  of maternity on our women, Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 159 and we are not concerned  even to find that our children  are weak, impotent and 
imbecile.  
We are, in  this respect  far worse  than even the lower  animals; for  in their case the 
male and the female  are brought  together  solely  with the object  of breeding  from 
them.  Man and woman  should  regard  it sacred  duty to keep apart  from the 
moment  of conception  up to the time when  the child is weaned.  But we go on with 
our fatal merry -making  blissfully  forgetful  of that sacred  obligation.  This almost 
incurable  disease  enfeebles  our mind and leads  us to an early grave, after  making  
us drag a miserable  existence for a short  while.  Married people  should  understand  
the true function  of marriage, and should  not violate  Brahmacharya except  with a 
view to progeny.  
But this is so difficult  under  our present  conditions  of life. Our diet, our  ways of 
life, our  common  talk, and our environments  are all equally  calcul ated to rouse  
animal  passions; and sensuality is like a poison  eating  into our vitals.  Some people  
may doubt the possibility of our being  able to free ourselves  from this bondage.  
This book is written  not for those  who go about with such doubting of heart,  but 
only for those who are  really in earnest, and who have courage  to take active  
steps  for self-improvement.  Those  who are quite  content  with their present abject  
condition  will find this tedious  even to read; but I hope it will be some  service  to 
those  who have realized  and are disgusted  with their own miserable  plight.  
From  all that has been said it follows  that those  who are still unmarried  should  try 
to remain  so; but  if they cannot  help marrying, they should  defer  it as long as 
possible.  Young  men, f or instance, should  take a vow to remain  unmarried  till the 
age of twenty- five or thirty.  We cannot  consider  here all the advantages  other  
than physical  which  they will reap and which  are as it were  added unto the rest. 
My request  to those  parents  who read this chapter  is that they should  not tie a 
millstone  round  the necks  of their children  by marrying  them  young.  They should  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 160 look to the welfare  of the rising  generation, and  not merely  seek to pamper  their 
own vanity.  They should  cast aside  all silly notio ns of family  pride  or 
respectability, and cease  to indulge  in such heartless  practices.  Let them  rather, if  
they are true well- wishers  of their children, look  to their physical, mental  and 
normal  improvement.  What  greater  disservice  can they do to their progeny  than 
compel  them  to enter  upon married life, with  all its tremendous  responsibilities  
and cares, while  they are mere  children ? 
Then again  the true laws of health  demand  that the man who loses his wife, as  
well as the woman  that loses her husband, sho uld remain  single  ever after.  There  
is a difference  of opinion  among  medical  men as to whether  young  men and 
women  need ever let their vital energy  escape, some  answering  the question  in 
the affirmative, others  in negative.  But while  doctors  thus disagree  we must not 
give way to over-indulge  from an idea that we are supported by medical  authority.  
I can affirm, without the slightest  hesitation, from  my own experience  as well as 
that of others, that sexual  enjoyment  is not only not necessary  for, but  is 
positively injurious  to health.  All the strength  of body and mind that has taken  
long to acquire  is lost all at once by a single  dissipation  of the vital energy.  It 
takes  a long time to regain  this lost vitality, and even then there  is no saying  that 
it can be thoroughly  recovered.  A broken  mirror may be mended and made  to do 
its work, but  it can never  be anything  but a broken  mirror.  
As has already been pointed out, the  preservation  of our vitality  is impossible  
without  pure air, pure  water, pure  and wholesome  food, as  well as pure thoughts.  
So vital indeed is the relation  between  health  and morals  that we can never  be 
perfectly healthy unless  we lead a clean  life. The earnest  man, who, forgetting  
the errors  of the past, begins  to live a life of purity, will  be able to reap the fruit 
of it straightaway.  Those  who practice  true Brahmacharya even for a short  period  
will see how their body and mind improve  steadily in strength  and power, and they 
will not at any cost be willing  to part with this treasure.  I myself  have been guilty  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 161 of lapses  even after having  fully understood the value  of Brahmacharya, and have 
of course  paid dearly for it. I am filled  with shame  and remorse  when  I think  of the 
terrible  contrast between  my condition  before  and after these  lapses.  But from 
the errors  of the past I have now learnt to preserve  this treasure  intact, and I fully 
hope, with  God’s  grace  to continue  to preserve  it in the future; for I  have, in  my 
own person, experienced  the inestimable  benefits of  Brahmach arya.  I was married  
early, and had become  the father  of children  as a mere  youth.  When  at length, I  
awoke  to the reality of my situation, I  found  that I was steeped in ignorance  about  
the fundamental  laws of our being.  I shall consider  myself  amply rewarded  for 
writing  this chapter  if at least a single  reader  takes  a warning  from my failings  and 
experiences, and  profits  thereby.  Many people  have told – and I also believe it – 
that I am full of energy  and enthusiasm, and  that I am by no means  weak  in mind; 
some  even accuse  me of strength  bordering  on obstinacy.  Nevertheless  there  is 
still bodily and mental  ill-health  as a legacy of the past.  And yet when  compared  
with my friends, I  may call myself  healthy  and strong.  If even after twenty years  
of sensual  enjoyment, I  have been able to reach  this state, how  much  better  off 
should  I have been if I had kept myself  pure during  those  twenty years  as well?  It is 
my full conviction, that if only I had lived a life of unbroken Brahmacharya all 
through, my  energy  and enthusiasm  would  have been thousandfold  greater  and I 
should  have been able to devote  them  all to the furtherance  of my country’s  cause  
as my own. If an imperfect  Brahmachari  like myself  can reap such benefit, how  
much  more  wonderful  must be the gain in power – physical, mental, as  well as 
moral – that unbroken Brahmacharya can bring  to us. 
When  so strict  is the law of Brahmacharya what shall we say of those  guilty  of the 
unpardonable  sin of illegitimate  sexual  enjoyment ? The evil arising  from adultery  
and prostitution  is a vital question  of religion  and morality and cannot be fully 
dealt with in a treatise  on health.  Here we are only concerned  to point out how 
thousands  who are guilty of these  sins are afflicted by venereal  diseases.  God is Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 162 merciful  in this that the punishment  swiftly overtakes  sinners.  Their  short  span of 
life is spent in abject bondage  to quacks  in a futile  quest after a remedy for their 
ills. If adultery  and prostitution  disappeared, at least half the present  number  of 
doctors  would  find their occupation  gone. So inextricably indeed has venereal  
disease  caught  mankind in its clutches  that thoughtful  medical  men have been 
forced  to admit, that so long as adultery  and prostitution  continue, there  is no 
hope for the human race, all  the discoveries  of curative  medicine notwithstanding.  
The medicines  for these  disease  are so poisonous  that although  they may appear  
to have done some  good for the time being, they give rise to other  and still more  
terrible  diseases  which  are transmitted from generation  to generation.  
No one need therefore  despair.  My Mahatmaship is worthless.  It is due to my 
outward  activities, due  to my politics  which  is the least part of me and is 
therefore  evanescent.  What  is of abiding  worth  is my insistence  on truth, non -
violence  and Brahmacharya, which  is the real part of me. That permanent part of 
me, however, small, is  not to be despised.  It is my all. I prize  even the failures  
and disillusionments  which  are but steps  towards  success.  
(Extract from Self-restraint  v. self-indulgence  by M. K. Gandh i, Navajivan). 
 
Hindu- Muslim  Unity  
I am one of those  who do not consider  caste  to be a harmful  institution.  In its 
origin, caste  was a wholesome  custom  and promoted national  well- being.  In my 
opinion, the  idea that inter-dining  or intermarrying  is necessa ry for national  
growth, is  a superstition  borrowed  from the West.  Eating  is a process  just as vital 
as the other  sanitary necessities  of life. And if mankind  had not, much to its harm, 
made  of eating  a fetish  and indulgence, we  would  have performed  the operation  
of eating  in private  even as one performs  the other  necessary  functions  of life in 
private.  Indeed  the highest  culture  in Hinduism  regards  eating  in that light and Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 163 there  are thousands  of Hindus  still living  who will not eat their food in the 
presenc e of anybody.  I can recall  the names  of several  cultured  men and women  
who ate their food in entire  privacy but who never  had any ill will against anybody  
and who lived on the friendliest  terms  with all. 
Intermarriage  is a still more  difficult  question.  If brothers  and sisters  can live on 
the friendl est footing  without  ever thinking  of marrying  each other, I  can see no 
difficulty  in my daughter  regarding  every  Mohammedan  as a brother  and vice 
versa.  I hold strong  views  on religion  and on marriage.  The greater  restraint we 
exercise with regard to our appetites  whether  about eating  or marrying, the  
better  we become  from a religious  standpoint.  I should  despair  of ever cultivating  
amicable  relations  with the world, if  I had to recognize  the right or the proprie ty 
of any young  man offering  his hand in marriage  to my daughter  or to regard  it as 
necessary  for me to dine with anybody and everybody.  I claim  that I am living  on 
terms  of friendliness  with the whole  world.  I have never  quarrelled  with a single  
Mohammedan  or Christian, but for years  I have taken  nothing  but fruits  in 
Mohammedan  or Christian  households.  I would  most certainly  decline  to eat 
cooked  food from the same plate  with my son or to drink  water  of a cup which  his 
lips have touched  and which  has not been washed.  But the restraint or the 
exclusiveness  exercised  in these  matters  by me has never  affected the closest  
companionship  with the Mohammedan  or the Christian  friends  or my sons.  
But interdining  and intermarriage  have never  been a bar to disunion, quarrels  and 
worse.  The Pandavas  and the Kauravas  flew at one another’s  throats  without  
compunction  although  they inter-dined and intermarried.  The bitterness  between  
the English  and the Germans  has not yet died out. 
The fact is that intermarriage  and interdining  are not necessary  factors  in 
friendship  and unity  though they are often  emblems  thereof.  But insistence  on 
either  the one or the other  can easily become  and is to-day a bar to Hindu -
Mohammedan  Unity.  If we make  ourselves  believe  that Hindus  and Mohammedans  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 164 cannot  be one unless  they interdine or intermarry, we  would  be creating  an 
artificial  barrier between  us which  it might  be almost impossible  to remove.  And it 
would  be seriously  interfere with the growing  unity  between  Hindus  and 
Mohammedans  if, for example, Mohammedan  youths  consider  it lawful  to court  
Hindu  girls.  The Hindu  parents  will not, even  if they suspected any such thing, 
freely  admit Mohammedans  to their homes  as they have begun  to do now. In my 
opinion, it  is necessary  for Hindu  and Mohammedan  young  men to recognize  this 
limitation.  
I hold it to be utterly impossible  for Hindus  and Mohammedans  to intermarry  and 
yet retain  intact  each other’s  religion.  And the true beauty of Hindu -Mohammedan  
Unity  lies in each remaining  true to his own religion  and yet being  true to each 
other.  For, we  are thinking  of Hindus  and Mohammedans  even of the most 
orthodox  type being  unable  to regard one another  as natural  enemies  as they have 
done hitherto.  
What  then does the Hindu -Mohammedan  Unity  consist  in and how can it be best 
promoted?  The answer  is simple.  It consists  in our having  a common  purpose, a  
common  goal and common  sorrows.  It is best promoted by co-operating  to reach  
the common  goal, by  sharing  one another’s  sorrows  and by mutual  toleration.  A 
common  goal we have.  We wish this great country  of ours to be greater  and self-
governing.  We have enough sorrows  to share.  And to-day seeing  that the 
Mohammedans  are deeply touched  on the question  of Khilafat  and their case is 
just nothing  can be so powerful  for winning  Mohammedan  friendship  for the Hindu  
as to give his whole -hearted support to the Mohammedan  claim.  No amount  of 
drinking  out of the same  cup or dining  out of the same  bowl can bind the two as 
this help in the Khilafat question.  
And mutual  toleration  is a necessity  for all time and for all races.  We cannot  live 
in peace  if the Hindu  will not tolerate  the Mohammedan  form of worship  of God 
and his manners  and customs  or if the Mohammedans  will be impatient of Hindu  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 165 idolatory  or cow-worship.  It is not necessary  for toleration  that I must approve  of 
what I tolerate.  I heartily dislike  drinking, meat -eating  and smoking, but  I tolerate  
all these  in Hindus, Mohammedans  and Christians  even as I expect  them  to 
tolerate  my abstinence  from all these  although  they may dislike  it. All the quarrels  
between  the Hindus  and the Mohammedans  have arisen  from each wanting  to 
force  the other  to his view.1
 
Monoculture  in Education  
English  is to-day studied because  of its commercial  and so-called  political  value.  
Our boys think, and  rightly in the present  circumstances, that without  English  they 
cannot  get Government  service.  Girls are taught  English  as a passport  to marriage.  
I know  several  instances  of women  wanting  to learn  English  to that they may be 
able to talk Englishmen  in English.  I know  husbands  who are sorry that their wives  
cannot  talk to them  and their friends  in English.  I know  families  in which  English  is 
being  made  the mother  tongue.  Hundreds  of youths  believe that without  a 
knowledge  of English  freedom  for India is practically impossible.  The canker  has so 
eaten  into society  that, in  many  cases, the  only meaning  of Education  is a 
knowledge  of English.  All these  are for me signs of our slavery and degradation.  It 
is unbearable  to me that the vernaculars  should be crushed  and starved as they 
have been.  I cannot  tolerate  the idea of parents  writing  to their children, or  
husbands  writing  their wives, not  in their own vernaculars, but in English.  I hope I 
am as great a believer  in free air as the great poet.  I do not want my house  to be 
walled  in on all sides and my windows  to be stuffed.  I want the cultures  of all the 
lands  to be blown  about  my house  as freely  as possible.  But I refuse  to be blown  
off my feet by any.1  
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 166 The Untouchables  
The devil succeeds  only by receiving  help from his fellows.  He always  takes  
advantage  of the weakest  spots  in our natures  in order  to gain mastery over us. 
Even so does the Government  retain  its control  over us through our weaknesses  or 
vices.  And if we would  render  ourselves  proof against its machinations, we  must 
remove  our weaknesses.  It is for that reason  that I have called  non-co-operation  a 
process  of purification.  As soon as that process  is completed, this  Government  
must fall to pieces  for want of the necessary  environment , just  as mosquitoes  
cease  to haunt  a place  whose  cesspools  are filled  up and dried.  
Has not a just Nemesis  overtaken  us for the crime  of untouchability ? Have we not 
reaped as we have sown ? Have we not practiced  Dyerism  and O’Dwayerism  on our 
own kith and kin? We have segregated the pariah  and we are in turn segregated in 
the British  Colonies.  We deny him the use of public  wells; we  throw  the leavings  of 
our plates  at him. His very shadow  pollutes  us. Indeed there  is no charge  that the 
pariah  cannot  fling in our faces  and which  we do not fling in the faces  of 
Englishmen.  
How is this blot on Hinduism  to be removed ? ‘Do unto others  as you would  that 
others  should  do unto you.’ I have often  told English  officials  that, if  they are 
friends  and servants  of India,  they should  come  down  from their pedestal, cease  to 
be patrons, demonstrate  by their loving  deeds  what they are in every  respect  our 
friends, and believe us to be equals  in the same  sense  they believe fellow  
Englishmen to be their equals.  After  the experi ences  of the Punjab  and the 
Khilafat, I  have gone a step further  and asked them  to repent  and to change  their 
hearts.  Even so it is necessary  for us Hindus  to repent  of the wrong  we have done, 
to alter our behaviour  towards  those  whom  we have ‘suppressed’  by a system  as 
devilish  as we believe  the English  system  of the government  of India to be. We 
must not throw  a few miserable  schools  at them : we must not adopt  the air of 
superiority towards  them.  We must treat them  as our blood  brothers  as they are in Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 167 fact. We must return  to them  the inheritance  of which  we have robbed them.  And 
this must not be the act of a few English -knowing  reformers  merely, but  it must be 
a conscious  voluntary  effort  on the part of masses.  We may not wait till eternity  
for this much  belated reformation.  We must aim at bringing  it about within  this 
year of grace, probation, preparation, and tapasya.  It is a reform  not to follow  
Swaraj  but to precede  it. 
Untouchability is not a sanction  of religion, it  is a device  of Satan.  The Devil has 
always  quoted scriptures.  But scriptures  cannot  transcend Reason  and Truth.  They 
are intended  to purify Reason  and illuminate  Truth.  I am not going  to burn a 
spotless  horse, because  the Vedas  are reported  to have advised, tolerated, or  
sanctioned the sacrifice.  For me the Vedas  are divine  and unwritten.  ‘The letter  
killeth.’  It is the spirit  that giveth  the light.  And the spirit  of the Vedas  is purity, 
truth, innocence, chastity, simplicity, forgiveness, godliness, and all that makes  a 
man or woman  noble  and brave.  There  is neither  nobility nor bravery in treating  
the great and uncomplaining  scavengers  of the nation  as worse  than dogs to be 
despised and spat upon.  Would  that God gave us the strength  and the wisdom  to 
become  voluntary  scavengers  of the natio n as the ‘suppressed’  classes  are forced  
to be There  are Augean  stables  enough and to spare  for us to clean.1 
How am I to plead with those  who regard any contact  with the members  of the 
suppressed  community  as entailing  defilement  and of which  they cannot  be 
cleansed  without necessary  ablutions, and  who thus regard omission  to perform  
the ablutions  a sin? I can only place  before  them  my innermost  convictions.  
I regard  untouchability as the greatest blot on Hinduism.  This idea was not brought  
home  to me by my bitter  experiences  during  the South  African  struggle.  It is not 
due to the fact that I was once an agnostic.  It is equally wrong  to think, as  some  
people  do, that I have taken  my views  from my study of Christian  religious  
literature.  These  views  date as far back as the time when  I was neither  enamoured  
of, nor  was acquainted with, the  Bible  or the followers  of the Bible.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 168 I was hardly yet twelve  when  this idea had dawned on me. A scavenger  named  
Uka, an  untouchable, used to attend our house  for cleaning  latrines.  Often  I would  
ask my mother  why it was wrong  to touch  him, why  I was forbidden  to touch  him. 
If I accidentally touched  Uka, I  was asked to perform  the ablutions, and  though I 
naturally obeyed, it was not without  smilingly  protesting  that untouchabi lity was 
not sanctioned by religion, that it was impossible  that it should  be so. I was a very 
dutiful  and obedient  child and so far as it was consistent  with respect  for parents, 
I often  had tussles  with them  on this matter.  I told my mother  that she was 
entirely  wrong  in considering  physical  contact  with Uka as sinful.  
While  at school  I would  often  happen  to touch  the ‘untouchables’, and  as I never  
would  conceal  the fact from my parents, my mother  would  tell me that the 
shortest  cut to purification  after the unholy  touch  was to cancel  the touch  by 
touching  any Mussulman passing  by. And simply out of  reverence and regard  for my 
mother  I often  did so, but  never  did so believing  it to be a religious  obligation.  
After  some  time we shifted  to Porebander, where  I made  my first acquaintance  
with Sanskrit.  I was not yet put to an English  school, and  my brother  and I were 
placed  in charge  of a Brahman , who  taught us Ramruksha  and Vishnu Punjar.  The 
tests ‘jale  Vishnuh’ , ‘sthake Vishnuh’  (there  is the Lord (present)  in water, there  
is the Lord (present)  in earth)  have never  gone out of my memory.  A motherly old 
dame  used to live close  by. Now it happened that I was very timid  then, and  would  
conjure  up ghosts  and goblins  whenever  the lights  went out, and it was dark.  The 
old mother, to  disabuse  me of fears, suggested  that I should  mutter  the Ramraksha  
texts  whenever  I was afraid, and all evil spirits  would  fly away.  This I did and, as  I 
thought, with  good effect.  I could  never  believe  then that there  was any text in 
the Ramraksha pointing  to the contact  of the ‘untouchables’  as a sin. I did not 
understand its meaning  then, or  understood it very imperfectly.  But I was 
confident  that Ramraksha, which  could  destroy all fears  of ghosts, could  not be 
countenancing  any such thing as fear of contact  with the ‘untouchables’.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 169 The Ramayana used to be regularly  read in our family.  A Brahmin  called  Ladha  
Maharaj  used to read it. He was stricken  with leprosy, and he was confident  that a 
regular  reading  of the Ramayana would  cure him of leprosy, and, indeed, he  was 
cured  of it. ‘How  can the Ramayana’, I  thought to  myself, ‘in  which  one who is 
regarded nowadays  as an untouchable  took Rama across  the Ganges  in his boat, 
countenance  the idea of any  human beings  being  untouchable  on the ground  that 
they were polluted souls? The fact that we addressed God ad the ‘purifier  of the 
polluted’  and by similar  appellations, shows  that it is a sin to regard  anyone  born 
in Hinduism  as polluted or untouchable – that it is satanic  to do so. I have hence 
been never  tired of repeating  that it is a great sin. I do not pretend that this thing  
had crystallized as a conviction  in me at the age of twelve, but I do say that I did 
then regard untouchability as a sin. I narrate  this story  for the information  of the 
Vaishnavas  and Orthodox  Hindus.  
I have always  claimed  to be a Sanatani  Hindu.  It is not that I am quite  innocent  of 
the scriptures.  I am not a profound  scholar  of Sanskrit.  I have read the Vedas and 
the Upanishads only in translations. Naturally  theref ore, mine  is not a scholarly  
study of them.  My knowledge  of them  is in no way profound, but I have studied  
them  as I should  do as a Hindu  and I claim  to have grasped their true spirit.  By the 
time I had reached  the age of 21, I had studied  other  religions  also. 
There  was a time when  I was wavering  between  Hinduism  and Christianity.  When  I 
recovered  my balance  of mind, I  felt that to me salvation  was possible  only 
through the Hindu  religion  and my faith in Hinduism  grew deeper  and more  
enlightened.  
But even then I believed  that untouchability was no part of Hinduism; and  that, if  
it was, such  Hinduism  was not for me. 
I believe that caste has saved Hinduism from disintegration.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 170 But like every  other  institution, it  has suffered  from excrescences.  I consider  the 
four divisions  alone  to be fundamental, natural, and essential.  The innumerable  
sub-castes  are sometimes  a convenience, often a hindrance.  The sooner  there  is 
fusion  the better.  The silent  destruction  and reconstruction  to sub-castes  have 
ever gone on and are bound  to continue.  Social  pressure  and public  opinion  can be 
trusted to deal with the problem.  But I am certainly against any attempt at 
destroying  the fundamental  divisions.  The caste  system  is not based on inequality, 
there  is no question  of inferio rity, and so far as there  is any such question  arising, 
as in Madras, Maharashtra, or  elsewhere, the tendency should  undoubtedly be 
checked.  But there  appears to  be no valid reason  for ending  the system  because  of 
its abuse.  It lends  itself  easily  to refor mation.  The spirit  of democracy, which  is 
fast spreading  throughout  India and the rest of the world, will, without  a shadow  
of doubt, purge  the institution  of the idea of predominance  and subordination.  
The spirit  of democracy is not a mechanical  thing  to be adjusted by abolition  of 
forms.  It requires  change  of the heart.  If caste  is a bar to the spread of the spirit, 
the existence of five religions  in India – Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, 
Zoroastrianism, and  Judaism – is equally  a bar. The spirit  of democ racy requires  
the inculcation  of the spirit  of brotherhood, and I can find no difficulty  in 
considering  a Christian  ===or  a Mohammedan  to be my brother  in absolutely the 
same  sense  as a blood  brother, and  Hinduism  that is responsible  for the doctrine  of 
the caste  is also responsible  for the inculcation  of the essential  brotherhood, not  
merely  of man but even of all that lives.  
One of my correspondents  suggests that we should  abolish  the caste  but adopt the 
class system  of Europe – meaning  thereby  I suppose  that the idea of heredity  in 
caste  should be  rejected.  I am inclined  to think  that the law of heredity is an 
eternal  law and any attempt to alter that law must lead, as  it has before  led, to  
utter  confusion.  I can see very great  use in considering  a Brahmi n to be always  a 
Brahmin  throughout  his life. If he does not behave  himself  like a Brahmin, he  will Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 171 naturally cease  to command  the respect  that is due to the real Brahmin.  It is easy 
to imagine  the innumerable  difficulties  if one were to set up a court  of 
punishments  and rewards, degradation  and promotion.  If Hindu  believe, as  they 
must believe  in reincarnation, transmigration, they must know  that nature  will, 
without  any possibility of mistake, adjust the balance  by degrading  a Brahmin, if  
he misbehaves  himself, by  reincarnating  him in a lower  division, and  translating  
one who lives the life of a Brahmin  in his present  incarnation  to Brahmin -hood in 
his next.1
 
Hinduism  
In dealing  with the problem  of untouchability, I  have asserted my claim  to being  a 
Sanat ani Hindu  with greater  emphasis  than hitherto, and yet there  are things  
which  are commonly  done in the name  of Hinduism, which  I disregard.  I have no 
desire  to be called  Sanatani  Hindu  or any other, if  I am not such.  And I have 
certainly no desire  to steal in a reform  or an abuse  under  cover  of a great faith.  
It is therefore  necessary  for me once for all distinctly  to give my meaning  of 
Sanatana  Hinduism.  The word  Sanatana is used in its natural  sense.  
I call myself  a Sanatani  Hindu, because,    
(1) I believ e in the Vedas, the  Upnishads , the  Puranas  and all that goes by the 
name  of Hindu  scriptures, and therefore  in avatars  and rebirth.  
(2) I believe  in the Varnashrama dharma in a sense  in my opinion  strictly  Vedic, 
but not in its present  popular  and crude  sense. 
(3) I believe  in the protection  of the cow in its much  larger  sense  than the 
popular.  
(4) I do not disbelieve  in idol-worship.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 172 The reader  will note that I have purposely refrained  from using  the word divine  
origin  in reference to the Vedas  or any other scriptures.  For I do not believe in the 
exclusive  divinity  of the Vedas.  I believe the Bible, the  Koran, and  the Zend Avesta  
to be as much divinely  inspired  as the Vedas.  My belief  in the Hindu  scriptures  
does not require  me to accept  every  word  and every verse  as divinely  inspired.  Nor 
do I claim  to have any first-hand knowledge  of these  wonderful  books.  But I do 
claim  to know  and feel the truths  of the essential  teaching  of the scriptures.  I 
decline  to be bound  by any interpretation, however  learned  it may be, if  it is 
repugnant  to reason  or moral  sense.  I do most emphatically repudiate  the claim (if  
they advance  any such)  of the present  Shankaracharyas  and Shastris  to give a 
correct  interpretation  of the Hindu  scriptures.  On the contrary, I  believe  that our 
present  knowledge  of these  books  is in a most chaotic  state.  I believe implicity  in 
the Hindu  aphorism, that no one truly knows  the Shastras  who has not attained  
perfection  in Innocence (Ahimsa), Truth (Satya)  and Self-Control (Brahmacharya)  
and who has not renounced  all acquisition  or possession  of wealth.  I believe  in the 
institution  of Gurus, but  in this age millions  must go without  a Guru, because  it is 
a rare thing  to find a combination  of perfect  purity and perfect  learning.  But one 
need not despair of ever knowing  the truth  of one’s  religion, because  the 
fundamentals  of Hinduism  as of every  great religion  are unchangeable , and easily  
understood.  Every  Hindu  believes  in God and His Oneness, in rebirth  and salvation.  
But that which  distinguishes  Hinduism  from every  other  religion  is its cow 
protection, more  than its Varnarshrama.  
Varnashrama is, in my opinion, inherent  in human nature, and Hinduism  has simply 
reduced  it to a science.  It does attach  to birth.  A man cannot  change  his varna by 
choice.  Not to abide  by one’s  varna  is to disregard the law of heredity.  The 
division, however, into  innumerable  castes  is an unwarranted liberty taken  with 
the doctrine.  The four divisions  are all-sufficing.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 173 I do not believe that interdining  or even intermarriage  necessarily  deprives  a man 
of his status  that his birth has given  him. The four divisions  define  a man’s  calling, 
they do not restrict  or regulate  social  intercourse.  The divisions  define  duties, 
they confer  no privileges.  It is, I hold, against the genius  of Hinduism  to arrogate  
to oneself  a higher  status  or assign  to another  a lower.  All are born to serve  God’s  
creation, a  Brahman  with his knowledge, a  Kshatriya  with his power  of protection, 
a Vaishya with his commercial  ability and a Shudra  with bodily labour.  This, 
however, does  not mean  that a Brahman  for instance  is absolved from bodily  
labour, or  the duty of protecting  himself  and others.  His birth makes  a Brahman  
predominantly  a man of knowledge, the  fittest  by heredity and training  to impart  
it to others.  There  is nothing, again, to  prevent  the Shudra  from acquiring  all the 
knowledge  he wishes.  Only, he  will best serve  with his body and need not envy 
others  their special  qualities  for service.  But a Brahman  who claims superiority  by 
right of knowled ge falls and has no knowledge.  And so with the others  who pride  
themselves  upon their special  qualities.  Varnashrama is self-restraint and 
conservation  and economy  of energy.  
Though therefore  Varnashrama is not affected  by interdining  or intermarriage, 
Hinduism  does most emphatically discourage  interdining  and intermarriage  
between  divisions.  Hinduism  reached  the highest  limit of self-restraint.  It is 
undoubtedly  a religion  of renunciation of the flesh, so  that the spirit  may be set 
free. It is no part of a Hindu’s  duty to dine with his son. And by restricting  his 
choice  of a bride  to a particular  group, he  exercises  rare self-restraint.  Hinduism  
does not regard  a married  state  as by any means  essential  for salvation.  Marriage  
is a ‘fall’ even as birth is a ‘fall’.  Salvation  is freedom  from birth and hence  death  
also. Prohibition  against intermarriage  and interdining  is essential  for a rapid  
evolution  of the soul. But this self-denial  is no test of varna.  A Brahman  may 
remain  a Brahman, though he may dine with his Shudra  brother, if  he has not left 
off his duty of service  by knowledge.  It follows  from what I have said above, that  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 174 restraint in matters  of marriage  and dining  is not based upon notions  of 
superiority.  A Hindu  who refuses  to dine with another  from a sense  of superiority  
misrepresents  his Dharma.  
Unfortunately to-day, Hinduism  seems  to consist  merely  in eating  and not eating.  
Once  I horrified  a pious  Hindu  by taking  toast at a Mussulman’s  house.  I saw that 
he was pained to see me pouring  milk into a cup handed  by a Mussulman friend , 
but his anguish knew  no bounds  when  he saw me taking  toast at the Mussulman’s  
hands.  Hinduism  is in danger  of losing  its substance, if  it resolves  itself  into a 
matter  of elaborate  rules as to what  and with whom  to eat. Abstemiousness  from 
intoxicating  drinks  and drugs, and from all kinds  of foods, especially meat, is  
undoubtedly a great aid to the evolution  of the spirit, but it is by no means  an end 
in itself.  Many a man eating  meat and with everybody, but living  in the fear of 
God, is  nearer  his freedom  than a man religiously  abstaining  from meat  and many  
other  things, but  blaspheming  God in every  one of his acts. 
The central  fact of Hinduism  however  is cow protection.  Cow protection  to me is 
one of the most wonderful  phenomena  in human evolution.  It takes  the human  
being  beyond his species.  The cow to me means  the entire  sub-human world.  Man 
through the cow is enjoined  to realize  his identity with all that lives.  Why the cow 
was selected  for apotheosis  is obvious  to me. The cow was in India the best 
companion.  She was the giver of plenty.  Not only did she give milk, but  she also 
made  agriculture  possible.  The cow is a poem  of pity. One reads  pity in the gentle  
animal.  She is the mother  to millions  of Indian  mankind.  Protec tion of the cow 
means  protection  of the whole  dumb creation  of God. The ancient  seer, whoever  
he was, began  with the cow. The appeal  of the lower  order  of creation  is all the 
more  forcible  because  it is speechless.  Cow protection  is the gift of Hinduism  to 
the world.  And Hinduism  will live so long as there  are Hindus  to protect  the cow. 
The way to protect  is to die for her. It is a denial  of Hinduism  and Ahimsa to kill a 
human being  to protect a cow. Hindus  are enjoined  to protect  the cow by their Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 175 tapasya, by self-purification, by self-sacrifice.  The present -day cow protection  has 
degenerated into a perpetual  feud with the Mussulmans, whereas  cow protection  
means  conquering  the Mussulmans  by our love. A Mussulman friend  sent me some  
time ago a book detailing  the inhumanities  practiced by us on the cow and her 
progeny; how  we bleed her to take the last drop of milk from her, how  we starve  
her emaciation, how  we ill-treat the calves, how  we deprive  them  of their portion  
of milk, how  cruelly  we treat  the oxen, h ow we castrate  them, how  we beat them, 
how we overload  them.  If they had speech, they  would  bear witness  to our crimes  
against them  which  would  stagger  the world.  By every  act of cruelty  to our cattle, 
we disown  God and Hinduism.  I do not know  that the condition  of the cattle  in any 
other  part of the world  is so bad as in unhappy  India.  We may not blame  the 
Englishmen for this. We may not plead poverty in our defence.  Criminal  negligence  
is the only cause  of the miserable  condition  of our cattle.  Our Panjar apoles, 
though they are an answer  to our instinct  mercy, are  a clumsy  demonstration  of its 
execution.  Instead of being  model  dairy  farms  and great profitable  national  
institutions, they are  merely  depots  for receiving  decrepit  cattle.  
Hindus  will be judged  not by their tilaks, not by the correct chanting  of mantras, 
not by their pilgrimages, not by their most punctilious  observance  of caste  rules 
but by their ability  to protect  the cow. Whilst  professing  the religion  of cow 
protection, we  have enslaved  the cow and her progeny, and have become  slaves  
ourselves.  
It will now be understood why I consider  myself  a Sanatani  Hindu.  I yield to none 
in my regard  for the cow. I have made  the Khilafat  cause  my own, because  I see 
that through its preservation  full prote ction  can be secured  for the cow. I do not 
ask my Mussulman friends  to save the cow in consideration  of my service.  My 
prayer  ascends  daily to God Almighty, that my service  of a cause  I hold to be just 
may appear  so pleasing  to Him, that he may change  the hearts  of the Mussulmans, Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 176 and fill them  with pity for their Hindu  neighbours  and make  them  save the animal  
the latter  hold dear as life itself.  
I can no more  describe  my feeling  for Hinduism  than for my own wife.  She moves  
me as no other  woman  in the world  can. Not that she has no faults; I  daresay, she  
has many more  than I see myself.  But the feeling  of an indissoluble  bond is there.  
Even so I feel for and about Hinduism  with all its faults  and limitations.  
Nothing  elates  me so much  as the music  of the Gita or the Ramayana by Tulsidas, 
the only two books  in Hinduism  I may be said to know.  When  I fancied  I was taking  
my last breath, the  Gita was my solace.  I know  the vice that is going  on to-day in 
all the great Hindu  shrines, but  I love them  in spite of their unspeakable  failings.  
There  is an interest  which  I take in them  and which  I take in other.  I am a 
reformer through  and through.  But my zeal never  takes  me to the rejection  of any 
of the essential  things  of Hinduism.  I have said I do not disbelieve  in idol worship.  
An idol does not excite  any feeling  of veneration  in me. But I think  that idol 
worship  is part of human nature.  We hanker  after symbolism.  Why should  one be 
more  composed  in a church  than elsewhere ? Images  are an aid to worship.  No 
Hindu  consid ers an image  to be God. I do not consider  idol worship  a sin. 
It is clear  from the foregoing  that Hinduism  is not an exclusive  religion.  In it there  
is room  for the worship  of all the prophets  of the world.  It is not a missionary  
religion  in the ordinary  sense of the term.  It has no doubt absorbed many  tribes  in 
its fold, but this absorption  has been of an evolutionary, imperceptible  character.  
Hinduism  tells every  one to worship  God according  to his own faith or Dharma, and  
so it lives at peace  with all the religions.  
That being  my conception  of Hinduism , I have never  been able to reconcile  myself  
to untouchability.  I have always  regarded  it as an excrescence.  It is true that it 
has been handed down  to us from generations, but so are  many evil practices  even 
to this day. I should  be ashamed  to think  that dedication  of girls to virtual  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 177 prostitution  was a part of Hinduism.  Yet it is practiced by Hindus  in many  parts  of 
India.  I consider  it positive  irreligion  to sacrifice  goats  to Kali and do not consider  
it a part of Hinduism.  Hinduism  is a growth  of ages.  The very name, Hinduism, was  
given  to the religion of  the people  of Hindustan  by foreigners.  There  was no doubt  
at one time sacrifice  of animals  offered  in the name  of religion.  But it is not 
religion, much less is it Hindu  religion.  And so also, it  seems  to me that when  cow 
protection  became  an article  of faith our ancestors, those  who persisted in eating  
beef were excommunicated.  The civil strife  must have been fierce.  Social  boycott  
was applied not only to the recalcitrants, but their sins were visited  upon their 
children  also. The practice  which  had probably  its origin  in good intentions  
hardened into usage, and even verses  crept  into our sacred  books  given  the 
practice  a permanence  wholly  undeserved  and still less justified.  Whether  my 
theory is correct  or not, untouchability is repugnant  to reason  and to the instinct  
of mercy, pity or love. A religion  that establishes  the worship  of the cow cannot  
possibly countenance  or warrant  a cruel  and inhuman boycot t of human beings.  
And I should  be content  to be torn to pieces  rather  than disown  the suppressed  
classes.  Hindus  will certainly  never  deserve freedom, not  get it if they allow  their 
noble  religion  to be disgraced by the retention  of the taint of untouchabilty.  And 
as I love Hinduism  dearer  than life itself, the  taint has become  for me an 
intolerable  burden.  Let us not deny God by denying  to a fifth of our race the right 
of association  on an equal  footing.1 
 
1. Young  India, Vol. III  
                                               
 
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 178  
 
   
 
 
Part Seven  
------------------------------------------------- -------------  
Extracts  from Gandhi’s  Diary kept during  
His residence  in Delhi  after  India had 
Achieved  Dominion  Status  up to the time 
Of his Assassination  
------- ------------------------------------------------------  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 179 EXTRACTS  FROM  THE DELHI  DIARY  
10th September  1947 
Is it not our shame  as a nation  that there  should  be any refugee  problem  at all? 
Qaid- e-Azam  Jinnah, Lia quatsaheb and other  Pakistan  leaders  have proclaimed in 
common  with Pandit Nehru and Sardar  Patel  that the minorities  will be treated in 
the respective  dominions  with the same  consideration  as the majorities.  Was this 
said by each to tickle  the world  with sweet  words, or was it meant to show to the 
world  that we mean  what we say and that we will die in the attempt to redeem  
the world.  If so, why  are the Hindus  and Sikhs  and the proud Amils  and Bhaibunds  
driven  to leave  Pakistan  which  is their home ? What  has happened in Quetta, 
Nawabshah  and Karachi ? The tales one hears  and reads  from western  Pakistan  are 
heart -breaking.  It will not do for either  party to plead  helplessness  and say it is all 
the work of goondas.  Each dominion  is bound  to take full responsibility  for the acts 
of those  who live in either  dominion.  ‘Theirs  is not to reason  why; theirs  but to do 
and die.’ No longer  do we work willy-nilly under  the crushing  weight  of 
imperialism.  But this does not mean  that there  will now be no rule of law if we are 
to face the world  squarely in the face. Are the Union  ministers  to declare  their 
bankruptcy and shamelessly  own to the world  that the people  of Delhi  or the 
refugees  will not cheerfully  and voluntarily obey the rule of law? I would  like the 
ministers  to break  in the attempt to wean  the people  from their madness  rather  
than bend.  
 
12th September  1947 
Anger  breeds  revenge and the spirit of revenge is to-day responsible  for all the 
horrible  happenings  here and elsewhere.  What  good will it to do the Muslims  to 
avenge  the happenings  in Delhi  or for the Sikhs  and the Hindus  to avenge  cruelties  
on our co-religionists  in the Frontier  and West Punjab ? If a man or a group  of men Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 180 go mad, should  everyone follow  suit? I warn the Hindus  and Sikhs  that by killing  
and loot and arson  they are destroying  their own religions.  I claim  to be a student  
of religion  and I know  that no religion  teaches  madness.  Islam  is no exception.  I 
implore  you all to stop your insane  actions  at once.  Let not future  generations  say 
that we lost the sweet  bread of freedom  because  we could  not digest it. 
Remember  that unless  we stop this madness  the name  of India will be mud in the 
eyes of the world.  
 
15th September  1947 
During  the night  as I heard what should  have been the soothing  sound  of gentle  
life-giving  rain, my  mind  went  out to the thousands  of refugees  lying about in the 
open camps  in Delhi.  I was sleeping  snugly  in a veranda protecting  me on all sides.  
But for the cruel  hand of man against his brother, these  thousands  of men, women  
and children  would  not be shelter -less and in many cases  foodless.  In some  places  
they could  not but be in knee-deep water.  Was it all inevitable ? The answer from 
within  was an emphatic  No. Was this the first fruit of freedom, just  a month -old 
baby?  These  thoughts  have haunted me throughout  these  last twenty  hours.  My 
silence  has been a blessing.  It has made  me inquire  within.  Have citizens  of Delhi  
gone mad?  Have they no humanity  left in them ? Have love of the country  and its 
freedom  no appeal  for them ? I must be pardoned for putting  the first blame  on the 
Hindus  and Sikhs.  Could  they not be men enough to stem the tide of hatred?  I 
would  urge the Muslims  of Delhi  to shed all fear, trust God and discover  all the 
arms in their possession  which  the Hindus  and Sikhs  fear they have.  Not that the 
former  too do not have any. The question  is one of degree.  Either  the minority  
rely upon God and His creature  man to do the right thing, or  rely upon their 
firearms  to defend  themselves  against those  whom  they must not trust.  
My advice  is precise  and firm. Its soundness  is manifest.  Trust  your Government  to 
defend  every  citizen  against wrong -doers, however  well armed they may be. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 181 Further, trust it to demand and get damages  for every  member  of the community  
wrongfully  dispossessed.  All that neither  Government  can do is to resurrect  the 
dead.  The people  of Delhi  will make  it difficult  to demand justice  from the 
Pakistan  Government.  Those  who seek justice  must do justice, must  have clean  
hands.  Let the Hindus  and Sikhs  take the right step and invite  the Muslims  who 
have been driven  out of their homes  to return.  If they can take this courageous  
step worthy  from every  point of view, they  immediately reduce  the refugee 
problem  to its simplest  terms.  They will command  recognition  from Pakistan, nay  
from the whole  world.  They will save Delhi  and India from disgrace  and ruin. For 
me, transfer  of millions  of Hindus  and Sikhs  and Muslims  is unthinkable.  It is 
wrong.  The wrong  of Pakistan  will be undone  by the right of a resolute  non-
transfer  of population.  I hope I shall have the courage  to stand by it, even  though 
mine may be a solitary  voice  in its favour.  
 
19th September  1947 
I visited  the Hindu  pocket  in Kucha  Tarachand surrounded  on all sides by Muslims.  
The spokesman  recited  in highly  exaggerated  language  the woes  of the Hindus  and 
ended  by saying  that the whole  of the locality  should  be denuded  of all the 
Muslims  who were mostly Leaguers  and who had carried  on a wild agitation  against 
the Hindus.  He maintained that the Hindus  should  do exactly as the Muslims  in 
Pakistan  were reported to be doing.  
I replied  that I could  not associate  myself  with the contention  that India should  
drive  out all its Muslim  population  to Pakistan  as the Muslims  of Pakistan  were  
driving  out all non-Muslims.  Two wrongs  cannot  make  one right.  I therefore  invited  
my audience  to listen  to my advice  and act bravely and fearlessly  and be proud  to 
live in the midst of a large  Muslim  population.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 182 I then went  to the Anathalaya  in Pataudi  House  and advised the responsible  parties  
to bring  back the orphans  who had been removed  out of fright.  I was told that 
there  was a shower of bullets  from the adjoining  Muslim  houses  killing  one child 
and wounding  another.  This was about the 7th of September.  Maulana  Ahmad  Said 
and other  Muslim  friends  who were accompanying  me said that the neighbouring  
Muslims  would  see to it that no harm  befell  the inmates.  The next place  was near 
the house  of Shri Bhargava who is the sole Hindu  living  in the midst of Muslims.  It 
was packed  with Muslims.  I hope that the Muslims  will fulfil my dream  as a lad of 
twelve  that the Hindus, Muslims  and the other  Indians  will live together  as 
brothers  and friends.  And finally  I ask you to join me in a prayer  that God will 
fulfil that dream, or  take me away and save me from witnessing  the awful  trage dy 
of one part of India being  inhabited by the Muslims  only and the other  part by the 
Hindus.  
 
21st September  1947 
I am not going  to argue  with this objector.  I realize  the anger  that rages  in 
people’s  hearts  to-day. The atmosphere  is so surcharged  that I think  it right to 
respect  even one objector, but by no means  does this mean  that I give up God or 
His worship  in my heart.  Prayer  demands  a pure atmosphere.  One thing  that 
everyone should  take to heart from such objections  is that those  who are anxious  
to serve  must have endless  patience  and tolerance.  One must never  seek to 
impose  one’s  views  on others.  
The Hindus  greet  me with Mahatma  Gandhiki  Jai, but they little know  that to-day 
there  can be no victory for me, nor  do I wish to live if the Hindus, Musli ms and 
Sikhs  cannot  live at peace  with one another.  I am doing  my level best to drive  
home  the truth  that there  is strength  in unity  and weakness  in disunion.  Just as a 
tree that does not bear fruit withers, so  also will my body be useless  if my service  
cannot bear the expected  fruit.  Whilst  this is  true, it is equally true that one is Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 183 bound  to work without  attachment to fruit.  Detachment  is more  fruitful  than 
attachment.  I am merely  explaining  the logic of facts.  A body that has outlived  its 
usefulness  will perish  giving  place  to a new one. The soul is imperishable  and 
continues  to take on new forms  for working  out its salvation  through  acts of 
service.  
 
23rd September  1947 
I am told that there  are still left over 18,000 Hindus  and Sikhs  in Rawalpindi  and 
30,000 in the Wah Camp.  I will repeat my advice  that they should  all be prepared  
to die rather  than leave  their homes.  The art of dying  bravely and with honour  
does not need any special  training, save  a living  faith in God. Then there  will be 
no abductions  and no forcible  conversions.  I know  that you are anxious  I should  go 
to the Punjab  at the earliest  moment.  I want to do so. But if I failed  in Delhi, it  is 
impossible  for me to succeed  in Pakistan.  For I want to go to all the parts  and 
provinces  of Pakistan  under  the protection  of no escort  save God. I will go as a 
friend  of the Muslims  as of others.  My life will be at their disposal.  I hope that I 
may cheerfully  die at the hands  of anyone  who chooses  to take my life. Then I will 
have done as I have advise d all to do. 
 
26th September  1947 
There  was a time when  India listened to me. To-day I am a back number.  I have 
been told I have no place  in the new order, where  we want machines, navy, air  
force  and what not. I can never  be a party  to that. If you can have the courage  to 
say that you will retain  freedom  with the help of the same  force  with which  you 
have won it, I am your man.  My physical  incapacity  and my depression  will vanish  
in a moment.  The Muslims  are reported to have said hanske  liya Pakistan, lark e 
lenge  Hindustan . If I had my way, I  would  never  let them  have it by force  of arms.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 184 Some dream  of converting  the whole  of India to Islam.  That will never  happen  
through war. Pakistan  can never  destroy  Hinduism.  The Hindus  alone  can destroy  
themselves  and their faith.  Similarly, if  Islam  is destroyed, it will be destroyed by 
the Muslims  in Pakistan, not by the Hindus  in Hindustan.  
 
3rd October  1947 
To-day I am getting  news  of satyagraha being  started in many places.  Often  I 
wonder  whether  the so-called  satyagraha is not really  duragraha . Whether  it is 
strikes  in mills or railways  or post offices  or movement  in some  of the states, it  
seems  as if it is a question  of seizing  power.  A virulent  poison  is leaving  society  to-
day and every  opportunity for attaining  their object  is seized  by those  who do not 
stop to consider  that means  and ends are convertible  terms.  
I would  like to refer to the fact that I am even getting  letters  asking  me to bless 
people’s  work or the starting  of movements.  In my opinion  every  good work carries  
within  it its own blessings  and does not need mine or anyone’s  backing.  A good 
man who was doing  good work and who came  to me understood my proposition  at 
once.  Truth  is always  self-evident  and it is everyone’s  duty to abide  by it all costs.  
But those  who resort  to satyagraha should  search  their hearts  and find out 
whether  it is Truth  they are seeking.  If not, then  insistence  becomes  a mockery.  I 
affirm  that those  who are seeking  to get what is not in reality theirs  cannot  
possibly abide  by ahimsa, and  Truth  cannot  be found  without  it. 
 
7th October  1947 
Many people  come  and talk to me and leave  literature  with me to the effect  that 
the popular  ministers  are acting  in an autocratic  fashion  like their British  
predecessors.  I have not talked to the ministers  in this connection.  But I am quite  
clear that nothing  for which  you have criticized  the British  Government  shall Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 185 happen  in the regime  of responsible  ministries.  Under  the British  rule the Viceroy  
could  issue ordinances  for making  laws and executing  them.  There  was hue and cry 
against the combination  of judicial  and executive functions.  Nothing  has happened  
since  to warrant  a change  in the opinion.  There  should  be no ordinance  rule. Your 
legislative  assemblies  should  be your only law-makers.  Ministers  are liable  to be 
changed  at will. Their  acts should  be subject  to review  by the courts.  They should  
do all in their power  to make  justice  cheap, expeditious  and incorruptible.  For 
that purpose  Panchayat Raj has been suggested.  It is not possible  for a high court  
to reach  lakhs  and lakhs  of people.  Only extraordinary situations  require  
emergency  legislation.  Legislative  assemblies , even  though the procedure  may 
entail  some  delay, must not be superseded  by the executive.  I have no concrete  
example  in mind. I have based my remarks  upon the correspondence  I have 
received  from various  provinces.  Therefore, while  I appeal  to the people  not to 
take the law into their own hands, I  appeal  to the ministers  to beware  of lapsing  
into the old ways which  they have condemned.  
 
20th October  1947 
It is my painful  duty to draw attention  to another  menace, if  it be one. A Britisher  
writes  in an open letter : ‘To whom  it may concern’ : 
‘Several  of us are living  in a lonely  spot in a disturbed area.  We are pure British  
and for years  we have devoted ourselves  at great personal  sacrifice  to the welfare  
of the people  of this country…..We  now find that a secret  word has gone out that 
all the British  left in India are to be murdered.  I read in the newspapers  Pandit  
Nehru’s  assura nce that the Government  will protect the persons  and property of 
all loyal citizens  of the State.  But there  is no protection  for persons  living  in little 
country  places  or almost  none.  None  at all for us. It is a physical  impossibility.’  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 186 There  is much  else in this open letter  which  can be quoted with advantage.  I have 
reproduced enough to warn us of the lurking  danger.  Of course, it  may be only a 
scare  and there  may be nothing  beyond  it. There  may be no secret  circular.  
There  is, however, prudence  in not disregarding  such warnings.  I am hoping  that 
the writer’s  fears  are wholly  groundless.  I agree  with him that all promise  of 
protection  by authority in isolated places  is vain. It simply cannot  be done, no  
matter  how efficient  the military  and police  machine  may be, which, it  must be 
admitted it is not at present.  Protection  must come  first from within, i.e.  from 
rock-like faith in God and secondly  from the goodwill  of the neighbouring  
population.  If neither  is present, the  best and the safest  way is to leave  India’s  
inhospitable  shore.  Things  have not come  to such a pass.  The duty of all of us is to 
regard  with special  attention  all the Britishers  who choose  to remain  in India as its 
faithful  servants.  They must be free from every  kind of insult  or disregard.  The 
Press  and public  bodies  have to be circumspect  in this as in many other  respects  if 
we are to render  a good account  of ourselves  as a free and self-respecting  nation.  
Those  who respect  themselves  cannot  make  god the claim  if they will not respect  
their neighbours  however  few of insignificant  they may be. 
 
21st October  1947 
I have heard  of another  sad incident.  It is not a communal  murder.  The victim  is a 
Hindu  government  officer.  A soldier  shot him dead, because  he would  not act as 
he was directed.  This tendency to use a gun on the slightest  pretext  is a grave  
portent.  There  are barbarous  people  in the world, to  whom  life has no value.  They 
shoot  dead human beings  as they would  shoot  down  birds or beasts.  Is free India to 
be in this category ? Man has not the power to create  life, hence  he has no right to 
take it. Yet the Muslims  murder  the Hindus  and Sikhs  and vice versa.  When  this 
cruel  game  is finished, the  blood  lust is bound  to result  in the Muslims  slaughtering  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 187 the Muslims, and  the Hindus  and Sikhs  slaughtering  themselves.  I hope they will 
never  reach  that savage  state.  That is their fate unless  both the states  pull 
themselves  together  and set things  right before  it is too late. 
 
30th October  1947 
This evening  when  as usual  before  the prayer  meeting  the audience  was asked if 
there  was any objector  to the Koran  verses  being  recited  as part of the prayer, 
one member  spoke  up and persisted in his objection.  Gandhiji  had made  it clear  
that if there  was such object  on, he  would  neither  have public  prayer  nor the 
after-prayer  speech  on current  events.  Consequently, he  sent word that there  
would  be neither  prayer  nor speech  before  the public.  But the gathering  would  not 
disperse  without  seeing  Gandhiji.  He, therefore, went  to the rostrum  and said a 
few words  on the reason  for abstention  and the working  of ahimsa as he 
understood it. 
It is unseemly  for anyone  to object  to the prayer, especially when  it is on a private  
lawn. Nevertheless, my  ahimsa warns  me against disregarding  even one objector  
when  an overwhe lming  majority  are likely  to overawe  one person  into silence.  It 
would  be otherwise  if the whole  audience  objected.  It would  then be my duty to 
have the prayer  even at the risk of being  molested.  There  is also the further  
consideration  that the majority  should not be disappointed for the sake of one 
objector.  The remedy  is simple.  If the majority restrain  themselves  and entertain  
no anger  against, or  evil design  on, the  solitary objector, it  will be my duty to hold 
the prayer.  The possibility, however, is  that if the whole  audience  is non-violent  in 
intention  and action, the  objector  will restrain  himself.  Such I hold to be the 
working  of non-violence.  I further  hold that truth  and non-violence  are not the 
monopoly  of a few adepts.  All universal  rules of conduct known  as God’s  
commandments  are simple  and easy to understand and carry  out if the will is Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 188 there.  They only appear  to be difficult  because  of the inertia which  governs  
mankind.  Man is a progressive  being.  There  is nothing  at a standstill  in nature.  
Only God is motionless  for He was, is , and will be the same yesterday, to -day and 
to-morrow, and  yet is ever moving.  We need not, however, worry  ourselves  over 
the attributes  of God. We have to realize  that we are ever progressing.  Hence, I  
hold that if mank ind is to live, it  has to come  growingly  under  the sway of truth  
and non-violence.  It is in view of these  two fundamental  rules of conduct  that I 
and you have to work and live. 
 
3rd November  1947 
If two quantities  of poison  mix together, who  will decide  which was first on the 
field, and  if such a decision  could  be arrived  at, what end would  it serve ? We know  
this, however, that  a virus  has spread throughout  the western  Pakistan  area and 
that it has not as yet been recognized  as such by the powers  that be. So far as the 
Union  is concerned, it  has been confined  to a small  part of it. Would  to God that 
the virus would  remain  under  isolation  and control ! There  would  then be cause  for 
every  hope that it would  be expelled  in due time and that soon from both parts . 
In view of the fact that Dr. Rajendraprasad has called  a meeting  of the Premiers  
or their representatives  and others  to help and advise  him in the matter  of food 
control, I feel that I should  devote  this evening  to that very important question.  
Nothing  that I have heard during  these  days has moved  me from the stand I have 
taken  up from the beginning, that  the control  should  be entirely removed  at the 
earliest  moment  possible, certainly not later than six months  hence.  Not a day 
passes  but letters  and wires come  to me, some  from important persons, declaring  
emphatically that both the controls  should  be removed.  I propose  to omit the 
other, i.e. cloth  control, for  the time being.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 189 Control  gives  rise to fraud, suppression  of truth, intensification  of the black  
market and to artificial  scarcity.  Above  all, it  unmans  the people  and deprives  
them  of initiative , it undoes  the teaching  of self-help they have been learning  for 
a generation.  It makes  them  spoon -fed. This is a tragedy next only, if  indeed  not 
equal, to  the fratricide  on a vast scale  and the insane  exchange  of population  
resulting  in unnecessary  deaths, starvation  and want of proper  residence and 
clothing  more  poignant for the coming  inclement  weather.  The second  is certainly  
more  spectacular.  We dare not forget  the first because  it is not spectacular.  
This food control  is one of the vicious  legacies  of the last world  war. Control  then 
was probably inevitable  because  a very large  quantity of cereals  and other  
foodstuffs  were exported outside.  This unnatur al export was bound  to create  a 
man-made  scarcity  and lead to rationing  in spite of its many drawbacks.  Now 
there  need be no export which  we cannot  avoid if we wish to. We would  help the 
starving  parts  of the world, if  we do not expect  outside  help for India in the way 
of food.  
I have seen during  my lifetime  covering  two generations  several  God-sent famines, 
but have no recollection  of an occasion  when  rationing  was even thought  of. 
To-day, thank  God, the  monsoons  have not failed  us. There  is, therefore, no  real 
scarcity  of food.  There  are enough cereals, pulses  and oil seeds  in the villages  of 
India.  The artificial  control  of prices, the  growers  do not, cannot  understand.  
They, therefore, refuse  willingly  to part with their stock  at a price  much  lower  
than they command  in the open market.  This naked fact needs  no demonstration . 
It does not require  statistics  or desk-work civilians  buried in their red-tape files to 
produce  elaborate  reports  and essays  to prove  that there  is scarcity.  It is to be 
holed  that no one will frighten  us by trotting  out before  us the bogey of over-
population.  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 190 13th November  1947 
Freedom  without  equality for all, irrespective  of race or religion, is  not worth  
having  for the Congress.  In other  words, the  Congress  and any government  
representative  of the Congress  must remain  a purely democratic, popular  body, 
leaving  every  individual  to follow  that form of religion  which  best appeals  to him 
without  any interference  from the state.  There  is so much  in common  between  
people  living  in the same state  under  the same  flag owing  undivided allegiance  to 
it. There  is so much  in common  between  man and man that it is a marvel  that 
there  can be any quarrel  on the ground  of religion.  Any creed  or dogma which  
coerces  others  into following  one uniform  practice  is a religion  only in name, for  a 
religion  worth  the name  does not admit of any coercion.  Anything  that is done 
under  coercion  has only a short  lease  of life. It is bound to die. It must be a matter  
of pride  to you, whether  you are four-anna Congre ss members  or not, that  you 
have in your midst an institution  without  a rival which  disdains  to become  a 
theocratic  state, and which  always  believes  and lives up to the belief  that the 
state  of your conception  must be a secular, democratic  state  having  perfect 
harmony  between  the different  units composing  the state.  When  I think  of the 
plight of the Muslims  in the Union, how  in many places  life has become  difficult  
for them  and how there  is a continuing  exodus  of the Muslims  from the Union, I  
wonder  whether  the people  who are responsible  for creating  such a state  of things  
could  ever become  a credit  to the Congress.  I therefore  hope that during  the year 
which  has just commenced, the  Hindus  and Sikhs  will so behave  as to enable  every  
Muslim, whether  a boy or a girl, to  feel that he or she is as safe and free as the 
tallest  Hindu  or Sikh.  
 
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 191 14th November, 1947  
I am taking  the bhajan  of the evening  as my text for my discourse.  When  I was 
fasting  in the Aga Khan Palace  which  was converted  into a prison  to accom modate  
Devi Sarojini  Naidu, Mirabehn, Mahadevbhai  and myself, this  bhajan  gripped me. I 
do not wish to go into the causes  of the fast. Its relevance simply is that I was 
sustained throughout  the twenty -one days not by the quantity  of water  I drank, or  
for some  days by the quantity of orange  juice I took, or  by the extraordinary  
medical  care and attention  I was receiving, but  by enthroning  in my heart God 
whom  I know  as Rama.  I was so much  enamoured  of the lines of the bhajan, but  
whose  words  I had then forgotten, that I asked my associates  to send a telegram  
for the exact  words  of the bhajan.  To my joy I received  the full text of the bhajan  
in the reply  telegram.  Its refrain  is that Ramanama is everything, and  that before  
it the other  gods are of no conseque nces.  I wish to recall  this instructive  episode  
from my life in order  to emphasize  to my audience  the fact that the momentous  
session  of the A.I.C.C. which  is to meet  in New Delhi  to-morrow, i.e.  Saturday, 
should  carry  on their deliberations  with God in their hearts.  This they are bound  to 
do as they are representative  of Congressmen, and  as such they would  not be 
worth  their chiefs. The  Congressmen, had  God in their hearts  instead  of Satan.  
 
16th November  1947 
It is the fashion  nowadays  to use the word satyagraha for any kind of resistance, 
armed or otherwise.  This looseness  harms  the community  and degrades  
satyagraha.  If, therefore, you  understand  all the implications  of satyagraha  and 
know  that the living  God of Truth  and Love is with the satyagrahi , you  will have no 
hesitation  in believing  that it is invincible.  I am sorry  to say what  I do about  the 
Hindu  Mahasabha and the Rashtriya Swayamsevak  Sangh.  I would  be glad to find 
that I am wrong.  I have seen the chief of the Rashtriya Swyamsevak  Sangh.  I have Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 192 attended a meeting  of the members  of the R.S.S. Since  then I have been 
upbraided for having  gone to the meeting  and have had many letters  of complaints  
about the organization.  
 
17th November  1947 
A man becomes  what he thinks’. Says  an upnishad  mantra.  Experience of wise men 
testifies  to the truth  of the aphorism.  The world  will thus become  what its wise 
men think.  An idle thought  is no thought.  It would  be a serious  mistake  to say that 
the world  will become  as the unthinking  multitude  act. They will not think.  
Independence  should  mean  democracy.  Democracy  demands  that every  citizen  has 
the opportunity of receiving  wisdom  as distinguished  from a knowledge  of facts so-
called.  South  Africa  has many wise men and women  as it has also many able 
soldiers  who are equally able farmers.  It will be a tragedy for the world  if they do 
not rise superior  to their debilitating  surroundings  and give a proper  lead to their 
country  on this vexed  and vexing  problem  of White  supremacy.  Is it not by this 
time a played -out game ? 
I must keep you for a moment  over the much -debated question  of control.  Must 
the voice  of the people  be drowned  by the noise  of the pundits  who claim  to know  
all about the virtue  of controls ? Would  that our ministers  who are drawn  from the 
people  and are of the people  listened  to the voice  of the people  rather  than of the 
controllers  of the red tape which, they  know, did  them  infinite  harm  when  they 
were in the wilderness ! The pundits  then ruled  with a vengeance.  Must they do so 
even now? Will not the peopl e have any opportunity of committing  mistakes  and 
learning  by them ? Do the ministers  not know  that they have the power  to resume  
control  wherever  necessary, if  decontrol  is found  to have been harmful  to the 
people, in  any instance  out of the samples, by  no means  exhaustive, that I am 
giving  below ? The list before  me confounds  my simple  mind.  There  may be virtue  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 193 in some  of them.  All I contend  is that the science, if  it is one, of  controls  requires  
a dispassionate  examination  and then education  of the people  in the secret  of 
controls  in general  or specified  controls.  Without  examining  the merits  of the list I 
have received  I pick out a few of the samples  given  to me: Control  on Exchange, 
Investment, Capital  Issues, Opening  branches  of Banks  and their investmen ts, 
Insurance  investments, All  Import  and Export of every  kind of commodity, Cereals, 
Sugar, Gur, Cane  and Syrup, Vanaspati, Textiles, including  Woolens, Powe r 
Alcohols, Petrol  and Kerose ne, Paper, Cement, Steel, Mica, Manganese, Coal, 
Transport, Installation  of Plant, Machinery, Factories, Distribution  of cars in 
certain  provinces  and Tea plantation.  
 
21st November  1947 
A member  of the audience  asks me: What  is a Hindu ? What  is the origin  of the 
word? Is there  any Hinduism ? 
These  are pertinent questions  for the time.  I am no historian, I  lay claim  to no 
learning.  But I have read in an authentic  book on Hinduism  that the word  ‘Hindu’  
did not occur  in the Vedas  but when  Alexander  the Great invaded  India, the  
inhabitants  of the country  to the east of the Sindhu, which is known  by the 
English -speaking  Indians  as Indus, were  described as Hindus.  The letter  ‘S’ had  
become  ‘H’ in Greek.  The religion  of these  inhabitants  became  Hinduism  and as 
they knew  it, it was a most tolerant religion.  It gave shelter  to the early Christians  
who had fled from persecution, also  to the Jews known  as Heni-Israel, as  also to 
the Parsis.  I am proud  to belong  to that Hinduism  which  is all-inclusive, and  which  
stands  for tolerance.  Aryan  scholars  swear  by what they call the Vedic  religion and 
Hindustan  is otherwise  known  as Aryavarta.  I have no such aspiration.  Hindustan  of 
my conception  is all-sufficing  for me. It certainly includes  the Vedas, but it 
includes  also much  more.  I can detect  no inconsistency  in declaring  that I can, Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 194 withou t in any way whatsoever  impairing  the dignity of Hinduism, pay equal  
homage  to the best of Islam, Christianity, Zoroastrianism  and Judaism.  Such 
Hinduism  will live as long as the sun shines.  Tulsidas  has summed  it up in one 
doha:  ‘The root of religion  is embedded in Mercy, whereas  egotism  is rooted  in 
love of the body. Tulsi says that Mercy  should  never  be abandoned, even  though 
the body perishes.’  
Finally I feel bound  to refer  to a case of persecution  of the Roman  Catholics  near 
Gurgaon, which was brought  to my notice.  The village  in question  where  it took 
place  is known  as Kanhai, about twenty -five miles  from Delhi.  One of my visitors  
was an Indian  Roman  Catholic  chaplain  and the other  was a catechist  belonging  to 
a village.  They produced to me a letter  from the Roman  Catholics  in the village  
relating  the story of persecution  at the hands  of the Hindus.  This was curious  
enough in urdu.  I understand that the inhabitants  of that part of the country, 
whether  they are Hindus  or others, can  only speak  Hindustani  and write  in the 
urdu script.  The informants  told me that the Roman  Catholics  there  had been 
threatened  if they did not remove  themselves  from their village.  I hope that it was 
an idle threat and that these  Christian  brothers  and sisters  will be left to follow  
their own faith and avocation  without let or hindrance.  Surely, they are not less 
entitled  to their freedom  than they were under  the British  regime, now  that there  
is freedom  from political  bondage.  That freedom  can never  be confined  to the 
Hindus  only in the Union  and the Muslims  only in Pakistan.  I have in one of my 
speeches  already told you that when  the mad fury against the Muslims  has abated, 
it is likely  to be vented on others; but when I made  the remark  I was not prepared  
for such an early verification  of my forebodings.  The fury against  the Muslims  has 
not yet completely  abated.  So far as I know, these  Christians  are utterly  
inoffensive.  It is suggested  that their offence  consists  in being  Christians, more  so 
because  they eat beef and pork.  As a matter  of curiosity  I asked the chaplain  
whether  there  was any truth  in the remark, and  I was told that these  Roman  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 195 Catholics, of  their own accord, have  abjured  beef and pork not only now, but  long 
ago. If this kind of unreasoning  prejudice  persist, the  future  for independent India  
is dismal.  The chaplain  himself  has recently  had his bicycle  taken  away from him 
when  he was at Rewari, and  narrowly  escaped death.  Is this agony to end only 
with the extinction  of all the non-Hindus  and non-Sikhs ? 
I have no desire to live to witness  such a dissolution  of India, and  I would  ask you 
to join me in the wish and prayer  that good sense  will return  to the Hindus  and 
Sikhs  of the Union.  
 
24th December  1947 
To-morrow, Christian  Day, is  a festival  for the Christians  as Deepavali  is for the 
Hindus.  I do not think  that either  festival  is meant for indulgence  in drinks, dances  
and merry -making.  These  are holy days making  one examine  oneself  and do better  
next year.  I offer greetings  to all Christian  friends  in India and outside and hope 
that they will enforce  in their own lives the teachings  of Jesus  Christ.  I warn the 
Hindus, Muslims  and Sikhs  against entertaining  any ill-will towards  the Christians, 
who are a minority in India.  Nor should  they entertain  any wish about converting  
them  to Hinduism, Islam  or Sikhism.  I do not believe in such conversions.  I want 
the Christians  to be good Christians, the  Muslims  to be good Muslims, the  Sikhs  to 
be good Sikhs  and the Hindus  to be good Hindus  under  all circumstances.  That to 
me is real conversion.  
I have seen in the newspapers  that in view of the fact that State  patronage  to 
Christianity or any other  religion  will not be given, 75  per cent of the churches  in 
India will have to be closed  down.  Religion  can never  be served  through  money. 
The Christians  should  rejoice  that an artificial  prop is being  removed.  God is 
Omnipresent.  Our bodies  are the real temples  rather  than buildings  of stone.  The 
best place  for congregational  worship  for any religion  in my opinion  is in the open Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 196 with the sky above  as the canopy and mother  earth  below  for the floor.  Every  
individual  is the protector  of his own religion  against the whole  world.  
 
27th December  1947 
The Panchayat should  now see to cattle  improvement.  They should  show  steady  
increase  in the milk yield.  Our cattle  have become  burden  on the land for want of 
care.  It is gross  ignorance  to blame  the Muslims  for cow slaughter.  I hold that it is 
the Hindus  who kill the cattle  by inches  through ill-treatment.  Slow death  by 
torture  is far worse  than outright  killing. The Panchayat should  also see to an 
increase  in the quantity of foodstuff  grown  in their village.  That is to be 
accomplished  by properly  manuring  the soil. The Compost  Conference  recently  
held in Delhi  under  the inspiration  of Shrimati  Mirabehn  has told us how the 
excreta  of animals  and human beings  mixed  with rubbish  can be turned  into 
valuable  manure.  This manure  increases  the fertility of the soil. Then  they must 
see to the cleanliness  of their village  and its inhabitants.  They must be clean  and 
healthy in body and mind.  
I hope that they will have no cinema  house.  People  say that the cinema  can be a 
potent  means  of education.  That may come  true some  day, but  at the moment  I 
see how much  harm  the cinema  is doing.  
 
6th January  1948 
With reference to the news  from Bombay that dock labourers  and others  are 
thinking  of going  on strike, I  appeal  to all concerned, whether  they belong  to the 
Congress, the  Socialist  Party – if the latter  can be counted  apart from the Congress 
– or the Communist  Party to desist.  This is no time for strikes.  Such strikes  are 
harmful  to all concerned  and to the country  as a whole.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 197  
7th January  1948 
I have received  a note in which  the writer  says he has undertaken  a fast which  will 
be continued.  I consider  the fast to be wrong.  I am of the opinion  that during  my 
lifetime  those  who undertake  such fasts should  consult  me. 
I have seen in the newspapers  that the students  in Delhi  propo se to organize  a 
strike  on the 9th instant.  I told them  yesterday that this is no time for strikes.  
Strikes  by students  I consider  generally  to be wrong.  I have conducted  many  
strikes  during  my life, more  or less successfully.  But I can tell you that all strikes  
are not right and certainly  not non-violent.  If the students  will listen  to me, t hey 
will give up the idea of the proposed  strike.  
 
12th January  1948 
One fasts for health’s  sake under  laws governing  health, fasts  as a penance  for a 
wrong  done and felt as such.  In these  fasts, the fasting  one need not believe in 
ahimsa.  There  is, howev er, a fast which  a votary  of non-violence  sometimes  feels 
impelled  to undertake  by way of protest against some  wrong  done by society  and 
this he does when  he as a votary of ahimsa has no other  remedy  left. Such an 
occasion  has come  my way. 
When  on September  9th I returned  to Delhi  from Calcutta, it was to proceed  to the 
west of Punjab.  But that was not to be. Gay Delhi  looked  a city of the dead.  As I 
alighted from the train I observed gloom  on every  face I saw. Even the Sardar, 
whom  humour  and the joy that humour  gives  never  desert, was  no exception  this 
time.  The cause  of it I did not know.  He was on the platform  to receive me. He 
lost no time in giving  me the sad news  of the disturbances  that had taken  place  in 
the Metropolis  of the Union.  At once I saw that I had to be in Delhi  and ‘do or die’. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 198 There  is apparent calm brought  about  by prompt military  and police  action.  But 
there  is storm  within  the breast.  It may burst forth any day. This I count  as no 
fulfillment  of the vow to ‘do’ which  I alone  can keep me from death, and  
incomparable  friends.  I yearn  for heart friendship  between  the Hindus, Sikhs  and 
Muslims.  I subsisted  between  them  the other  day. To-day it is non-existent.  It is a 
state  that no Indian  patriot worthy  of the name  can contemplate  with equanimity.  
Though the Voice  within  has been beckoning  for a long time, I  have been shutting  
my ears to it, lest  it may be the voice  of Satan, otherwise  called  my weakness.  I 
never  like to feel resource -less; a  satyagrahi  never  should.  Fasting  is his last resort 
in the place  of the sword – his or other’s. I have no answer  to return  to the Muslim  
friends  who see me from day to day as to what they should  do. My impotence  has 
been gnawing  at me of late. It will go immediately the fast is undertaken.  I have 
been brooding  over it for the last three  days.  The final conclusion  has flashed upon 
me and it makes  me happy.  No man, if  he is pure, has  anything  more  precious  to 
give than his life. I hope and pray that I have that purity  in me to justify  the step.  
I ask you all to bless  the effort  and to pray for me and with me. The fast begins  
from the first meal to-morrow.  The period id indefinite  and I may drink  water  with 
or without  salts and sour limes.  It will end when  and if I am satisfied that there  is 
a reunion of hearts of all the communities  brought  about without  any outside 
pressure, and from an awakened sense  of duty.  The reward  will be the regaining  
of India’s  dwindling  prestige  and her fast-fading  sovereignty  over the heart of Asia 
and thereby, the  world.  I flatte r myself  with the belief  that the loss of her soul by 
India will mean  the loss of the hope of the aching, storm -tossed  and hungry  world.  
Let no friend, or  foe, if there  be one, be  angry with me. There  are friends  who do 
not believe in the method of the fast for the reclamation  of the human mind.  They 
will bear with me and extend  me the same  liberty of action  that they claim  for 
themselves.  With God as my supreme  and sole counselor, I  felt that I must take 
the decision  without  any other  adviser.  If I have made a mistake  and discover  it, I Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 199 shall have no hesitation  in proclaiming  it from the house -top and retracting  my 
faulty step.  There  is little chance  of my making  such a discovery.  If there  is clear  
indication,  as I claim  there  is, of  the inner  voice, it  will not be gainsaid.  I plead  for 
all absence  of argument and inevitable  endorsement  of the step.  If the whole  of 
India responds  or at least Delhi  does, the  fast might  be soon ended.  
But whether  it ends soon or late or never, let  there  be no softness  in dealing with 
what may be termed  as a crisis.  Critics  have regarded some  of my previous  fasts as 
coercive  and held that on merits  the verdict  would  have gone against my stand but 
for the pressure  exercised  by the fasts.  What  value  can an adverse  verdict  have 
when the purpose  is demonstrably sound ? A pure fast, like  duty, is  its own reward.  
I do not embark  upon it for the sake of the result  it may bring.  I do so because  I 
must.  Hence, I  urge everybody dispassionately to examine  the purpose  and let me 
die, if  I must, in peace  which  I hope is ensured.  Death  for me would  be a glorious  
deliverance rather  than that I should  be a helpless  witness  of the destruction  of 
India, Hinduism, Sikhism  and Islam.  That destruction  is certain  if Pakistan  ensures  
no equality of statu s and security  of life and property for all professing  the various  
faiths  of the world  and if India copies  her. Only then Islam  dies in the two Indians, 
not in the world.  But Hinduism  and Sikhism  have no world  outside  India.  Those  
who differ  from me will be honoured  by me for their resistance  however  
implacable.  Let my fast quicken  conscience, not  deaden  it. Just contemplate  the 
rot that has set in in beloved  India and you will rejoice  to think  that there  is an 
humble  son of hers who is strong  enough  and possibly  pure enough to take the 
happy step.  If he is neither, he  is a burden  on earth.  The sooner  he disappears  and 
clears  the Indian  atmosphere  of the burden  the better  for him and all concerned.  
I would  beg of all friends  not to rush to Birla House  nor try to dissuade  me or be 
anxious  for me. I am in God’s  hands.  Rather, they should  turn the searchlights  
inwards, for  this is essentially a testing  time for all of us. Those  who remain  at Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 200 their post of duty and perform  it diligently  and well, now  more  so than hitherto , 
will help me and the cause  in every  ways.  The fast is a process  of self-purification.  
 
13th January  1948 
I must warn you against being  surprised  that I have walked to the prayer  ground  as 
usual.  A fast weakens  nobody  during  the first twenty- four hours  after  a meal.  It 
generally  does good to those  who fast occasionally for twenty -four hours.  
To-morrow it may be difficult  for me to walk the prayer  ground.  But if you are 
eager  to attend the prayers  all the same, you  can come  and the girls will recite 
the prayers  with you even though I am not present.  
You ask me whom  I consider  blameworthy for the fast. I blame  no individual  or 
community.  I do believe, however, that  if the Hindus  and Sikhs  insist  on turning  
out the Muslims  from Delhi, they  will be betraying  India and their own faiths.  And 
that hurts  me. 
If Delhi  becomes  peaceful  in the real sense  of the term, I  will then break  the fast. 
Delhi  is the Capital  of India.  The ruin or downfall  of Delhi  I would  regard  as the 
ruin of India and Pakistan.  I want Delhi  to be safe for all Muslims, even  for one like 
Shaheed  Suhrawardy, who  is looked  upon as the chief of goondas.  Let all proved  
goondas  be rounded  up. But I am witness  to the fact that Shaheedsaheb has 
worked  for peace  in Calcutta  in all sincerity.  He has pulled out the Muslims  from 
Hindus’  houses  which  they had forcibly  occupied.  He is living  with me. He will 
willingly  join the prayer, but I will not expose  him to the risk of being  insulted.  I 
want him, as  I do every  Muslim, to  feel as safe in Delhi  as tallest  of you. 
I do not mind how long it takes  for real peace  to be established.  Whether  it takes  
one day or one month, it  is immaterial.  No one should  say or do anything  to lure 
me into giving  up my fast prematurely.  The object  should  not be to save my life. It Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 201 should  be to save India and her honour.  I shall feel happy and proud when  I see 
that India’s  place  is not lowered  as it has become  by the recent  happenings  which  
I have no wish to recall.  
 
14th January  1948 
I have come  to the prayer  meeting  in spite of the doctor’s  objections.  But from to-
morrow I shall probably not be able to walk to the prayer  ground.  I have the 
strength  to-day and I use it though the doctors  have advised me to conserve  it. I 
am in God’s  hands.  If He wants  me to live I shall not die. I do not want my faith in 
God to weaken.  
Before  I ever knew  anything  of politics  in my early youth, I  dreamt the dream  of 
communal  unity  of the heart.  I shall jump  in the evening  of my life, like  a child, to  
feel that the dream  has been realized in this life. The wish for living  the full span 
of life, portrayed by the seers  of old and which  they permit us to set down  at 125 
years, will  then revive.  Who would  not risk sacrificing  his life for the realization  of 
such a dream ? Then we shall have a real Swaraj.  Then, though legally  and 
geographically we may still be two states, in  daily life no one will think  that we 
were separate  states.  The vista before  me seems  to me to be, as  it must be to 
you, too  glorious  to be true.  Yet like a child in a famous  picture, drawn  by a 
famous  painter , I shall not be happy till I have got it. I live and want to live for no 
lesser  goal. Let the seekers  from Pakistan  Help me to come  as near the goal as it is 
humanly  possible.  A goal ceases  to be one, when it is reached.  The nearest  
approach  is always  possible.  What  I have said holds  good irrespective  of whether  
others  do it or not. It is open to every  individual  to purify  himself  or herself  so as 
to render  him or her fit for that land of promise.  I remember  to have read, I  forget  
whether  in the Delhi  Fort or the Agra Fort, when  I visited  them  in 1896, a  verse  on 
one of the gates, which  when  translated reads : ‘If there  is paradise  on earth, it is Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 202 here, it  is here, it  is here.’  That fort with all its magnificence  at its best, w as no 
paradise  in my estimation.  
But I should  love to see that verse  with justice  inscribed  on the gates  of Pakistan  
at all the entrances.  In such paradise, whether  it is in the Union  or in Pakistan, 
there  will be neither  paupers  nor beggars, nor  high or low, neither  millionaire  
employers  nor half-starved employees, nor  intoxicating  drinks  or drugs.  There  will 
be the same  respect  for women  as vouchsafed  to men, and the chastity  and purity  
of men and women  will be jealously  guarded.  Where  every  woman  except  one’s  
wife will be treated by men of all religions  as mother, sister  or daughter  according  
to her age. Where  there  will be no untouchability  and where  there  will be equal  
respect  for all faiths.  They will be all proudly, joyously and voluntarily  bread  
labourers.  I hope everyone who listens  to me or reads  these  lines will forgive  me if 
stretched on my bed and basking  in the sun, inha ling life-giving  sunshine , I allow  
myself  to indulge  in this ecstasy.  Let this assure  the doubters  and sceptics  that I 
have not the slightest  desire  that the fast should  be ended as quickly  as possible.  
It matters  little if the ecstatic  wishes  of a fool like me are never  realized  and the 
fast is never  broken.  I am content  to wait as long as it may be necessary, but it 
will hurt me to think  that people  have acted merely  in order  to save me. I claim  
that God has inspired  this fast and it will be broken  only when  and if He wishes  it. 
No human agency  has ever been known  to thwart, nor  will it ever thwart the 
Divine  Will. 
 
16th January  1948 
I did not expect  I would  be able to speak  to you to-day but you will be pleased to 
learn  that if anything, my  voice  is less feeble to-day than yesterday.  I cannot  
explain  it except  for the grace  of God. I have never  felt so well on the fourth  day 
of a fast in the past.  If all of you continue  to participate  in the process  of self-Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 203 purification, I  shall probably have the strength  to speak  to you till the end. I am in 
no hurry  to break  the fast. Hurry would  spoil matters.  I do not want  anyone  to 
come  and tell me that things  have been set right while  the process  is incomplete.  
If Delhi  becomes  peaceful  in the  real sense  of the term, it  will have its 
repercussions  all over the country.  I have no wish to live unless  peace  reigns  in the 
two Dominions.  
It is never a light matter  for any responsible  Cabinet to alter a deliberate, settled  
policy.  Yet our Cabinet, responsible  in every  sense  of the term, has  with equal  
deliberation  yet promptness  un-settled  their settled fact. They deserve the 
warmest  thanks  from the whole  country, from  Kashmir  to Cape  Comorin  and from 
Karachi  to the Assam  frontier.  And I know  that all the nations  of the earth  will 
proclaim  this gesture  as one which  only a large -hearted Cabinet like ours could  
rise to. This is no policy of appeasemen t of the Muslims.  This is a policy, if  you 
like, of  self-appeasement . No Cabinet worthy of being  representative  of a large  
mass of mankind  can afford  to take any step merely  because  it is likely  to win the 
hasty applause  of an unthinking  public.  In the midst of insanity, should  not our 
best representatives  retain  sanity and bravely prevent a wreck  of the ship of state  
under  their management?  What, then, was  the actuating  motive ? It was my fast. It 
changed  the whole  outlook.  Without  the fast, they could  not go beyond what the 
law permitted and required  them  to do. But the present  gesture  on the part of the 
Government  of India is one of unmixed  goodwill.  It has put the Pakistan  
Government  on its honour.  It ought  to lead to an honourable  settlement  not only 
of the Kashmir  question  but of all differences  between  the two Dominions.  
Friendship should  replace  the present  enmity.  Demands  of equity supersede the 
letter  of the law. There  is a homely  maxim  of law which  has been in practice  for 
centuries  in England  that when  common  law seems  to fail, equity comes  to the 
rescue.  Not long ago there  were  even separate  courts  for the administration  of law 
and equity.  Considered  in this setting, there  is no room  for questioning  the utter  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 204 justice  of this act of the Union  Govern ment.  If we want a precedent, there is a 
striking  one at our disposal  in the form of what is popularly known  as the 
MacDonald  Award.  That award was really the unanimous  judgment  of not only the 
members  of the Second  Round  Table  Conference.  It was undone  overnight  as a 
result  of the fast undertaken  in the Yeravda prison.  
I have been asked to end the fast because  of this great act of the Union  
Government.  I wish I could  persuade  myself  to do so. I know  that the medical  
friends  who, of  their own volition  and at considerable  sacrifice, meticulously  
examine  me from day to day are getting  more  and more  anxious  as the fast is 
prolonged.  Because  of defective  kidney function  they dread not so much  my 
instantaneous  collapse  as permanent  after -effects  of any further  prolongation.  I 
did not embark  upon the fast after consultation  with medical  men, be  they 
however  able.  My sole guide, even  dictator, was  God, the  Infallible  and 
Omnipotent.  If He has any further  use for this frail body of mine, He will keep it in 
spite of the prognostications  of medical  men and women.  I am in His hands.  
Therefore, I  hope you will believe me when  I say that I dread neither  death  nor 
permanent injury, even  if I survive.  But I do feel that this warning  of medical  
friends  should, if  the country  has any use for me, hurry  the people  up to close  
their ranks.  And like brave  men and women, that  we ought  to be under  hard-
earned  freedom, we  should  trust even those  whom  we may suspect  as our 
enemies.  Brave  people  disdain  distrust.  The letter  of my vow will be satisfied if 
the Hindus, Muslims  and Sikhs  of Delhi  bring  about a unison, which not even a 
conflagration  around  them  in all the other  parts  of India or Pakistan  will be strong  
enough to break.  Happily, the  people  in both the Dominions, seem  to have 
instinctively realized that the fittest  answer  to the fast should  be a complete  
friendship  between  the two Dominions, such that members  of all communities  
should  be able to go to either  Dominion  without  the slightest  fear of molestation.  
Self-purification  demands  nothing  less. It will be wrong  for the rest of the two Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 205 Dominions  to put a heavy strain  upon Delhi.  After  all, the  inhabitants  of the Union  
are not superhuman.  In the name  of the people, our  Government  has taken  a 
liberal  step without  counting  the cost. What  will be Pakistan’s  counter  gesture ? 
The ways are many if there  is the will. Is it there ? 
 
17th January  1948 
I repeat what I have said before – nothing  is to be done under  pressure  of the fast. 
I have observed  before  that things  done under  pressur e of a fast have been undone  
after the fast is over.  If any such thing  happens, it would  be a tragedy of the 
highest  degree.  There  is no occasion  for it at any time.  What  a spiritual  fast does 
expect  is cleansing  of the heart.  The cleansing, if  it is hones t, does  not cease  to 
be when  the cause  which  induced  it ceases.  The cl eansing  of a wall seen in the 
form of a whitewash  does not cease  when  the dear one has come  and gone.  This 
material  cleansing  is bound  to require  renovation  after some  time.  Cleansing  of 
the heart once achieved  only dies with one’s  death.  Apart from this legitimate  and 
laudable  pressure, the  fast has no other  function  which  can be described as 
proper.  
 
18th January  1948 
I embarked on the fast in the name  of Truth  whose  familiar  name  is God. Without  
living  Truth  God is nowhere.  In the name  of God we have indulged in lies, 
massacres  of people, without caring  whether  they were innocent  or guilty, men  or 
women , children  or infants.  We have indulged in abductions, forcible  conversions  
and we have done all this shamelessly.  I am not aware  if anybody has done these  
things  in the name  of Truth.  With that same  name  on my lips I have broken  the 
fast. The agony of our people  was unbearable.  Rashtrapati  Dr. Rajendrababu  
brought  over a hundred  people  representing  the Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 206 representatives  of the Hindu  Mahasbha, the  Rashtriya Swayam –sevak  Sangh  and 
representatives  of refugees  from the Punjab, the  Frontier  Province  and Sind.  In 
this very representative  company were present  Zahid Hussain saheb, the  High 
Commissioner  for Pakistan, the  Chief  Commissioner  of Delhi  and the Deputy  
Commissioner, General  Shah Nawazkhan, representing  the Azad Hind Fouj (I.N.A).  
Pandit Nehru, sitting  like a statue, was  of course  there, as  also Maulanassaheb.  Dr. 
Rajendrababu  read a document  in Hindustani  signed  by these  representatives, 
asking  me not to put any further  strain  on them  and end the agony by breaking  the 
fast. Telegrams  after telegrams  have come  from Pakistan  and the Indian  Union  
urging  me to do the same. I could  not resist  the counsel  of all these  friends.  I 
could  not disbelieve  their pledge  that come  what may, there  would  be complete  
friendship  between  the Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Christians, Parsis  and Jews, a  
friendship  not to be broken.  To break  that friendship  would  be to break  the 
nation.  
As I write, comforting  telegrams  are deluging  me. How I wish that God will keep 
me fit enough and sane enough to render  the service  of humanity  that lies in front  
of me! If the solemn  pledge made  to-day is fulfille d. I assure  you that it will revive  
with redoubled  force  my intense  wish and prayer  before  God that I should  be 
enabled to live the full span of life doing  service  of humanity  till the last moment.  
That span according  to learned opinion  is at least one hundred and twenty -five 
years, some  say one hundred  and thirty -three.  The letter  of my vow has been 
fulfilled  early, beyond expectation, through  the great  goodwill  of all the citizens  
of Delhi, including  the Hindu  Mahasabha  leaders  and the Rashtriya Swayamsev ak 
Sangh.  The result  could  not be otherwise  when  I find that thousands  of refugees  
and others  have been fasting  since  yesterday.  Signed  assurances  of heart  
friendship  have been pouring  in upon me from thousands.  Telegraphic  blessings  
have come  from all over the world.  Can there  be a better  sign of God’s  hand in 
this act of mine ? But beyond the letter  of fulfillment  of my solemn  vow lies its Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 207 spirit  without  which  the letter  killeth.  The spirit  of the vow is sincere  friendship  
between  the Hindus, Muslims  and Sikhs of the Union  and a similar  friendship  in 
Pakistan.  If the first is assured, the  second  must follow, as  sure as day follows  
night.  If there  is darkness  in the Union, it  would  be folly to expect  light in 
Pakistan.  But if the night  in the Union  is dispel led beyond the shadow  of a doubt, 
it cannot  be otherwise  in Pakistan, nor  are signs wanting  in that direction.  
Numerous  messages  have come  from Pakistan, not one of dissent.  May God, who  is 
Truth, guide  us as He has visibly  guided  us during  all these  six days. 
 
19th January  1948 
In this age of senseless  imitation  my warning  is that it would  be foolish  for 
anybody to embark  on such a fast expecting  identical  results  in an identically short  
space  of time.  If anyone  does, he  will face severe disappointment and will 
discredit what is a hoary and infallible  institution.  Two serve  qualifications  are 
necessary – a living  faith in God and a felt peremptory call from Him. I am 
tempted to add a third, but it is superflu ous. A peremptory call from God within  
presuppos es the rightness, timeliness, and  propriety of the cause  for which  the 
fast is taken.  It follows  that a long previous  preparation  is required.  Let no one, 
therefore, lightly  embark  on such a fast. 
 
21st January 1948 
I am going  to speak  about yesterday’s  bomb explosion.  I have been receiving  
anxious  inquiries  and praise  for being  unruffled  at the accident.  I thought  it was 
military practice  and therefore  nothing  to worry  about.  I did not realize  until after  
the prayers  that it was a bomb explosion  and that the bomb was meant against  
me. God only knows  how I would  have behaved in front of a bomb aimed at me 
and exploding.  Therefore, I  deserve no praise.  I would  deserve a certificate  only if Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 208 I fell as a result  of such an explosion  and yet retained a smile  on my face and no 
malice  against the doer.  What  I want to say is that no one should  look down  upon 
the misguided  youth  who threw the bomb.  He probably looks  upon me as an enemy  
of Hinduism.  After  all, has  not the Gita said that whenever  there  is an evil-minded  
person  damaging  religion, God  sends  someone  to put an end to his life? That 
celebrated verse  has a special  meaning.  The youth  should  realize  that those  who 
differ  from him are not necessarily  evil. The evil has no life apart  from the 
toleration  of good people.  No one should  believe  that he or she is so perfect  that 
he or she was sent by God to punish evil doers, as  the accused  seems  to flatter  
himself  he is. 
 
26th January  1948 
This day, 26th January, is  Independence  Day. This observance  was quite  
appropri ate when  we were  fighting  for Independence  we had not seen nor 
handled.  Now! We have handled it and we seem  to be disillusioned.  At least I am, 
even if you are not. 
What  are we celebrating  to-day? Surely  not our disillusionment.  We are entitled  to 
celebrate  the hope that the worst  is over and that we are on the road to showing  
the lowliest  villager  that it means  his freedom  from serfdom  and that he is no 
longer  a serf born to serve  the cities  and towns  of India, but that he is destined to 
exploit the city dwellers  for the advertisement of the finished  fruits  of well-
thought -out labours, that he is the salt of the Indian  earth, that it means  also 
equality of all classes  and creeds, never  the domination  and superiority of the 
major  community  over a minor, howe ver insignificant  it may be in number  or 
influence.  Let us not defer  the hope and make  the heart sick. Yet what are the 
strikes  and a variety  of lawlessness  but a deferring  of the hope? These  are 
symptoms  of our sickness  and weakness.  Let labour  realize  its dignity  and 
strength.  Capital  has neither  dignity  nor strength  compared  to labour.  These  the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 209 man in the street  also has. In a well-ordered  democratic  society  there  is no room, 
no occasion  for lawlessness  or strikes.  In such a society  there  are ample  lawful 
means  for vindicating  justice. Violence, veiled  or unveiled  must be taboo.  Strikes  
in Cawnpore, coal -mines  or elsewhere mean  material  loss to the whole  society  not 
excluding  the strikers  themselves.  I need not be reminded  that this declamation  
does not lie well in the mouth  of one like me who has been responsible  for so 
many successful  strikes.  If there  be such critics  they ought  not to forget  that then 
there  was neither  independence  nor the kind of legislation  we have now. I wonder  
if we can remain  free from the fever  of power  politics  or the bid for power which  
afflicts  the political  world, the  East and the West.  Before  leaving  this topic  of the 
day, let us permit ourselves  to hope that though geographically and politically  
India is divided into two, at  heart we shall ever be friends  and brothers  helping  
and respecting  one another  and be one for the outside  world.1 
 
1. Extracts  from Delhi  Diary (Prayer  Speeches  from 10.9.47  to 30.1.48), by  M. K. Gandhi , 
Navajivan  Publishing  House, Ahmedabad, March  1948.  Pp.4, 7 -8, 15 -16, 22 -3, 27 -8, 33 -4, 40 -
1, 58 -9, 70 -1, 101 -3, 123 -4, 133 -5, 168 -70, 174 -5, 178 -9, 193 -4, 195 -6, 281 -2, 289 -90, 314, 
316, 330 -3, 335, 336, 338, 339, 341 -3, 348 -52, 356 -8, 359 -60, 365 -6, 380 -1. 
 
  
 
 
  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 210  
 
   
 
                                           
  
Part Eight  
--------------------------------------------------- --------  
Correspondence  between  Mahatma Gandhi  
And Lord Linlithgow, Viceroy  of India  
------------------------------------------------------------  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 211 Chapter 08  
CORRESPONDENCE  
CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  LORD  LINLITHGOW  
AND 
THE GOVERNMENT  OF INDIA  
 
EARLIER  CORRESPONDENCE  ABOUT  AUGUST  DISTURBANCES  
The Aga Khan’s  Palace,  
Yeravda  
                                                                              14th August  1942.  
Dear Lord Linlit hgow , 
The Government  of India were wrong  in precipitating  the crisis.  The Government  
resolution  justifying  this step is full of distortions  and misrepresentations.  That 
you have the approval  of your Indian  ‘colleagues’  can have no significance, except  
this that in India you can always  command  such services.  That co-operation  is an 
additional  justification  for the demand of withdrawal  irrespective  of what people  
and parties  may say. 
The Government  of India should  have waited at least till the time that I 
inaugurated mass action.  I had publicly stated that I fully contemplated sending  
you a letter  before  taking  concrete  action.  It was to be an appeal  to you for an 
impartial  examination  of the Congress  case.  As you know  the Congress  has readily  
filled  in every  omission  that has been discovered  in the conception  of its demand.  
So could  I have dealt with every  difficulty  if you had given  me the opportunity.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 212 The precipitate  action  of the Government  leads  one to think  that they were afraid  
that the extreme caution  and gradualness  with which  the Congress  was moving  
towards  direct action  might  make  world  opinion  veer round  to the Congress  as it 
had already begun  doing, and  expose  the hollow ness of grounds  for the 
Government  rejection  of the Congress  demand.  They should  surely  have waited for 
an authentic  report of my speeches  on Friday and on Saturday night  after the 
passing  of the resolution  by the A.I.C.C. You would  have found  in them  that I 
would  not hastily begin  action.  You should  have taken  advantage  of the interv al 
foreshadowed in them  and explored  every  possibility  of satisfying  the Congress 
demand.  
The resolution  says: ‘The  Government  of India have waited patiently in the hope  
that wiser counsels  might  prevail.  They have been disappointed in that hope.’  I 
suppos e ‘wiser  counsels’  here mean  abandonment  of its demand  by the Congress.  
Why should  the abandonment of a demand legitimate  at all times  be hoped for by 
a government  pledged to guarantee  independence  to India?  Is it a challenge  that 
could  only be met by imme diate  repression  instead of patient reasoning  with the 
demanding  party ? I venture  to suggest  that it is a long draft  upon the credulity of 
mankind  to say that the acceptance  of the demand ‘would  plunge  India into 
confusion’.  Anyway the summary  rejection  of the demand has plunged  the nation  
and the Government  into confusion.  The Congress  was making  every  effort  to 
identify India with the allied  cause.  
The Government  resolution  says: ‘The  Governor -General -in-Council  has been 
aware, too, for  some  days past, of  dangerous  preparations  by the Congress  party  
for unlawful  and in some  cases  violent  activities, directed among  other  things  to 
interruption  of communications  and public  utility  services, the organization  of 
strikes, tampering  with the loyalty of Governmen t servants  and interference  with 
defence measures  including  recruitment.’  This is a gross  distortion  of the reality.  
Violence  was never  contemplated at any stage.  A definition  of what could  be Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 213 included  in non-violent  action  has been interpreted  in a sinist er and subtle  manner  
as if the Congress  was preparing  for violent  action.  Everything  was openly  
discussed  among  Congress  circles, for  nothing  was to be done secretly.  And why is 
it tampering  with your loyalty if I ask you to give up a job that is harming  the 
British  people ? Instead of publishing  behind  the backs  of principal  Congressmen  
the misleading  paragraph, the  Government  of India, immediately they came  to 
know  of the “preparations”, should have brought  to book the parties  concerned  
with the preparatio ns. That would  have been the appropriate  course.  By their 
unsupported allegations  in the resolution, they  have laid themselves  open to the 
charge  of unfair  dealing.  
The Congress  movement  was intended to evoke  in the people  the measure  of 
sacrifice  sufficie nt to compel  attention.  It was intended to demonstrate  what  
measure  of popular  support it had. Was it wise at this time of the day to seek to 
suppress  a popular  movement  avowedly non-violent ? 
The Government  resolution  further  says: ‘The  Congress  is not India’s mouthpiece.  
Yet in the interests  of securing  their own dominance  and in pursuit  of their 
totalitarian  policy, its  leaders  have consistently  impeded the efforts  made  to bring  
India to full nationhood.’  It is a gross  libel thus to accuse  the oldest  national 
organization  of India.  This language  lies ill in the mouth  of a government  which  
has, as  can be proved from public  records, consistently thwarted every  national  
effort  for attaining  freedom  and sought  to suppress  the Congress  by hook or by 
crook.  
The Government  of India have not condescended  to consider  the Congress  offer 
that if simultaneously  with the declaration  of the independence  of India, they  
could  not trust the Congress  to form a stable  provisional  government, they  should  
ask the Muslim  League  to do so and that any national  government  formed  by the 
League  would  be loyally  accepted  by the Congress.  Such an offer  is hardly  
consistent  with the charge  of totalitarianism  against the Congress.  Let me examine  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 214 the Government  offer.  ‘It is that as soon as hostilities  cease, India shall devise  for 
herself, with  full freedom  of decision  and on a basis embracing  all and not only a 
single  party, the  form of government  which  she regards  as most suited to her 
conditions.’  Has this offer any reality about it? All parties  have not agreed  now. 
Will it be any more  possible  after the war, and if the parties  have to act before  
independence  is in their hands ? Parties  grow up like mushrooms, for  without  
proving  their representative character, the  Government  will welcome  them  as 
they have done in the past, if  the parties  oppose  the Congress  and its activities, 
though they may do lip homage  to independence, frustration  is inherent  in the 
Government  offer.  Hence  the logical  cry of withdrawal  first. Only after the end of 
the British  power  and a funda mental  change  in the political  status  of India from 
bondage  to freedom, will  the formation  of a truly representative  government, 
whether  provisional  or permanent, be  possible.  The living  burial  of the author  of 
the demand  has not resolved  the deadlock.  It has aggravated  it. 
Then the resolution  proceeds : ‘The  suggestion  put forward  by the Congress  party  
that the millions  of India uncertain  as to the future  are ready, despite  the sad 
lessons  of so many martyr  countries, to  throw  them selves  into the arms of the 
invaders, is  one that the Government  of India cannot  accept  as a true 
representation  of the feeling  of the people  of this great country.’ I do not know  
about the millions.  But I can give my own evidence in support of the Congres s 
statement.  It is open to the Government  not to believe the Congress  evidence.  No 
imperial  power  likes to be told that it is in peril.  It is because  the Congress  is 
anxious  for Great Britain  to avoid  the fate that has overtaken  other  imperial  
powers  that it asked her to shed imperialism  voluntarily  by declaring  India 
independent.  The Congress  has not approached the movement  with any but the 
friendliest  motive.  The Congress  seeks  to kill imperialism  as much  for the sake of 
the British  people  and humanity  as for India.  Notwithstanding  assertions  to the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 215 contrary, I  maintain  that the Congress  has no interest  of its own apart from that of 
the whole  of India and the world.  
The following  passage  from the peroration  in the resolution  is interesting.  ‘But on 
them (t he Government)  there  lies the task of defending  India, of  maintaining  
India’s  capacity  to wage  war, of  safeguarding  India’s  interests, of  holding  the 
balance  between  the different  sections  of her people  without fear or favour.’  All I 
can say is that it is a mockery  of truth  after  the experience of Malaya, Singapore  
and Burma.  It is sad to find the Government  of India claiming  to hold the ‘balance’  
between  the parties  for which  it is itself  demonstrably responsible.  
One thing  more.  The declared cause  is comm on between  the Government  of India 
and us. To put it in the most concrete  terms, it  is the protection  of the freedom  of 
China  and Russia.  The Government  of India think  that the freedom  of India is not 
necessary  for winning  the cause.  I think  exactly the opposite.  I have taken  
Jawaharlal  Nehru  as my measuring  rod. His personal contracts  make  him feel much  
more  the misery  of the impending  ruin of China  and Russia  than I can, and may I 
say than even you can. In that misery  he tried to forget  his old quarrel  with 
imperialism.  He dreads  much  more  than I do the success  of Nazism  and Fascism.  I 
argued with him for days together.  He fought  against my position  with a passion  
which  I have no words  to describe.  But the logic of facts overwhelmed  him. He 
yielded when  he saw clearly  that without  the freedom  of India that of the other  
two was in great jeopardy.  Surely  you are wrong  in having  imprisoned  such a 
powerful  friend  and ally. 
If notwithstanding  the common  cause, the  Government’s  answer  to the Congress  
demand  is hasty repression, they will not wonder  if I draw the inference  that it 
was not so much  the Allied  cause  that weighed  with the British  Government, as  
the unexpressed  determination  to cling to the possession  of India as an 
indispensable  part of imperial  policy . This determination  led to the rejection  of 
the Congress  demand  and precipitated repression.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 216 The present  mutual  slaughter  on a scale  never  before  known  to history is 
suffocating  enough.  But the slaughter  of truth  accompanying  the butchery  and 
enforced  by the falsity  of which  the resolution  is reeking  adds strength  to the 
Congress  position.  
It causes  me deep pain to have send you this letter.  But however  much  I dislike  
your action, I  remain  the same  friend  you have known  me. I would  still plead  for a 
recons ideration  of the Government  of India’s  whole  policy.  Do not disregard this 
pleading  of one who claims  to be a sincere  friend  of the British  people .  
Heaven  guide  you! 
I am, 
Yours  sincerely,  
 M. K. GANDHI
 
The Viceroy’s  House,  
New Delhi.  
22nd August  1942 
Dear Mr. Gandhi,  
Thank  you very much  for your letter  dated the 14th August  which  reached  me only 
a day or two ago. 
I have read, I  need not say, what you have been good enough to say in your letter  
with very close  attention, and I have given  full weight  to your views.  But I fear in 
the result  that it would  not be possible  for me either  to accept  the criticisms  
which  you advance  of the resolution  of the Governor -General -in-Council  or your 
request  that the whole  policy of the Government  of India should  be recons idered.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 217 Yours  sincerely  
LINLITHGOW.  
M. K. Gandhi, Esq.  
 
23. 9. 42  
Secretary,  Government  of India (H. D.), 
New Delhi . 
Sir, 
In spite of the chorus  of approval  sung by the Indian  councilors  and others, of  the 
present  government  policy in dealing  with the Congress, I  venture  to assert  that 
had the Government  but awaited my contemplated  letter  to H.E. the Viceroy  and 
the result  thereafter, no  calamity would  have overtaken  the country.  The reported  
deplorable  destruction  would  have most certainly been avoided.  
In spite of all that has been said to the contrary, I  claim  that the Congress  policy  
still remains  unequivocally  non-violent.  The wholesale  arrest  of the Congress  
leaders  seem  to have made  the people  wild with rage to the point of losing  self-
control.  I feel that the Government, not  the Congress, are  responsible  for the 
destruction  that has taken  place.  The only right course  for the Government  seems  
to me to be to release the Congress  leaders, to  withdraw  all repressive  measures  
and explore  ways and means  of conciliation.  Surely  the Government  have ample  
resources  to deal with any overt  act of violence.  Repression  can only breed  
discontent  and bitterness.  
Since  I am permitted to receive newspapers, I  feel that I owe it to the Government  
to give my reaction  to the sad happenings  in the country.  If the Government  think  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 218 that as a prisoner  I have no right to address  such communications, they  have but 
to say so and I will not repeat  the mistake.  
I am, 
Yours, etc.  
M. K. GANDHI.  
 
CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  LORD  LINLITHGOW  
LEADING  TO THE FAST AND AFTER  
Personal                                                      Detention  Camp,  
                                                                          New  Year’s  Eve, 1942.  
Dear Lord Linlithgow,  
This is a very personal  letter.  Contrary to the Biblical  injunction I have allowed  
many suns to set on a quarrel  I have harboured against you. But I must not allow  
the old year to expire  without  disburdening  myself  of what is rankling  in my breast  
against you. I have thought  we were  friends and should  still love to think  so. 
However  what has happened since  the 9th of August  last makes  me wonder  
whether  you still regard me as a friend.  I have perhaps  not come  in such close  
touch  with any occupant  of your gadi as with you. 
Your arrest  of me, the  communiqué  you issued  thereafter, your  reply to Rajaji  and 
the reasons  given  therefore, Mr. Amery’s  attack  on me and much  else I can 
catalogue  to show  that at some  stage  or other  you must have suspected my bona 
fides.  Mention  of other  Congressmen  in the same  connection  is by the way. I seem  
to be the fons et origo  of all the evil imputed to the Congress.  If I have not ceased  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 219 to be your friend  why did you not, before  taking  drastic  action, send  for me, tell  
me of your suspicions  and make  yourself  sure of your facts? 
I am quite  capable  of seeing  myself  as others  see me. But in this case I have failed  
hopelessly.  I find that all the statements  made  about me in Government  quarters  
in this connection  contain  palpable  departures  from truth.  
I have so much  fallen from grace  that I could  not establish  contact  with a dying  
friend.  I mean  Prof. Bhansali  who is fasting  in regard to the Chimur  affair ! 
And I am expected to condemn  the so-called  violence  of some  people  reputed to 
be Congressmen, although I have no data for such condemnation  save the heavily  
censored  reports  of newspapers.  I must own that I thoroughly  distrust  these  
reports.  I could  write  much  more, but  I must not lengthen my tale of woe. I am 
sure what I have said is enough to enable  you to fill in details.  
You know  I returned  to India from South  Africa  at the end of 1914 with a mission  
which  came  to me in 1906, namely, to  spread truth  and non-violence  among  
mankind  in the place  of violence  and falsehood  in all walks  of life. The law of 
satyagraha knows no defeat.  Prison  is one of the many  ways of spreading  the 
message.  But it has its limits.  You have placed  me in a palace  where  every  
reasonable  creature  comfort  is ensured.  I have freely  partaken  of the latter  purely  
as a matter  of duty, never  as a pleasure, in  the hope that some  day those  who 
have the power  will realize  that they have wronged  innocent  men.  I had given  
myself  six months.  The period  is drawing  to a close.  So is my patience.  The law of 
satyagraha as I know  it prescribes  a remedy in such moments  of trial.  In a 
sentence  it is, ‘Crucify  the flesh by fasting’.  That same  law forbids  its use except  
as a last resort.  I do not want to use it if I can avoid it. 
This is a way to avoid it. Convince  me of my error or errors, and  I shall make  
ample  amends. You can send for me or send someone  who knows  your mind and 
can carry  conviction.  There  are many  other  ways if you have the will. Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 220 May I expect  an early  reply?  
May the New Year bring  peace  to us all! 
I am, 
Your sincere  friend,  
M. K. GANDHI
 
The Viceroy ’s House,  
New Delhi . 
Personal                                                                                13th January  1943 
Dear Mr. Gandhi,  
Thank  you for your personal  letter  of December  31st, which  I have just received.  I 
fully accept  its personal  character, and I welcome  its frankness.  And my reply  will 
be, as  you would  wish it to be, as  frank  and as entirely  personal  as your letter  
itself.  
I was glad to have your letter, for, to  be as open with you as our previous  relations  
justify, I  have been profou ndly depressed  during  recent  months  first by the policy  
that was adopted  by the Congress  in August, secondly, because  while  that policy  
gave rise, as  it was obvious  it must, throughout  the country  to violence  and crime 
(I say nothing  of the risks to India from outside  aggression)  no word of 
condemnation  for that violence  and crime  should  have come  from you, or  from the 
Working  Committee.  When  you were first at Poona  I knew  that you were not 
receiving  newspapers, and I accepted  that as explaining  your silenc e. When  
arrangements  were made  that you and the Working  Committee  should  have such 
newspapers  as you desired  I felt certain  that the details  those  newspapers  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 221 contained of what was happening  would  shock  and distress  you as much as it has 
us all, and  that you would  be anxious  to make  your condemnation  of it categorical  
and widely known.  But that was not the case; and it has been a real 
disappointment to me, all  the more  when  I think  of these  murders, the  burning  
alive of police  officials, the  wrecking  of trains, the  destruction  of property, the  
misleading  of these  young  students, which  has done so much  harm  to India’s  good 
name, and to the Congress  party.  You may take it from me that the newspaper  
accounts  you mention  are well founded – I only wish they were  not, for  the story is 
a bad one. I well know  the immense  weight  of your great authority in the Congress  
movement  and with the Party  and those  who follow  its lead, and I wish I could  
feel, again  speaking  very frankly, that a heavy responsibility  did not rest on you. 
(And unhappily, while  the initial  responsibility  rests with the leaders, others  have 
to bear the consequences, whether  as law breaker, with  the results  that that 
involves, or  as the victims.)  
But if I am right in reading  your letter  to mean  that in the light of what has 
happened you wish to retrace  your steps  and disassociate  yourself  from the policy  
of last summer, you  have only to let me know  and I will at once consider  the 
matter  further.  And if I have failed to understand  your object  you must not 
hesitate  to let me know  without  delay  in what respect  I have done so, and  tell me 
what positive  suggestion  you wish to put to me. You know  me well enough  after 
these  many years  to believe  that I shall be only too concerned  to read with the 
same  close  attention  as ever any message  which  I receive  from you, to  give it the 
fullest  weight  and approach  it with the deepest  anxiety to understand your 
feelings  and your motives . 
Yours  sincerely , 
LINLITHGOW
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 222 Personal  
Detention  Camp,  
19th January  1943.  
Dear Lord Linlithgow,  
I received  your kind letter  of 13th instant yesterday at 2.30 p.m.  I had almost  
despaired  of ever hearing  from you. Please  excuse  my impatience.  
Your letter  gladdens  me to find that I have not lost caste  with you. 
My letter  of 31st December  was a growl  against you. Yours  is a counter -growl.  It 
means  that you maintain  that you were  right in arresting  me and you were sorry  
for the omissions  of which  in your opinion, I  was guilty.  
The inference  you draw from my letter  is, I am afraid, not correct.  I have reread  
my letter  in the light of your interpretation, but have failed  to find your meaning  
in it. I wanted to fast and should  still want to if nothing  comes  out of our 
correspondence  and I have to be a helpless  witness  to what is going  on in the 
count ry including  the privations  of the millions  owing  to the universal  scarcity  
stalking  the land.  
If I do not accept  your interpretation  of my letter, you  want me to make  a positive  
suggestion.  This, I  might  be able to do, only  if you put me among  the members  of 
the Working  Committee  of the Congress.  
If I could  be convinced  of my error or worse, of  which  you are evidently  aware, I  
should  need to consult  nobody, so  far as my own action  is concerned, to  make  a 
full and open confession  and make  ample  amends.  But I have not any conviction  of 
error.  I wonder  if you saw my letter  to the Secretary  to the Government  of India 
(H.D) of 23rd September  1942.  I adhere  to what I have said in it and in my letter  to 
you of 14th August  1942.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 223 Of course  I deplore  the happenings  that have taken  place  since  9th August last. But 
have I not laid the whole  blame  for them  at the door of the Government  of India? 
Moreover, I  could  not express  any opinion  on events  which  I cannot  influence  or 
control  and of which  I have but a one-sided account.  You are bound  prima facie to 
accept  the accuracy  of reports  that may be placed  before  you by your 
departmental  heads.  But you will not expect  me to do so. Such reports  have, 
before  now, often  proved fallible.  It was for that reason  that in my letter  of 31st 
December, I  pleaded with you to convince  me of the correctness  of the 
information  on which  your conviction  was based.  You will perhaps  appreciate  my 
fundamental  difficulty  in making  the statement  you have expected  me to make.  
This, however, I  can say from the housetop, that I am as confirmed  a believer  in 
non-violence  as I have ever been.  You may not know  that any violence  on the part 
of Congress  workers, I  have condemned  openly and unequivocally.  I have even 
done public  penance  more  than once.  I must not weary you with examples.  The 
point I wish to make  is that on every  such occasion  I was a free man.  
This time the retracing, as  I have submitted, lies  with the Government.  You will 
forgive  me for expressing  an opinion  challenging  yours.  I am certain  that nothing  
but good would  have resulted if you had stayed  your hand and granted me the 
interview  which  I had announced, on the night  of the 8th August  I was to seek.  But 
that was not to be. 
Here, may I remind  you that the Government  of India have before  now owned  
their mistakes, as  for instance, in  the Punjab  when  the late General  Dyer was 
condemned, in the U.P. when  a corner  of mosque  in Cawnpore  was restored, and  
in Bengal  when  Partition  was annulled.  All these  things  were done in spite of great  
and previous  mob violence.  
To sum up: Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 224 (1) If you want me to act singly, convince  me that I was wrong  and I will make  
ample  amends.  
(2) If you want me to make  any proposal  on behalf  of the Congress  you should  put 
me among  the Congress  Working  Committee  members.  
I do plead  with you to make  up your mind  to end the impasse.   
If I am obscure  or have not answered  your letter  fully, please  point out the 
omissions  and I shall make  an attempt to give you satisfaction.  
I have no mental  reservation.  
I find that my letters  to you are sent through the Government  of Bombay.  This 
procedure  must involve  some  loss of time.  As time is of the essence in this matter, 
perhaps  you will issue instructions  that my letters  to you may be sent directly  by 
the Superintendent of this camp.  
I am, 
Your sincere  friend,  
M. K. GANDHI
 
The Viceroy’s  House,  
New Delhi.  
25th January  1943.  
Dear Mr. Gandhi,  
Many thanks  for your personal  letter  of the 19th January, which  I have just 
received, and  which  I need not say I have read with close  care and attenti on. But I 
am still, I  fear, rather  in the dark.  I made  clear  to you in my last letter  that, 
however  reluctantly, the  course  of events, and my familiarity with what  has been Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 225 taking  place, has  left me no choice  but to regard the Congress  movement, and you 
as its authorized and fully empowered  spokesman  at the time of the decision  of 
last August, as  responsible  for the sad campaign  of violence  and crime, and  
revolutionary activity  which  has done so much  harm, and so much  injury  to India’s  
credit, since  last August. I note what you say about non-violence.  I am very glad to 
read your unequivocal  condemnation  of violence  and I am well aware  of the 
importance  which  you have given  to that article  of your creed  in the past.  But the 
events  of these  last months, and even the events  that are happening  to-day, show  
that it has not met with the full support of certain  at any rate of your followers , 
and the mere  fact that they may have fallen  short  of an ideal which  you have 
advocated is no answer  to the relations  of those  who have lost their lives, and  to 
those  themselves  who have lost their property or suffered  severe  injury  as a result  
of violent  activities  on the part of Congress  and its supporters.  And I cannot  I fear 
accept  as an answer  your suggestion  that ‘the whole  blame’  has been laid by you 
yourself  at the door of the Government  of India.  We are dealing  with facts in this 
matter, and they have to be faced.  And while, as  I made  clear  in my last letter, I  
am very anxious  to have from you anything  that you may have to say or any 
specific  proposition  that you may have to make, the  position  remains  that it is not 
the Government  of India, but the Congress  and yourself  that are on their 
justification  in this matter.  
If therefore  you are anxious  to inform  me that you repudi ate or dissociate  yourself  
from the resolution  of the 9th August  and the policy which  that resolution  
represents, and if you can give me appropriate  assurance  as regards  the future, I  
shall, I  need not say, be  very ready to consider  the matter  further.  It is of course  
very necessary  to be clear  on that point, and you will not, I  know, take  it amiss  
that I should  make  that clear  in the plainest possible  words.  
I will ask the Governor  of Bombay to arrange  that any communication  from you 
should  be sent through him, which  will I trust reduce  delay in its  transmission.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 226 Yours  sincerely,  
LINLITHGOW  
 
Detention  Camp,  
29th January  1943.  
Dear Lord Linlithgow,  
I must thank  you warmly  for your prompt reply  to my letter  of 19th instant.  I wish I 
could  agree  with you that your letter  is clear.  I am sure you do not wish to imply  
by clearness  simply that you hold a particular  opinion  strongly.  I have pleaded and 
would  continue  to plead  till the last breath  that you should  at least make  an 
attempt to convince  me of the validi ty of the opinion  you hold, that the August  
resolution  of the Congress  is responsible  for the popular  violence  that broke  out on 
the 9th August  last and after, even  though it broke  out after the wholesale  arrest  
of principal  Congress  workers.  Was not the drastic  and unwarranted action  of the 
Government  responsible  for the reported  violence ? You have not even said what  
part of the August  resolution  is bad or offensive  in your opinion.  That resolution  is 
in no way a retraction  by the Congress  of its policy  of non-violence.  It is definitely  
against Fascism  in every  shape  or form.  It tenders  co-operation  in the war effort  
under  circumstances  which  alone  can make  effective  and nation -wide co-operation  
possible.  
Is all this open to reproach ? 
Objection  may be raised to that clause  of the resolution  which  contemplated civil 
disobedience.  But that itself  cannot  constitute  an objection  since  the principle  of 
civil disobedience  is impliedly conceded  in what is known  as the “Gandhi -Irwin  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 227 Pact’.  Even that civil disobedien ce was not to be started before  knowing  the result  
of the meeting  for which  I was to seek from you an appointment.  
Then, take  the unproved  and in my opinion  unprovable  charges  hurled  against the 
Congress  and me by so responsible  a Minister  as the Secretary of State  for India.  
Surely  I can say with safety that it is for Government  to justify  their action  by 
solid evidence, not  by mere  ipse dixit.  
But you throw  in my face the facts of murders  by persons  reputed to be 
Congressmen.  I see the fact of murders  as clearly, I  hope, as  you do. My answer  is 
that the Government  goaded the people  to the point of madness.  They started  
leonine  violence  in the shape  of the arrests  already referred  to. That violence  is 
not any the less so, because  it is organized on a scale  so gigantic  that it displaces  
the Mosaic  law of tooth  for tooth  by that of ten thousand  for one – not to mention  
the corollary  of the Mosaic  law, i.e. of non-resistance  as enunciated  by Jesus  
Christ.  I cannot  interpret  in any other  manner  the repressive  measures  of the all-
powerful  Government  of India.  
Add to this tale of woe the privations  of the poor millions  due to India- wide 
scarcity  which  I cannot  help thinking  might  have been largely  mitigated, if  not 
altogether  prevented, had there  been a bona fide national  government  responsible  
to a popularly  elected  assembly.  
If then I cannot  get soothing  balm for my pain, I  must resort  to the law prescribed  
for satyagrahis, namely, a fast according  to capacity.  I must commence  after the 
early morning  breakfast of the 9th February, a fast for twenty -one days ending  on 
the morning  of the 2nd March.  Usually, during  my fasts, I  take water  with the 
addition  of salts.  But nowadays, my system  refuses  water.  This time therefore  I 
propose  to add juices  of citrus  fruits  to make water  drinkable.  For, my  wish is not 
to fast unto death  but to survive  the ordeal, if  God so wills.  This fast can be ended  
sooner  by the Government  giving  the needed  relief.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 228 I am not marking  this letter  personal, as  I did the two previous  ones.  They were in 
no way confidential.  They were  mere  personal  appeals.  
I am, 
Your sincere  friend,  
M. K. GANDHI  
PS.- The following  was inadvertently omitted : The  Government  have evidently  
ignored  or overlooked  the very material  fact that the Congress, by  its August  
resolution, asked  nothing  for itself.  All its demands  were for the whole  people.  As 
you should  be aware, the  Congress  was willing  and prepared for the Government  
inviting  Qaid- i-Azam  Jinnah to form a national  government  subject  to such agreed  
adjustments  as may be necessary  for the duration  of the war, such  government  
being  responsible  to a duly elected  assembly.  Being  isolated from the Working  
Committee, except  Shrimati  Sarojini  Devi, I  do not know  its present  mind.  But the 
committee  is not likely  to have changed its mind.  
M. K. GANDHI  
 
The Viceroy’s  House,  
New Delhi.  
5th February 1943.  
Dear Mr. Gandhi,  
Many  thanks  for your letter  of 29th January  which  I have just received.  I have read 
it, as  always, with  great care and with every  anxiety to follow  your mind  and to do 
full justice  to your argument.  But I fear that my view of the responsibility of Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 229 Congress  and of yourself  personally for the lamentable  disorders  of last autumn  
remains  unchanged.  
In my last letter  I said that my knowledge  of the facts left me no choice  but to 
regard  the Congress  movement  and you as its authorized and fully empowered  
leader  at that time of the decision  of last August, as  responsible  for the campaign  
of violence  and crime  that subsequently broke  out. In reply you have reiterated  
your request  that I should  attempt to convince  you that my opinion  is correct.  I 
would  readily have responded earlier  to that request  were it not that your letters  
gave no indication, such  as I should  have been entitled to expect, that you sought  
the informa tion with an open mind.  In each of them  you have expressed  profound  
distrust of the published reports  of the recent  happenings, although in your last 
letter, on  the basis of the same  information, you  have not hesitated  to lay the 
whole  blame  for them  on the Government  of India.  In the same  letter  you have 
stated  that I cannot  expect  you to accept  the accuracy  of the official  reports  on 
which  I rely. It is not therefore  clear to me how you expect  or even desire  me to 
convince  you of anything.  But in fact, th e Government  of India have never  made  
any secret  of their reasons  for holding  the Congress  and its leaders  responsible  for 
the deplorable  acts of violence, sabotage  and terrorism  that have occurred  since  
the Congress  resolution  of the 8th August  declared a ‘mass  struggle’  in support of 
its demands, appointed you as its leader  and authorized  all Congressmen  to act for 
themselves  in the event  of interference with the leadership of the movement.  A 
body which  passes  a resolution  in such terms  is hardly entitled  to disclaim  
responsibility for any events  that follow  it. There  is evidence that you and your 
friends  expected  this policy to to lead to violence; and  that you were prepared to 
condone  it; and  that the violence  that ensued  formed  part of a concerted  plan,  
conceived  long before  the arrest  of Congress  leaders.  The general  nature  of the 
case against the Congress  has been publicly  stated by the Home  Member, 
Government  of India, in  his speech  in the Central  Legislative  Assembly on the 15th Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 230 September  last, and if you need further  information  I would  refer  you to it. I 
enclose  a complete  copy in case the press  versions  that you must have seen were  
not sufficient.  I need only add that all the mass of evidence  that has since  come  to 
light has confirmed  the conclusio ns then reached.  I have ample  information  that 
the campaign  of sabotage  has been conducted under  secret  instructions  circulated  
in the name  of the A.I.C.C., that well-known  congressman  have organized and 
freely  taken  part in acts of violence  and murder; an d that even now an 
underground  Congress  organization  exists  in which, among  others, the  wife of a 
member  of the Congress  Working  Committee  plays  a prominent  part, and  which  is 
actively engaged  in planning  the bomb outrages  and other  acts of terrorism  that 
have disgusted the whole  country.  If we do not act on all this information  or make  
it more  publicly known  it is because  the time is not yet ripe; but you may rest 
assured  that the charges  against  the Congress  will have to be met sooner  or later 
and it will then be for you and your colleagues  to clear yourselves  before  the 
world  if you can. And if in the meanwhile  you yourself, by  any action  such as you 
now appear  to be contemplating, attempt to find an easy way out, the  judgment  
will go against  you by defau lt. 
I have read with surprise  your statement that the principle  of civil disobedience  is 
implicitly  conceded  in the Delhi  Settlement  of the 5th March  1931, which  you refer  
to as the “Gandhi -Irwin  Pact’.  I have again  looked  at the document.  Its basis was 
that civil disobedience  would  be ‘effectively  discontinued’  and that certain  
‘reciprocal  action’  would  be taken  by Government.  It was inherent  in such a 
document  that it should  take notice  of the existence of civil disobedience.  But I 
can find nothing  in it to suggest  that civil disobedience  was recognized  as being  in 
any circumstances  legitimate.  And I cannot  make  it too plain that it is not so 
regarded  by my Government.  
To accept  the point of view which  you put forward  would  be to concede  that the 
authorize d government  of the country, on  which  lies the responsibility for Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 231 maintaining  peace  and good order, should  allow  subversive  and revolutionary  
movements  described by you yourself  as open rebellion, to  take place  
unchallenged; that  they should  allow  preparations  for violence, for  the 
interruption  of communications, for  attacks  on innocent  persons, for  the murder  
of police  officers  and others  to proceed  unchecked.  My Government  and I are open 
indeed  to the charge  that we should  have taken  drastic  action  at an earlier  stage  
against you and against the Congress  leaders.  But my anxiety and that of my 
Government  has throughout  been to give you, and to give the Congress  
organization, every possible  opportunity to withdraw  from the position  which  you 
have decided to take up. Your statements  of last June and July, the  original  
resolution  of the Working  Committee  of the 14th July, and your declaration  on the 
same  day that there  was no room  left for negotiations, and  that after  all it was an 
open rebellion, are  all of them grave  and significant, even  without  your final 
exhortation  to ‘do or die’. But with a patience  that was perhaps  misplaced, it was 
decided to wait until the resolution  of the All India Congress  Committee  made  it 
clear that there  could  be no further  toleration  of the Congress  attitude  if 
Government  was to discharge  its responsibility  to the people  of India.  
Let me in conclusion  say how greatly I regret  having  regard , having regard to your 
health  and your age, the  decision  that you tell me that you now have it in mind to 
take.  I hope and pray that wiser counsels  may yet prevail  with you. But the 
decision  whether  or not to undertake  a fast with its attendant risks is clearly  one 
that must be taken  by you alone  and the responsibility  for which  and for its 
consequences  must rest on you alone.  I trust sincerely  that in the light of what  I 
have said you may think  better  of your resolution  and I would  welcome  a decision  
on your part to think  better  of it, not  only because  of my own natural  reluctance  
to see you willfully  risk your life, but  because  I regard the use of a fast for 
political  purposes  as a form of political  blackmail (himsa)  for which  there  can be Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 232 no moral  justification, and  understood from your own previous  writings  that this 
was also your view.  
Yours  sincerely , 
LINLITHGOW . 
M. K. Gandhi, Esq.  
 
The Viceroy’s  House,  
New Delhi.  
5th February 1943.  
Dear Mr. Gandhi,  
In your letter  of 29th January to H.E. you mentioned  that you were not marking  
that letter  personal  like your two earlier  letters, but that those two earlier  letters  
were in no way confidential, and  were  a mere  personal  appeal.  As you would  no 
doubt  have expected  H.E. had hitherto  attached to the word ‘personal’ its  normal  
conventional  meaning, and  had accordingly  given  the same  marking  to his replies. 
He assumes  in the light of what you say that you would  have no objection  to his 
publishing  these  letters  with his replies  to them  despite  the fact of their personal  
marking.  Perhaps  you would  be so kind as to let me know.  
Yours  sincerely , 
G. LAITHWAI TE. 
M. K. Gandhi, Esq.  
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 233 Detention  Camp,  
7th February 1943 
Dear Sir Gilbert,  
I was delighted to see your signature  after such a lapse  of time.  When  I said that 
the two personal  letters  were not confidential  I certainly meant what you say. But 
I meant also that though they were not confidential  on my part, if  His Excellency  
wanted to treat them  as such, being  personal, he  was free to do so, and  therefore  
equally free to regard  his two replies  also as such.  In that case he could  have the 
four letters  withhel d from publication.  So far as I am concerned  my request  of 
course  is that the whole  correspondence  beginning  with my letter  to the Secretary  
to the Government  of India, Home  Department should  be published.  
Yours  sincerely,  
M. K. GANDHI.  
 
Detention  Camp,  
7th February 1943.  
Dear Lord Linlithgow,  
I have to thank  you for your long reply dated 5th instant  to my letter  of  
29th January  last. 
I would  take your last point first, namely, the  contemplated fast which  begins  on 
9th instant.  Your letter, from  a satyagr ahi’s stand -point, is  an invitation  to fast. No 
doubt the responsibility for the step and its consequences  will be solely  mine.  You 
have allowed  an expression  to slip from your pen for which  I was unprepared.  In 
the concluding  sentence  of the second  paragr aph you describe  the step as an Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 234 attempt ‘to find an easy way out’. That you, as  a friend, can  impute  such a base 
and cowardly motive  to me passes  comprehension.  You have also described it as ‘a 
form of political  blackmail’, and you quote  my previous  writin gs on the subject  
against me. I abide  by my writings.  I hold that there  is nothing  inconsistent  in 
them  with the contemplated step.  I wonder  whether  you have yourself  read those  
writings.  
I do claim  that I approached you with an open mind  when  I asked you to convince  
me of my error.  A ‘profound  distrust’  of the published  reports  is in no way 
inconsistent  with my having  an open mind. You say that there  is evidence that I (I 
leave  my friends  out for the moment) ‘expected  this policy  to lead to violence’, 
that I was ‘prepared to condone  it’, and that ‘the  violence  that ensued  formed  
part of a concerted  plan conceived  long before  the arrest  of Congress  leaders’.  I 
have seen no evidence in support of such a serious  charge.  You admit that part of 
the evidence  has yet to be published.  The speech  of the Home  Member, of  which  
you have favoured  me with a copy, may be taken  as the opening  speech  of the 
prosecution  counsel  and nothing  more.  It contains  unsupported imputations  
against Congressmen.  Of course  he has describe d the violent  outburst  in graphic  
language.  But he has not said why it took place  when  it did. You have condemned  
men and women  before  trying  them  and hearing  their defence.  Surely  there  is 
nothing  wrong  in my asking  you to show  me the evidence  on which  you hold them  
guilty.  What  you say in your letter  carries  no conviction.  Proof  should  correspond  
to the canons  of English  jurisprudence.  
If the wife of a member  of the Working  Committee  is actively engaged  in ‘planning  
the bomb outrages  and other  acts of terrorism’  she should  be tried before  a court  
of law, and punished  if found  guilty.  The lady you refer to could  only have done 
the things  attributed to her after  the wholesale  arrests  of 9th August  last which  I 
have dared to describe  as leonine  violence.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 235 You say that the time is not yet ripe to publish  the charges  against the Congress.  
Have you ever thought  of the possibility of their being  found  baseless  when  they 
are put before  an impartial  tribunal, or  that some  of the condemned  persons  
might  have died in the meanwhile, or  that some  of the evidence that the living  
can produce  might  become  unavailable ? 
I reiterate  the statement that the principle  of civil disobedience  is implicitly  
conceded  in the settlement  of 5th March  1931, arrived  at between  the then Viceroy 
on behalf  of the Government  of India and myself  on behalf  of the Congress.  I hope 
you know  that the principal  Congressmen  were discharged  before  that settlement  
was even thought  of. Certain  reparation  were made  to Congressmen  under  that 
settlement.  Civil disobedience  was discontinued  only on certain  conditions  being  
fulfilled  by the Government.  That by itself  was, in  my opinion, an  
acknowledgement  of its legitimacy, of  course  under  given  circumstances.  It 
therefore  seems  somewhat strange  to find you maintain  that civil disobedience  
cannot  be recognized  as being  in any circumstances  legitimate. “by your 
Government”.  You ignore  the practice  of the British  Government  which  has 
recognized  its legitimacy under  the name  of ‘passive  resistance’.  
Lastly you read into my letter  a meaning  which  is wholly  inconsistent  with my 
declaration, in  one of them, of  adherence  to unadulterated non-violence.  For, you  
say in your letter  under  reply, that “acceptance  of my point of view would  be to 
concede  that the authorized  Government  of the country  on which  lies the 
responsibility for maintaining  peace  and good order, should  allow  movements  to 
take place  that would  admit preparations  for violence, interruption  of 
communications, for  attacks  on innocent  persons, for  murders  of police  officers  
and others, to  proceed  unchecked”.  I must be strange  friend  of yours  whom  you 
believe to be capable  of asking  for recognition  of such things  as lawful.  
I have not attempted an exhaustive  reply to the views  and statements  attribute  to 
me. This is not the place  nor the time for such reply.  I have only picked  out those  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 236 things  which  in my opinion  demanded an immediate  answer.  You have left me no 
loophole  for escaping  the ordeal  I have set before  myself.  I begin  it on 9th instant  
with the cleares t possible  conscience.  Despite  your description  of it as ‘a form of 
political  blackmail’, it  is on my part meant to be an appeal  to the Highest Tribunal  
for justice  which  I have failed  to secure  from you. If I do not survive  the ordeal  I 
shall go to the judgment seat with the fullest  faith in my innocence.  Posterity will 
judge  between  you as representative of an all-powerful  Government  and me as a 
humble  man who has tried to serve  his country  and humanity  through it. 
My last letter  was written  against time and therefore  a material  paragraph  went in 
as postscript.  I now send herewith  a fair copy typed by Pearey lal who has taken  
Mahadeo  Desai’s  place.  You will find the postscript paragraph  restored  to the 
place  where  it should  have been.  
I am, 
Your sincere  friend, 
M. K. GANDHI . 
(Received  by Post)  
Home  Department,  
New Delhi.  
7th February 1943.  
Confidential  
Dear Mr. Gandhi,  
The Government  of India have been informed  by His Excellency  the Viceroy  of your 
intention  as communicated to him of undertaking  a fast for twenty -one days in 
certain  circumstances.  They have carefully  considered  the position, and the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 237 conclusions  they have reached  in the light of such consideration  are set out in the 
statement of which  a copy is enclosed, which  they would  propose, in  the event  of 
your maintaining  your present  intention, to  release  in due course  to the press.  
1. The Government  of India, as  you will see from their statement, would be very 
reluctant  to see you fast, and I am instructed to inform  you that, as  the statement  
makes  clear, they would  propose  that, should you persist  in your intention, you  
will be set at liberty  for the purpose, and for the duration, of  your fast as from the 
time of its commencement.  During  the period of your fast there  will be no 
objection  to your procee ding where  you wish, though the Government  of India 
trust that you will be able to arrange  for your accommodation  away from the Aga 
Khan’s  Palace.  
2. Should  you for any reason  find yourself  unable  to take advantage  of these  
arrangements, a decision  which  the Government  of India would  greatly regret, 
they will of course  suitably amend the statement of which  a copy is now enclosed  
before  it issues.  But they wish to repeat, with  all earnestness, their  anxiety and 
their hope that the considerations  which  have carried  so much  weight  with them  
will equally carry  weight  with you, and  that you will not pursue  your present  
tentative  proposal.  In that event  no occasion  will of course  arise for the issue of 
any statement of any kind.  
Yours  sincerely  
R. TOTTENHAM  
PS. February 8th. – In view of the urgency  of the matter  the text of this letter  was 
telegraphed to the Governor’s  Secretary  yesterday for communication  to you to-
day. 
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 238 Detention  Camp,  
8th February 1943.  
Dear Sir Richard,  
I have very carefully  studied your letter. I am sorry to say that there  is nothing  in 
the correspondence  which  has taken  place  between  His Excellency  and myself  or 
your letter, to  warrant  a recalling  of my intention  to fast. I have mentioned  in my 
letters  to His Excellency  the conditions  which  can induce  prevention  or suspension  
of the step.  
If the temporary release is offered  for my convenience, I  do not need it. I shall be 
quite  content  to take my fast as a detenu  or prisoner.  If it is for the convenience  
of the Government  I am sorry I am unable to suit them  much  as I should  like to do 
so. I can say this much  that I, as a prisoner, shall  avoid, as  far as is humanly  
possible, every  cause  of inconvenience  to the Govern ment  save what is inherent  in 
the fast itself.  The impending  fast has not been conceived  to be taken  as a free 
man.  Circumstances  may arise, as  they have done before  now, when  I may have to 
fast as a free man.  If therefore  I am released, there  will be no fast in terms  of my 
correspondence  above  mentioned.  I shall have to survey  the situation  de novo and 
decide  what I should  do. I have no desire  to be released  under  false pretences.  In 
spite of all that has been said against me, I  have not to belie  the vow of Truth  and 
Non-violence  which  alone  makes  life liveable for me. I say this, i f it is only for my 
own satisfaction.  It does me good to reiterate  openly my faith when outer  
darkness  surrounds  me, as  it does just now.  
I must not hustle  the Government  into a decision  on this letter.  I understand that 
your letter  has been dictated throu gh the telephone.  In order  to give the 
Government  enough time, I  shall suspend  the fast, if  necessary, to  Wednesday  
next, 10th instant.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 239 So far as the statement proposed to be issued  by the Government  is concerned, 
and of which  you have favoured  me with a copy, I  can have no opinion.  But if I 
might  have I say that it does me an injustice.  The proper  course  would  be to 
publish  the full correspondence  and let the public  judge  for themselves.  
Yours  sincerely , 
M. K. GANDHI  
 
Detention  Camp,  
27th September  1943.  
Dear Lord Linlithgow,  
On the eve of your departure  from India I would  like to send you a word.  
Of all the high functionaries  I have had the honour  of knowing  none has been the 
cause  of such deep sorrow to me as you have been.  It has cut me to the quick  to 
have to think  of you as having  countenanced  untruth, and  that regarding  one 
whom  you at one time considered  as your friend.  I hope and pray that God will 
some  day put it into your heart to realize  that you, a  representative  of a great 
nation, had  been led into a grievous  error.  
With good wishes.  
I still remain,  
Your friend,  
M. K. GANDHI . 
 
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 240 Viceroy’s  Camp  India,  (Simla).  
Personal  
7th October, 1943.  
Dear Mr. Gandhi,  
I have received  your letter  of 27th September.  I am indeed  sorry that your feelings  
about my deeds  or words  of mine should  be as you describe.  But I must be 
allowed, as  gently  as I may, to  make  plain to you that I am quite  unable  to accept  
your interpretation  of the events  in question.  
As for the corrective  virtues  of time and reflection  evidently these  are ubiquitous  
in their operation, and  wisely  to be rejected  by no man.  
Yours  sincerely , 
LINGLITHGOW  
M. K .Gandhi, Esq.  
Received  on 15th October  1943.  
                                              
                                               
 
 
 
 
   Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 241  
 
   
 
 
 
 
Part Nine 
------------------------------------ ----- 
Aphorisms  
-----------------------------------------  
   
 
 
  
 
  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 242 Chapter 09  
APHORISM  
My writings  should  be cremated with my body.  What  I have done will endure, not  
what I have said and written.  I have often  said recently  that even if all our 
scriptures  were to perish, one  mantra of Ishopanisha  was enough to declare  the 
essence of Hinduism, but even that one verse  will be of no avail if there  is no one 
to live it. Even so what I have said and written is useful  only to the extent  that it 
has helped you to assimilate  the great  principles  of truth  and ahimsa.  If you have 
not assimilated them, my  writings  will be of no use to you. 
(Harijan,  1st May 1937)  
 
Let Gandhism  be destroyed if it stands  for error. Truth  and ahimsa will never  be 
destroyed, but if Gandhism  is another  name  for sectarianism, it deserves  to be 
destroyed.  If I were to know, after  my death, that what I stood  for had 
degenerated into sectarianism, I  should  be deeply pained.  We have to work away  
silently.  Let no one say that he is a follower  of Gandhi.  It is enough that I should  
be my own follower.  I know  what an inadequate  follower  I am of myself, for  I 
cannot  live up to the convictions  I stand  for. 
(Harijan, 2nd March  1940)  
 
If we are armed  with that attitude  of mind, we  may hope to propagate  ahimsa  
principles.  Without  that, book  and newspaper  propaganda is of no avail.  You do 
not know  with what indifference  I used to run Young  India.  I did not shed a single  
tear when  Young  India had to be stopped.  
(Harijan, 13th May 1939)   Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 243  
My own experience has led me to the knowledge  that the fullest  life is impossible  
without  an immovable  belief  in a Living  Law in obedience  to which  the whole  
universe  moves.  A man without  that faith is like a drop thrown out of the ocean  
bound  to perish.  
(Harijan, 25th April 1936)  
 
I have made  the world’s  faith in God my own, and  as my faith is ineffaceable, I  
regard  that faith as amounting  to experience.  However, as  it may be said that to 
describe  faith as experienc e is to temper  with Truth, it  may perhaps  be more  
correct  to say that I have no word  for characterizing  my belief  in God. 
(Auto.)  
 
God is that indefinable  something  which  we all feel but which  we do not know.  To 
me God is Truth  and Love, God  is ethics  and morality.  God is fearlessness, God  is 
the source  of light and life and yet He is above  and beyond all these.  God is 
conscience.  He is even the atheism  of the atheist.  He transcends  speech  and 
reason.  He is personal  God to those  who need His touch.  He is the purest essence.  
He simply Is to those  who have faith.  He is long suffering.  He is patient but He is 
also terrible.  He is the greatest  democrat  the world  knows.  He is the greatest  
tyrant ever known.  We are not, He alone  Is. 
(Young  India, 5th March  1925)  
 
I do not regard  God as a person.  Truth  for me is God, and God’s  Law and God are 
not different  things  or facts, in  the sense  that an earthly king and his law are Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 244 different.  Because  God is an Idea, Law  Himself.  Therefore, it  is impossible  to 
conceive  God as breaking  the Law. He, therefore, does  not rule our actions  and 
withdraw  Himself.  When  we say He rules our actions, we  are simply  using  human 
language  and we try to limit Him. Otherwise, He  and His Law abide  everywhere  
and govern  everything.  Therefore, I  do not think  that He answers  in every  detail  
every  request of ours, but  there  is no doubt that He rules our action  and I literally  
believe that not a blade  of grass  grows  or moves  without  His will. 
(Harijan, 23rd March  1940)  
 
You cannot  realize  the wider  consciousness, unless  you subordinate  completely  
reason  and intellect, and  the body too. 
(Harijan)  
But I know  that I have still before  me a difficult  path to traverse.  I must reduce  
myself  to zero.  So long as one does not of his own free will put himself  last among  
his fellow  creatures, there  is no salvation  for him. Ahimsa is the farthest limit of 
humanity.  
(Auto.)  
 
But He is no God who merely  satisfies  the intellect, if  He ever does.  God to be God 
must rule the heart and transform  it. He must express  Himself in every  smallest  
act of His votary.  This can only be done through a definite  realization  more  real 
than the five senses  can ever produce.  Sense perceptions  can be, often  are, false  
and deceptive, however  real they may appear  to us. Where  there  is realization  
outside  the senses  it is infallible.  It is proved not by extraneous  evidence  but in 
the transformed conduct  and character  of those  who have felt the real presence  
of God within.  Such testimony  is to be found  in the experiences  of an unbroken  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 245 line of prophets  and sages  in all countries  and climes.  To reject  this evidence is to 
deny oneself.  
(Young  India, 11th October  1928)  
 
No one can attain  perfection  while  he is in the body for the simple  reason  that the 
ideal state  is impossible  so long as one has not completely  overcome  his ego, and  
ego cannot  be wholly  got rid of so long as one is tied down  by the shackles  of the 
flesh.  
(Young  India, 20th September  1928)  
 
We are living  in the midst of death.  What  is the value  of ‘working  for our own 
schemes’  when they might  be reduced  to naught  in the twinkling  of an eye, or  
when  we may equally swiftly and unawares  be taken  away from them ? But we may 
feel strong  as a rock, if  we could  truthfully  say ‘we work for God and His 
schemes’.  Then  nothing  perishes.  All perishing  is then only what seems.  Death  and 
destruction  have then, but only then no reality about them.  For death  and 
destruction  is then but a change.  
(Young  India, 23rd September  1926)  
 
Prayer  is the very soul and essence of religion, and  therefore, pr ayer must be the 
very core of the life of man, for  no man can live without  religion.  
(Young  India, 23rd January  1930)  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 246 Prayer  is not asking.  It is longing  of the soul. It is daily admission  of one’s  
weakness….It  is better  in prayer  to have a heart without  words  than words  without  
a heart.  
(Young  India, 23rd January  1930)  
 
Means  and end are convertible  terms  in my philosophy of life. 
(Young  India, 26th December  1924)  
 
I have nothing  new to teach  the world.  Truth  and Non-violence  are as old as the 
hills. All I have done is to try experiments  in both on as vast a scale  as I could.  In 
doing  so I have sometimes  erred  and learnt by my errors.  Life and its problems  
have thus become  to me so many  experiments  in the practice  of truth  and non-
violence.  
(Harijan, 28th March  1936)  
 
Good  travels  at a snail’s  pace.  Those  who want to do good are not selfish, they  are 
not in a hurry, they  know  that to impregnate  people  with good requires  a long 
time.  
(I.H.R. ) 
 
Love and exclusive  possession  can never  go together.  Theoret ically, when  there  is 
perfect  love, there must be perfect  non-possession.  The body is our last 
possession.  So a man can only exercise perfect  love and be completely  
dispossessed, if  he is prepared to embrace  death  and renounces  his body for the 
sake of human service.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 247 But that is true in theory only.  In actual  life, we  can hardly exercise perfect  love, 
for the body as a possession  will always  remain  with us. Man will ever remain  
imperfect, and it will always  be his part to try to be perfect.  So that perfecti on in 
love or non-possession  will remain  an unattainable  ideal as long as we are alive, 
but towards  which  we must ceaselessly  strive.  
(M. R., 1935)  
 
I saw that nations  like individuals  could  only be made  through the agony of the 
Cross  and in no other  way. Joy comes  not out of infliction  of pain on others, but  
out of pain voluntarily  borne  by oneself.  
(Young  India, 31st December  1931)  
 
Sex urge is a fine and noble  thing.  There  is nothing  to be ashamed of in it. But it is 
meant only for the act of creation.  Any other  use of it is a sin against God and 
humanity.  
(Harijan, 28th March  1936)  
 
Abstract truth  has no value  unless  it incarnates  in human beings  who represent  it 
by proving  their readiness  to die for it. 
                                                                        (Young  India, 22nd December  1921)  
 
I do dimly  perceive  that whilst  everything  around  me is ever changing, ever  dying, 
there  is underlying  all that change  a living  power  that is changeless, that holds  all 
together, that creates, di ssolves  and recreates.  That informing  power  or spirit  is Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 248 God. And since  nothing  else I see merely  through the senses  can or will persist, He  
alone  is. 
And is this power  benevolent  or malevo lent? I see it as purely benevolent, for  I can 
see that in the midst of death  life persists, in  the midst of untruth  truth  persists, 
in the midst of darkness  light persists.  Hence  I gather  that God is Life, Truth, 
Light . He is Love.  He is the supreme  Good.  
                                                                           (Young  India, 11th October  1928)  
 
Human  society  is a ceaseless  growth, an  unfoldment  in terms  of spirituality.  
                                                                      (Young  India, 16th September  1926)  
 
I claim  that human  mind  or human  society  is not divided  into watertight  
compartments  called  social, political  and religious.  All act and react  upon one 
another.  
(Young  India, 2nd March  1922)  
 
I do not believe that the spiritual  law works  on a field of its own. On the contrary, 
it expresses  itself  only through the ordinary  activities  of life. It thus affects  the 
economic, the  social  and the political  fields.  
(Young  India, 3rd September  1925)  
 
I believe in absolute  oneness  of God and therefore  also of humanity.  What though  
we have many bodies ? We have but one soul. The rays of the sun are many through 
refraction.  But they have the same  source.  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 249 (Young  India, 25th September  1924)  
 
The individual  is the one supreme  consideration.  
                                                                        (Young  India, 13th November  1924) 
 
Rationalists  are admirable  beings, rationalism  is a hideous  monster  when  it claims  
for itself  omnipotence.  Attribution  of omnipotence  to reason  is as bad a piece  of 
idolatry as is worship  of stock  and stone  believing  it to be God. I plead not for the 
suppression  of reason, but for a due recognition  of that in us which  sanctifies  
reason.  
(Young  India, 14th October  1926)  
 
It is my firm conviction  that nothing  enduring  can be built upon violence.  
(Young  India,  15th November  1928)  
 
They say ‘means  are after all means’. I would  say ‘means  are after  all everything’.  
As the means  so the end. There  is no wall of separation  between  means  and end. 
Indeed  the Creator  has given  us control (and that too very limited)  over means, 
none over the end. Realization  of the goal is in exact  proportion  to that of the 
means.  This is a proposition  that admits  of no exception.  
(Young  India, 17th July 1924)  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 250 The means  may be likened  to a seed, the end to a tree; and  there  is just the same  
inviolable  connection between  the means  and the end as there  is between  the 
seed and the tree.  
(I. H. R.) 
 
Though you have emphasized the necessity  of a clear statement of the goal, but  
having  once determined  it, I have never  attached  importance  to its repetition.  The 
clearest  possible  definition  of the goal and its appreciation  would  fail to take us 
there, if  we do not know  and utilize  the means  of achieving  it. I have, therefore, 
concerned  myself  principally with the conservation  of the means  and their 
progressive  use; I  know  if we can take care of them  attainment of the goal is 
assured.  I feel, too, that our progress  towards  the goal will be in exact  proportion  
to the purity of our means.  
This method may appear  to be long, perhaps  too long, but  I am convinced  that it is 
the shortest.  
(A.B.P.  17th September  1933)  
 
The true source  of rights  is duty.  If we all discharge  our duties, rights  will not be 
far to seek.  If leaving  duties  unperformed  we run after rights, they will escape  us 
like a will-o’-wisp.  The more  we pursue  them, the  farther  will they fly. The same  
teaching  has been embodied by Krishna  in the immortal  words : ‘Action  alone  is 
thine.  Leave  though the fruit severely  alone.’ Action  is duty; fruit  is the right.  
(Young  India, 8th January 1925)  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 251 But some  comforts  may be necessary  even for man’s  spiritual  advancement.  One 
could  not advance  himself  by identifying  himself  with the discomfort  and squalor  
of the villager.  
A certain  degree of physical  harmony  and comfort  is necessary  but above  that 
level, it becomes  a hindrance  instead of help. Therefore  the ideal of creating  an 
unlimited  number  of wants  and satisfying  them  seems  to be delusion  and a snare.  
The satisfaction  of one’s  physical  needs, of  one’s  narrow self must meet  at a point  
a dead stop, before  it degenerates  into physical  and intellectual  voluptuousness.  A 
man must arrange  his physical  and cultural  circumstances  so that they may not 
hinder  him in his service  of humanity, on which  all his energies  should  be 
concentrated.  
(Harijan, 29th August 1936)  
 
As long as you derive  inner  help and comfort  from anything  you should  keep it. If 
you were to give it up in a mood  of self-sacrifice  or out of a stern  sense  of duty, 
you would  continue  to want it back, and that unsatisfied want would  make  troubl e 
for you. Only give up a thing  when  you want some  other  condition  so much  that 
the thing  no longer  has any attraction  for you, or  when  it seems  to interfere  with 
that which  is more  greatly  desired.  
(Vishwa -Bharati  Quarterly, New  Series  II, Part  II.) 
 
Political  power  means  capacity to regulate  national  life through national  
representatives.  If national  life becomes  so perfect  as to become  self-regulated, 
no representation  becomes  necessary.  There  is then a state  of enlightened  
anarchy.  In such a state  everyone is his own ruler.  He rules himself  in such a 
manner  that he is never  a hindrance  to his neighbor.  In the ideal state  therefore, Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 252 there  is no political  power  because  there  is no state.  But the ideal  is never  fully 
realized  in life. Hence  the classical  statement of Thoreau  that that government  is 
best which  governs  the least.  
(Young  India, 2nd July 1931)  
 
I look upon an increase  in the power  of the state  with the greatest fear because, 
although  while  apparently doing  good by minimizing  exploitation, it  does the 
greatest harm  to mankind  by destroying  individuality which  lies at the root of all 
progress.  
The state  represents  violence  in a concentrated  and organized form.  The 
individual  has a soul, but  as the state  is a soulless  machine, it  can never  be 
wean ed from violence  to which  it owes  its very existence.  
It is my firm conviction  that if the state  suppressed  capitalism  by violence, it  will 
be caught  in the coils of violence  itself  and fail to develop non-violence  at any 
time.  
What  I would  personally prefer, would  be, not  a centralization  of power  in the 
hands  of the state  but an extension  of the sense  of trusteeship; as  in my opinion, 
the violence  of private  ownership  is less injurious  than the violence  of the state.  
I read Carlyle’s  History of the French  Revolution  while  I was in prison, and Pandit  
Jawaharlal  has told me something  about the Russian  Revolution.  But it is my 
conviction  that inasmuch  as these  struggles were fought  with the weapon  of 
violence, they  failed  to realize  the democratic  ideal.  
We want freedom  for our country, but  not at the expense or exploitation  of 
others, not  so as to degrade  other  countries.  I do not want  the freedom  of India if 
it means  the extinction  of England  or the disappearance  of Englishmen.  I want the Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 253 freedom  of my count ry so that other  countries  may learn  something  from my free 
country, so  that the resources  of my country  might  be utilized  for the benefit  of 
mankind.  Just as the cult of patriotism  teaches  us to-day that the individual  has to 
die for the family, the  famil y has to die for the village, the  village  for the district, 
the district for the province, and the province  for the country; even so, a country  
has to be free in order  that it may die, if  necessary  for the benefit  of the world.  
My love therefore  of nationa lism, or  my idea of nationalism, is  that my country  
may become  free, that  if need be, the  whole  country  may die, so  that the human  
races  may live. There  is no room  for race-hatred there.  Let that be our 
nationalism.  
( I.V.)  
 
You will see that my influence , great  as it may appear  to outsiders, is  strictly  
limited; I  may have considerable  influence  to conduct  a campaign  for redress  of 
popular  grievance  because  people  are ready and need a helper.  But I have no 
influence  to direct people’s  energy  in a channel  in which  they have no interest.  
(Harijan, 26th July 1942)  
 
My ahimsa would  not tolerate  the idea of giving  a free meal to a healthy person  
who has not worked  for it in some  honest  way, and if I had the power, I  would  stop 
every  sadavrata where  free meals  are given.  It has degraded the nation  and it has 
encouraged  laziness, idleness, hypocrisy  and even crime.  
(Young  India, 13th August  1925)  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 254 Do not say you will maintain  the poor on charity.  Only two classes  of people  are 
entitled  to charity and no one else – the Brahmana who  possesses  nothing  and 
whose  business  it is to spread holy learning, and  the cripple  and the blind.  The 
iniquitous  system  of giving  doles  to the able-bodied idle is going  on to our eternal  
shame  and humiliation, and it is to wipe out that shame  that I am going  about  with 
the message  of the Charkha up and down  the whole  country.  
(Young  India, 24th February 1927)  
 
Monotony  is the law of nature.  Look at the monotonous  manner  in which  the sun 
rises.  And imagine  the catastrophe  that would  befall the universe, if  the sun 
became  capricious  and went  in for a variety pastime.  But there  is a monotony  that 
sustains  and a monotony  that kills. The monotony  of necessary  occupations  is 
exhilarating  and life-giving.  An artist  never  tires of his art. 
The present  distress  is undoubtedly  insufferable.  Pauperism  must go. But 
industrialism  is no remedy.  The evil does not lie in the use of bullock -carts.  It lies 
in our selfishness  and want of consideration  for our neighbours.  If we have no love 
for our neighbours, no  change, however  revolutionary, can  do us any good.  
(Young  India, 7th October  1926)  
 
I would  say that if the village  perishes  India will perish  too. India will be no more  
India.  Her own mission  in the world  will get lost. The revival  of the village  is 
possible  only when  it is no more  exploited.  Industrialization  on a mass scale  will 
necessarily  lead to passive  or active  exploitation  of the villagers  as the problems  
of competition  and marketing  come  in. Therefore  we have to concentrate  on the 
village  being  self-contained, manufacturing  mainly for use. Provided this character  
of the village  industry  is maintained, there  would  be no objection  to the villagers  Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 255 using  even the modern  machines  and tools that they can make  and can afford  to 
use. Only they should not be used as a means  of exploitation  of others.  
(Harijan, 29th August  1936)  
 
The conflict  between  monied  classes  and labourers  is merely  seeming.  When  
labour  is intelligent  enough to organize  itself  and learns  to act as one man, it  will 
have the same weight  as money  if not much  greater.  The conflict  is really  between  
intelligence  and unintelligence.  Surely  it will be folly to keep up such a conflict.  
Unintelligence  must be removed.  
Exploitation  of the poor can be extinguished  not by effecting  the destruction  of a 
few millionaires, but  by removing  the ignorance  of the poor and teaching  them  to 
non-co-operate  with their exploiters.  That will convert  the exploiters  also. I have 
even suggested  that ultimately it will lead to both being  equal  partners.  Capital  as 
such is not evil; it  is its wrong  use that is evil. Capital  in some  form or other  will 
always  be needed.  
(Harijan, 28th July 1940)  
 
By political  independence  I do not mean  an imitation  of the British  House  of 
Commons, or  the Soviet  rule of Russia  or the Fascist rule of Italy or the Nazi rule 
of Germany.  They have systems  suited to their genius . We must have ours suited 
to ours.  What  that can be is more  than I can tell; I  have described it as Ramraja, 
i.e. sovereignty  of the people  based on pure moral authority.  
(Harijan, 2nd January 1937)  
 Selected Writings of MAHATMA GANDHI  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 256 It is my certain  conviction  that no man loses his freedom  except  through  his own 
weakness.  
Even the most despotic  government  cannot  stand except  for the consent  of the 
governed  which  consent  is often  forcibly  procured  by the despot.  Immediately the 
subject  ceases  to fear the despotic  force, his  power  is gone.  
(Young  India, 30th June 1920, Tagore)  
 
I do not believe in armed risings.  They are a remedy  worse  than the disease  sought  
to be cured.  They are a token  of the spirit  of revenge and impatience  and anger.  
The method of violence  cannot  do good in the long run. Witness  the effect  of the 
armed rising  of the allied  powers  against Germany.  Have they not become  even 
like the Germans, as  the latter  have been depicted  to us by them ? 
That nation  is great which  rests its head upon death  as its pillow.  Those  who defy 
death  are free from all fear. 
 