 
Selected Letters of Mahatma 
Gandhi 
 
By M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
THE SELECTED WORKS OF 
MAHATMA GANDHI 
VOLUME FOUR  
 
GENERAL ELDITOR 
SHRIMAN NARAYAN 
 
Rupees One Hundred Fifty for set of five volumes  
© Navajivan Trust, 1968 
Price of this set of Selected Works of Mahatma Gand hi is subsidised by 
Navajivan Trust 
ISBN 81-7229-278-3 (set) 
Printed and Published by Jitendra T. Desai Navajiva n Publishing House 
Ahmedabad-380 014 (INDIA ) 
Phone: 079 - 27540635. 27542634 Fax: 079 - 27541329  
E-mail: jitnavjivan10@gmail.com Website: www.navaji vantrust.org  
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
FOREWORD 
This volume contains selected letters written by Ma hatma Gandhi from time to 
time. Very few of these letters were published in G andhiji's own lifetime. After 
his passing away, systematic efforts were made to c ollect numerous letters 
written by him to many friends and co-workers. We h ave tried to select and 
classify under different heads significant thoughts  contained in these letters. 
In the first part of the Volume, we have included a bout a hundred letters in 
their complete form. Most of these letters were wri tten on memorable 
occasions. I am sure the reader would be able to ge t an insight into Gandhiji's 
rich and varied personality through these letters. 
The second part contains Gandhiji's ideas which hav e been lifted from a large 
number of letters written by Gandhiji to many of hi s co-workers as well as men 
of public importance. Most of these ideas are of un iversal significance and 
would, I am sure, interest our readers in different  parts of the world. 
Shriman Narayan 
Raj Bhavan 
Ahmedabad, 
October 16, 1968 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3   
PUBLISHER'S NOTE 
A deluxe edition of Selected Works of Mahatma Gandhi  was released in  1969.  
It went out of print in about six months. To meet t he popular demand for it and 
to make it available to individual readers at a rea sonable price a new soft-
cover edition was soon released. It, too, was enthu siastically received and the 
entire stock of the publication was sold out in les s than three years. 
We are very happy to say that the set was reprinted  and was offered at a 
subsidised price to commemorate the Diamond Jubilee  year of Navajivan Trust 
during 1993-94.  Looking to its continuous demand and so also to fu lfill 
Navajivan's object of propagating Gandhian Literatu re, its fifth reprint is being 
published with new type-setting in five volumes. We  are sure, this new revised 
edition, too, would be well-received by individual readers, in order to enrich 
their personal library. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4   
1. TO DADABHAI NAOROJI 1 
[This letter appears to be the first of many that G andhiji wrote to Dadabhai 
Naoroji. Dadabhai was acquainted with the problems of Indians in South Africa, 
having been approached by them as early as 1891 to place their petitions 
before the British Government. The complete letter is not available, and the 
following extracts from it are taken from R. E Masa ni's Dadabhai Naoroji : The 
Grand Old Man of India,  pp. 468-9.] 
Durban, July 5, 1894  
The first Parliament of Natal under Responsible Gov ernment has been pre-
eminently an Indian Parliament. It has for the most  part occupied itself with 
legislation affecting Indians, by no means favourab ly. The Governor, in opening 
the Legislative Council and Assembly, remarked that  his Ministers would deal 
with the Franchise which was exercised by Indians i n Natal, although they never 
exercised it in India. The reasons given for the sw eeping measure to 
disfranchise Indians were that they had never exerc ised the Franchise before, 
and that they were not fit for it. 
The petition of the Indians seemed to prove a suffi cient answer to this. Hence 
they have now turned round and given out the real o bject of the Bill, which is 
simply this: "We do not want the Indians any more h ere. We want the coolies, 
but they shall remain slaves here and go back to In dia as soon as they are free." 
I earnestly request your undivided attention to the  cause and appeal to you to 
use your influence that always has been and is bein g used on behalf of the 
Indians, no matter where situated. The Indians look  up to you as children to the 
father. Such is really the feeling here. 
A word for myself and I have done. I am yet inexper ienced and young and, 
therefore, quite liable to make mistakes. The respo nsibility undertaken is quite 
out of proportion to my ability. I may mention that  I am doing this without any 
remuneration. So you will see that I have not taken  the matter up, which is 
beyond my ability, in order to enrich myself at the  expense of the Indians. I am Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  the only available person who can handle the questi on. You will, therefore, 
oblige me very greatly if you will kindly direct an d guide me and make 
necessary suggestions which shall be received as fr om a father of his child. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. I, pp. 105-6 
 
1'Dadabhai Naoroji (1825-1917)—Pioneer statesman know n as "the Grand Old Man of India"; 
President, Indian National Congress, 1886, 1893 and 1906; was first to enunciate Swaraj as the 
objective of the Congress; was elected member of th e House of Commons, 1893. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6   
2. TO G. K. GOKHALE1 
21-24, Court Chambers,  
Corner, Rissik & Anderson Street,  
P. O. Box 6522,  
Johannesburg,  
January 13, 1905  
To 
THE HONOURABLE PROFESSOR GOKHALE ,  
POONA  
DEAR PROFESSOR GOKHALE , 
The existence of  Indian Opinion  you know. It has now embarked on a career 
when I think I may fairly appeal to you for active sympathy. I propose to write 
perfectly frankly, as you know me too well to misun derstand me. When I saw 
that Mr. Madanjit could not carry on the paper with out pecuniary assistance 
and as I knew that he was guided by thoroughly patr iotic motives, I placed at 
his service the bulk of my savings. That, however, was not enough. Three 
months ago I took over the whole responsibility and  management. Mr. Madanjit 
still remains nominally the proprietor and publishe r, because I believe that he 
has done much for the community. My own office is a t present being worked in 
the interest of  Indian Opinion  and I have already become responsible to the 
extent of nearly £ 3,500. Some English friends, who  knew me intimately and 
before whom I placed the scheme as described in the  enclosed, took up the 
idea and now it is in full working order and, altho ugh it does not show the same 
measure of self-sacrifice as shown by the founders of the Fergusson College in 
Poona, I venture to think that it is not a bad copy . It has been a most delightful 
thing to me to see the English friends coming forwa rd so boldly. They are not 
literary men but they are sterling, honest, indepen dent men. Each of them had 
his own business or employment where he was doing w ell, and yet none of 
them had the slightest hesitation in coming forward  as a worker for a bare 
living which means £3 per month, with a distant pro spect of getting profits. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  It is also my intention, if my earnings continue, t o open a school on the 
grounds, which would be second to none in South Afr ica for the education 
primarily of Indian children who would be resident boarders, and secondarily, 
of all who want to join the school but would also r eside on the premises. For 
this, too, volunteer workers are required. It would  be possible to induce one or 
two Englishmen and English ladies here to give thei r lifetime to this work, but 
Indian teachers are absolutely necessary. Could you  induce any graduates who 
have an aptitude for teaching, who bear a blameless  character and who would 
be prepared to work for a mere living? Those who wo uld come must be well-
tried, first-class men. I would want two or three a t least but more could 
certainly be accommodated, and after the school is in working order, it is 
intended to add a sanatorium with open-air treatmen t on hygienic lines. My 
immediate purpose, however, is in connection with  Indian Opinion. If you 
approve of all I have said regarding it, will you k indly send a letter of 
encouragement to be sent to the editor for publicat ion; also if you could spare 
a few moments, occasionally write an article ever s o small for it? I am also 
anxious to secure either honorary or paid correspon dents who would contribute 
weekly notes in English, Gujarati, Hindi and Tamil.  If it becomes expensive, I 
might have to be satisfied with only English corres pondence which would lend 
itself to being translated in the three Indian lang uages. Could you recommend 
any such correspondent or correspondents? The weekl y notes should give an 
idea of what is being done on your side with refere nce to the Indian question, 
giving extracts from notices of the question in the  newspapers, and should 
contain matters that are likely to be interesting t o the Indians in South Africa. 
You may at your discretion disclose partly or wholl y the contents of this letter 
in so far as such a course may be necessary in the interests of the subject-
matter hereof. I hope you are keeping good health. 
I remain,  
Yours faithfully, M.  K.  GANDHI  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. IV pp. 332-33 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8  1 Gopal Krishna Gokhale (1866-1915)—Statesman and ed ucationist; was associated with the Indian 
National Congress since its early days; presided ove r its Banaras Session in 1905; founded the 
Servants of India Society at Poona; visited South A frica in 1912 at Gandhiji's invitation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9   
3. TO G. K. GOKHALE 
Cape Town, February 27, 1914  
DEAR MR. GOKHALE , 
For the time being I am at Cape Town watching the c ourse of events. I do not 
want to inflict on you any news as about the strugg le. I shall be as brief as I 
possibly can. 
Mr Andrews and Mr Pearson are truly good men, we al l like them very much. Sir 
Benjamin has disappointed us. He has hardly done an y good and he may do a 
great deal of harm. He is weak and by no means sinc ere. Even now he has 
hardly grasped the details. 
And he undoubtedly, consciously or unconsciously, f osters divisions among us. 
Mr Andrews will tell you all about him. But I thoug ht that I should give you my 
impressions of Sir Benjamin. 
If there is a settlement in March, I propose to lea ve for India in April. I shall 
have with me probably about 20 men, women and child ren who will live with 
me. These will include the school children who are likely to come. I do not 
know whether you still want me to live at the Serva nts of India quarters in 
Poona or how. I shall be prepared to do so immediat ely after I have paid a visit 
to the members of my family. It is likely that the number living with me may be 
augmented by some members of my family who may wish  to share my life and 
work. Please do not consider yourself bound to keep  me at the Society's 
quarters. I am entirely in your hands. I want to le arn at your feet and gain the 
necessary experience. No matter whether I am stayin g somewhere under your 
guidance or not, I shall scrupulously observe the c ompact of silence for one 
year after my arrival in India. The vow of silence as I have understood it does 
not include the South African question and may be b roken at your wish for 
furthering any project about which both of us hold the same view. 
My present ambition you know. It is to be by your s ide as your nurse and 
attendant. I want to have the real discipline of ob eying someone whom I love Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  and look up to. I know I made a bad secretary in So uth Africa. I hope to do 
better in the Motherland if I am accepted. 
May you benefit in health by the change and the cal mer atmosphere on the 
continent. 
This letter will be in your hands about the middle of March. If you deem it 
necessary to say anything to me about my movements,  you will of course cable. 
I assume too that you will not want me to go to Poo na before you return. If you 
did, I should of course go. 
If I am enabled to leave for India in April, I prop ose to use the funds you have 
sent for our passages which shall be all deck. I ha ve no means of my own and 
Phoenix can hardly supply funds now. It is drained totally dry. 
I remain,  
Yours sincerely, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, pp. 360-61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11   
4. TO TOLSTOY 
Westminster Palace Hotel, 
4, Victoria Street,  
London, S.W., 
1st October, 1909  
SIR , 
I take the liberty of inviting your attention to wh at has been going on in the 
Transvaal (South Africa) for nearly three years. 
There is in that colony a British Indian population  of nearly 13,000. These 
Indians have for several years laboured under the v arious legal disabilities. The 
prejudice against colour and in some respect agains t Asiatics is intense in that 
colony It is largely due, so far as Asiatics are co ncerned, to trade jealousy. The 
climax was reached three years ago, with a law whic h I and many others 
considered to be degrading and calculated to unman those to whom it was 
applicable. I felt that submission to law of this n ature was inconsistent with the 
spirit of true religion. I and some of my friends w ere and still are firm believers 
in the doctrine of non-resistance to evil. I had th e privilege of studying your 
writings also, which left a deep impression on my m ind. British Indians, before 
whom the position was fully explained, accepted the  advice that we should not 
submit to the legislation, but that we should suffe r imprisonment, or whatever 
other penalties the law may impose for its breach. The result has been that 
nearly one-half of the Indian population that was u nable to stand the heat of 
the struggle, to suffer the hardships of imprisonme nt, have withdrawn from the 
Transvaal rather than submit to law which they have  considered degrading. Of 
the other half, nearly 2,500 have for conscience's sake allowed themselves to 
be imprisoned, some as many as five times. The impr isonments have varied 
from four days to six months; in the majority of ca ses with hard labour. Many 
have been financially ruined. At present there are over hundred passive 
resisters in the Transvaal goals. Some of these hav e been very poor men, 
earning their livelihood from day to day. The resul t has been that their wives Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  and children have had to be supported out of public  contributions, also largely 
raised from passive resisters. This has put a sever e strain upon British Indians, 
but in my opinion they have risen to the occasion. The struggle still continues 
and one does not know when the end will come. This,  however, some of us at 
least have seen most clearly, that passive resistan ce will and can succeed 
where brute force must fail. We also notice that in  so far as the struggle has 
been prolonged, it has been due largely to our weak ness, and hence to a belief 
having been engendered in the mind of the Governmen t that we would not be 
able to stand continued suffering. 
Together with a friend, I have come here to see the  imperial authorities and to 
place before them the position, with a view to seek ing redress. Passive resisters 
have recognized that they should have nothing to do  with pleading with the 
Government, but the deputation has come at the inst ance of the weaker 
members of the community, and it therefore represen ts their weakness rather 
than their strength. But in the course of my observ ation here, I have felt that if 
a general competition for an essay on the Ethics an d Efficacy of Passive 
Resistance were invited, it would popularize the mo vement and make people 
think. A friend has raised the question of morality  in connection with the 
proposed competition. He thinks that such an invita tion would be inconsistent 
with the true spirit of passive resistance, and tha t it would amount to buying 
opinion. May I ask you to favour me with your opini on on the subject of 
morality? And if you consider that there is nothing  wrong in inviting 
contributions, I would ask you also to give me the names of those whom I 
should specially approach to write upon the subject . 
There is one thing more, with reference to which I would trespass upon your 
time. A copy of your letter addressed to a Hindu on  the present unrest in India 
has been placed in my hands by a friend. On the fac e of it, it appears to 
represent your views. It is the intention of my fri end, at his own expense, to 
have 20,000 copies printed and distributed and to h ave it translated also. We 
have, however, not been able to secure the original , and we do not feel 
justified in printing it, unless we are sure of the  accuracy of the copy and of Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  the fact that it is your letter. I venture to enclo se herewith a copy of the copy, 
and should esteem it a favour if you kindly let me know whether it is your 
letter, whether it is an accurate copy and whether you approve of its 
publication in the above manner. If you will add an ything further to the letter 
please do so. I would also venture to make a sugges tion. In the concluding 
paragraph you seem to dissuade the reader from the belief in reincarnation. I 
do not know whether (if it is not impertinent on my  part to mention this) you 
have specially studied the question. Reincarnation or transmigration is a 
cherished belief with millions in India, indeed in China also. With many one 
might almost say it is a matter of experience, no l onger a matter of academic 
acceptance. It explains reasonably the many mysteri es of life. With some of the 
passive resisters who have gone through the gaols o f the Transvaal, it has been 
their solace. My object in writing this is not to c onvince you of the truth of the 
doctrine, but to ask you if you will please remove the word "reincarnation" from 
the other things you have dissuaded your reader fro m. In the letter in question 
you have quoted largely from  Krishna  and given reference to passages. I should 
thank you to give me the title of the book from whi ch the quotations have been 
made. 
I have wearied you with this letter. I am aware tha t those who honour you and 
endeavour to follow you have no right to trespass u pon your time, but it is 
rather their duty to refrain from giving you troubl e, so far as possible. I have, 
however, who am an utter stranger to you, taken the  liberty of addressing this 
communication in the interests of truth, and in ord er to have your advice on 
problems, the solution of which you have made your life work. 
With respects, I remain, 
Your obedient servant, 
M.  K GANDHI  
Tolstoy & Gandhi , pp. 59-62 
  
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14   
4A. FROM COUNT LEO TOLSTOY 
Yasnaya Polyana, 
Oct.  7,  1909  
M.  K.  GANDHI TRANSVAAL  
Just now I have received your very interesting lett er, which gives me great 
pleasure. May God help all your dear brothers and c o-workers in the Transvaal. 
This fight between gentleness and brutality, betwee n humility and love on one 
side, and conceit and violence on the other, makes itself ever more strongly 
felt here to us also—especially in the sharp confli cts between religious 
obligations and the laws of the State expressed by the conscientious objection 
to render military service. Such objections are tak ing place very frequently. 
I have written  A letter to a Hindu  and am very pleased to have it translated 
(into English). The title of the book on  Krishna  will be communicated to you 
from Moscow. As regards rebirth I, for my part, sha ll leave out nothing; for, as 
it appears to me, the belief in a rebirth will neve r be able to strike such deep 
roots in and restrain mankind as the belief in the immortality of the soul and 
the faith in divine truth and love; of course I wou ld accommodate you, if you so 
desire, to delete those passages in question. It wi ll give me great pleasure to 
help your edition. Publication and circulation of m y writings, translated into 
Indian dialects, can only be a matter of pleasure t o me. 
The question regarding monetary payment of Royalty should not at all be 
allowed to appear in religious undertakings. 
I give my fraternal greetings and am glad to have c ome into personal contact 
with you. 
LEO TOLSTOY  
Tolstoy & Gandhi,  p. 63 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15   
5. TO COUNT LEO TOLSTOY 
Westminster Palace Hotel,  
4, Victoria Street,  
London, W.C.,  
10-11-1909  
DEAR SIR , 
I beg to tender my thanks for your registered lette r in connection with the 
letter addressed to a Hindu, and with the matters t hat I dealt with in my letter 
to you. 
Having heard about your failing health I refrained,  in order to save you the 
trouble from sending an acknowledgement, knowing th at a written expression 
of my thanks was a superfluous formality; but Mr Ay lmer Maude whom I have 
now been able to meet reassured me that you are kee ping good health indeed 
and that unfailingly and regularly you attend to yo ur correspondence every 
morning. It was very gladsome news to me and it enc ourages me to write to you 
further about matters which are, I know, of the gre atest importance according 
to your teaching. 
I beg to send you herewith a copy of a book written  by a friend—an 
Englishman—who is at present in South Africa, in co nnection with my life, in so 
far it has a bearing on the struggle with which I a m so connected and to which 
my life is dedicated. As I am very anxious to engag e your active interest and 
sympathy I thought that it would not be considered by you as out of the way for 
me to send you the book. 
In my opinion, this struggle of the Indians in the Transvaal is the greatest of 
modern times, inasmuch as it has been idealized bot h as to the goal as also to 
the methods adopted to reach the goal. I am not awa re of a struggle in which 
the participators are not to derive any personal ad vantage at the end of it and 
in which 50 per cent of the persons affected have u ndergone great suffering 
and trial for the sake of a principle. It has not b een possible for me to advertise Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  the struggle as much as I should like. You command,  possibly, the widest public 
today If you are satisfied as to the facts you will  find set forth in Mr Doke's 
book, and if you consider that the conclusions I ha ve arrived at are justified by 
the facts, may I ask you to use your influence in a ny manner you think fit to 
popularize the movement? If it succeeds, it will be  not only as a triumph of 
religion, love and truth over irreligion, hatred, a nd falsehood but it is highly 
likely to serve as an example to the millions in In dia and to people in other 
parts of the world, who may be down-trodden and wil l certainly go a great way 
towards breaking up the party of violence, at least  in India. If we hold out to 
the end, as I think we would, I entertain not the s lightest doubt as to its 
ultimate success and your encouragement in the way suggested by you can only 
strengthen us in our resolve. 
The negotiations that are going on for a settlement  of the question have 
practically fallen through, and together with my co lleagues I return to South 
Africa this week and invite imprisonment. I may add  that my son has happily 
joined me in the struggle and is now undergoing imp risonment with hard labour 
for six months. This is his fourth imprisonment in the course of the struggle. 
If you would be so good as to reply to this letter,  may I ask you to address your 
reply to me at Johannesburg, S.A., Box 6522. 
Hoping that this will find you in good health, 
I remain,  
Your obedient servant,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Tolstoy & Gandhi , pp. 64-66 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17   
6. TO LEO TOLSTOY 
Johannesburg 
4th April, 1910  
DEAR SIR , 
You may remember that I have written to you from Lo ndon where I stopped 
temporarily. As your devoted follower I send you he rewith a brief booklet which 
I have written. I have translated my own writings f rom Gujarati (my own 
language). What is remarkable is that my original b ook was confiscated by the 
Government of India. Therefore I was in a hurry to publish this translation. I am 
afraid I am burdening you; but if your health permi ts and you have time to go 
through my booklet, then I need not express how gre atly I shall value your 
criticism of it. I am sending also a few copies of your  A Letter to a Hindu  which 
you allowed me to publish. This letter will also be  translated into an Indian 
dialect. 
Yours respectfully,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Tolstoy & Gandhi, p.  66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18   
6A. FROM COUNT LEO TOLSTOY 
8th May, 1910  
DEAR FRIEND , 
Just now I have received your letter and your book,  Indian Home Rule.  
I have read your book with great interest, because I think the question you have 
therein dealt with is important not only for Indian s, but for the whole of 
Mankind. 
I cannot find your first letter, but by discovering  your biography by Doke, I 
happen to know you through that biography which gri pped me and it gave a 
chance to know and understand you better. 
I am not very well at present. So I am unable to wr ite to you on all the 
questions which are interconnected with your book a nd also with your activities 
in general, which I value much. But I shall write t o you as soon as I recover. 
Your friend and brother,  
LEO TOLSTOY  
Tolstoy & Gandhi,  p. 67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19   
7. TO LEO TOLSTOY 
M.  K.  GANDHI ,            21-24, Court Chambers,  
Attorney            Johannesburg,  
15th August, 1910  
To 
COUNT LEO TOLSTOY  
DEAR SIR , 
I am much obliged to you for your encouraging and c ordial letter of the 8th May 
last. I very much value your general approval of my  booklet,  Indian Home Rule. 
And if you have the time, I shall look forward to y our detailed criticism of the 
work which you have been so good as to promise in y our letter. 
Mr Kallenbach has written to you about Tolstoy Farm . Mr Kallenbach and I have 
been friends for many years. I may state that he ha s gone through most of the 
experiences that you have so graphically described in your work  My Confession.  
No writing has so deeply touched Mr Kallenbach as y ours; and, as a spur to 
further effort in living up to the ideals held befo re the world by you, he has 
taken the liberty, after consultation with me, of n aming his farm after you. 
Of his generous action in giving the use of the far m for passive resisters, the 
numbers of  Indian Opinion  I am sending herewith will give you full informati on. 
I should not have burdened you with these details b ut for the fact of your 
taking a personal interest in the passive resistanc e struggle that is going on in 
Transvaal. 
I remain, 
Your faithful servant, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Tolstoy & Gandhi,  p. 68 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20   
7A. FROM COUNT LEO TOLSTOY 1 
To 
M.  K.  GANDHI ,  
JOHANNESBURG , 
TRANSVAAL , SOUTH AFRICA . 
"KOTCHETY." 
(Castle of the eldest daughter of Tolstoy). 
7th September, 1910  
I have received your Journal  Indian Opinion  and I am happy to know all that is 
written on non-resistance. I wish to communicate to  you the thoughts which are 
aroused in me by the reading of those articles. 
The more I live—and specially now that I am approac hing death, the more I feel 
inclined to express to others the feelings which so  strongly move my being, and 
which, according to my opinion, are of great import ance. That is, what one 
calls non-resistance, is in reality nothing else bu t the discipline of love 
undeformed by false interpretation. Love is the asp iration for communion and 
solidarity with other souls, and that aspiration al ways liberates the source of 
noble activities. That love is the supreme and uniq ue law of human life, which 
everyone feels in the depth of one's soul. We find it manifested most clearly in 
the soul of the infants. Man feels it so long as he  is not blinded by the false 
doctrines of the world. 
That law of love has been promulgated by all the ph ilosophies—Indian, Chinese, 
Hebrew, Greek and Roman. I think that it had been m ost clearly expressed by 
Christ, who said that in that law is contained both  the law and the Prophets. 
But he has done more; anticipating the deformation to which that law is 
exposed, he indicated directly the danger of such d eformation which is natural 
to people who live only for worldly interests. The danger consists precisely in 
permitting one's self to defend those interests by violence; that is to say, as he 
has expressed, returning blow by blows, and taking back by force things that Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  have been taken from us, and so forth. Christ knew also, just as all reasonable 
human beings must know, that the employment of viol ence is incompatible 
with love, which is the fundamental law of life. He  knew that, once violence is 
admitted, doesn't matter in even a single case, the  law of love is thereby 
rendered futile. That is to say that the law of lov e ceases to exist. The whole 
Christian civilisation, so brilliant in .the exteri or, has grown up on this 
misunderstanding and this flagrant and strange cont radiction, sometimes 
conscious but mostly unconscious. 
In reality as soon as resistance is admitted by the  side of love, love no longer 
exists and cannot exist as the law of existence; an d if the law of love cannot 
exist, there remains no other law except that of vi olence, that is the right of 
the mighty. It was thus that the Christian Society has lived during these 
nineteen centuries. It is a fact that all the time people were following only 
violence in the organisation of Society. But the di fference between the ideals 
of Christian peoples and that of other nations lies  only in this: that, in 
Christianity the law of love had been expressed so clearly and definitely as has 
never been expressed in any other religious doctrin e; that the Christian world 
had solemnly accepted that law, although at the sam e time it had permitted 
the employment of violence and on that violence it had constructed their whole 
life. Consequently, the life of the Christian peopl es is an absolute contradiction 
between their profession and the basis of their lif e, contradiction between love 
recognized as the law of life, and violence recogni zed as inevitable in different 
departments of life: like Governments, Tribunals, A rmy, etc. which are 
recognised and praised. That contradiction develope d with the inner 
development of the Christian world and has attained  its paroxysm in recent 
days. 
At present the question poses itself evidently in t he following manner: either it 
must be admitted that we do not recognise any disci pline, religious or moral, 
and that we are guided in the organisation of life only by the law of force, or 
that all the taxes that we exact by force, the judi cial and police organisations 
and above all the army must be abolished. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  This spring in the religious examination of a secon dary school of girls in 
Moscow, the Professor of Catechism as well as the B ishop had questioned the 
young girls on the Ten Commandments and above all o n the sixth "Thou shalt 
not kill". When the examiner received good reply, t he Bishop generally paused 
for another question: Is killing proscribed by the sacred Law always and in all 
cases? And the poor young girls perverted by their teachers must reply: No, not 
always; killing is permitted during war, and for th e execution of criminals. 
However one of those unfortunate girls, (what I rel ate is not a fiction but a fact 
that has been transmitted to me by an eye-winless) having been asked the 
same question, "Is killing always a crime ?" was mo ved deeply, blushed and 
replied with decision "Yes, always." To all the sop histicated questions habitual 
to the Bishop she replied with firm conviction: kil ling is always forbidden in the 
Old Testament as well as by Christ who not only for bids killing but all 
wickedness against our neighbours. In spite of all his oratorical talent and all 
his imposing grandeur, the Bishop was obliged to be at a retreat and the young 
girl came out victorious. 
Yes, we can discuss in our journals the progress in  aviation and such other 
discoveries, the complicated diplomatic relations, the different clubs and 
alliances, the so-called artistic creations, etc. a nd pass in silence what was 
affirmed by the young girl. But silence is futile i n such cases, because every 
one of this Christian world is feeling the same, mo re or less vaguely, like that 
girl. Socialism, Communism, Anarchism, Salvation ar my, the growing 
criminalities, unemployment and absurd luxuries of the rich, augmented 
without limit, and the awful misery of the poor, th e terrible increasing number 
of suicides—all these are the signs of that inner c ontradiction which must be 
there and which cannot be resolved; and without dou bt, can only be resolved 
by acceptation of the law of Love and by the reject ion of all sorts of violence. 
Consequently your work in Transvaal, which seems to  be far away from the 
centre of our world, is yet the most fundamental an d the most important to us 
supplying the most weighty practical proof in which  the world can now share 
and with which must participate not only the Christ ians but all the peoples of 
the world. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23  I think that it would give you pleasure to know tha t with us in Russia, a similar 
movement is also developing rapidly under the form of the refusal of military 
services augmenting year after year. However small may be the number of your 
participators in non-resistance and the number of t hose in Russia who refuse 
military service, both the one and the other may as sert with audacity that "God 
is with us" and that "God is more powerful than men ". 
Between the confession of Christianity, even under the perverted form in which 
it appears amongst us Christian peoples, and the si multaneous recognition of 
the necessity of armies and of the preparation for killing on an ever-increasing 
scale, there exists a contradiction so flagrant and  crying that sooner or later, 
probably very soon, it must invariably manifest its elf in utter nakedness; and it 
will lead us either to renounce the Christian relig ion, and to maintain the 
governmental power or to renounce the existence of the army and all the forms 
of violence which the state supports and which are more or less necessary to 
sustain its power. That contradiction is felt by al l the governments, by your 
British Government as well as by our Russian Govern ment; and therefore, by 
the spirit of conservatism natural to these governm ents, the opposition is 
persecuted, as we find in Russia as well as in the articles of your journal, more 
than any other anti- governmental activity. The gov ernments know from which 
direction comes the principal danger and try to def end themselves with a great 
zeal in that trial not merely to preserve their int erests but actually to fight for 
their very existence. 
With my perfect esteem, 
 LEO TOLSTOY  
 
1 The original letter is in Russian. This English ve rsion was prepared under Tolstoy's supervision. 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24   
8. TO MAGANLAL GANDHI 1 
[After  March 14, 1915 ] 
BHAISHRI  M., 
You are right in what you think about non-violence.  Its essentials are  daya, 2 
akrodha, 3 aman ,4 etc. Satyagraha is based on non-violence. We saw t his clearly 
in Calcutta and came to the conclusion that we shou ld include it among our 
vows. The thought led to the further conclusion tha t we must observe all the  
yamas 5 and that, if we do so by way of vows, we perceive the inner significance 
of non-violence. In my talks with hundreds of men h ere I place the various  
yamas  above everything else. 
िसयराम  ᮧेमपीयूषपूरन  होत  जनमु न भरतको  । 
मुिनमनगम  यमिनयमसमदम  िवषमᮯत  आचरतको  ॥6 
I remembered this verse in Calcutta on this occasio n and pondered deeply over 
it. I am absolutely clear in my mind that India's d eliverance and ours will be 
achieved through the observance of these vows. 
In observing the vow of non-hoarding, the main thin g to be borne in mind is not 
to store up anything which we do not require. For a griculture, we may keep 
bullocks, if we use them, and the equipment require d for them. Where there is 
a recurring danger of famine, we shall no doubt sto re food grains. But we shall 
always ask ourselves whether bullocks and food grai ns are in fact needed. We 
are to observe all the  yamas  in thought as well, so that we shall grow more 
secure in them from day to day and come to think of  fresh things to renounce. 
Renunciation has no limit to it. The more we renoun ce, the more shall we grow 
in the knowledge of the  atman. 7 If the mind continues to move towards 
renunciation of the desire for hoarding and if in p ractice we give up hoarding as 
far as it is physically possible to do, we shall ha ve kept the vow of non-
hoarding. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25  The same is true about non-stealing. Non-hoarding r efers to stocking of things 
not needed. Non-stealing refers to the use of such things. If I need only one 
shirt to cover myself with but use two, I am guilty  of stealing one from another. 
For, a shirt which could have been of use to someon e else does not belong to 
me. If five bananas are enough to keep me going, my  eating a sixth one is a 
form of theft. Suppose we have a stock of 50 limes,  thinking that among us all 
we would need them. I need only two, but take three  because there are so 
many. This is theft. 
Such unnecessary consumption is also a violation of  the vow of non-violence. If, 
with the ideal of non-stealing in view, we reduce o ur consumption of things we 
would grow more generous. If we do so, actuated by the ideal of non-violence, 
we would grow more compassionate. In assuring, as i t were, every animal or 
living thing that it need have no fear on our accou nt, we entertain 
compassion—love—for it. A man who entertains such l ove will not find any living 
being inimical to him, not even in thought. That is  the most emphatic 
conclusion of the Shastras and my experience as wel l. 
The principle underlying all these vows is truth. B y deceiving oneself, one may 
refuse to recognize an act of stealing or hoarding as such. Hence, by taking 
careful thought we can ensure at every step that tr uth prevails. Whenever we 
are in doubt whether a particular thing should be s tored or not, the simple rule 
is not to store it. There is no violation of truth in renunciation. When in doubt 
about the wisdom of speaking, it is the duty of a m an who has taken the vow of 
truth not to speak. 
I want all of you to take only such vows as each on e feels inclined to, of his own 
free will. I always feel that vows are necessary. B ut everyone may take them 
only when he himself feels the need and take only s uch as he wants to. 
Ramachandra may have been a man of great prowess, p erformed innumerable 
feats and killed hundreds of thousands of monsters,  but no one would think of 
him today if he had not had such devoted men as Lak shmana and Bharata to 
follow him. The point is, if Ramchandra had had no more than extraordinary 
strength as a fighter, his greatness would have bee n forgotten after a while. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  There have been many brave warriors who killed mons ters as he did. There has 
been none among them whose fame and greatness are s ung in every home. 
Ramchandra possessed power of some other kind which  he could induce into 
Lakshmana and Bharata and in virtue of which the la tter became great men of 
austerities. Singing in praise of their austerities , Tulsidasji asked, who else, if 
Bharata had not been born and practised austerities  unattainable even by great 
sages, would have turned an ignorant man like him t o Rama? This is as much as 
to say that Lakshmana and Bharata were the guardian s of Rama's fame, that is, 
of his teaching. Moreover, austerities are not ever ything. For, if Lakshmana 
went without food or sleep for 14 years, so did Ind rajit. 8 But the latter did not 
know the true significance of austerities which Lak shmana had learnt from 
Rama; on the contrary, he possessed a nature which inclined him to misuse the 
power earned through austerities and so came to be known merely as a monster 
and suffered defeat at the hands of Lakshmana, the man of self-mastery, a 
lover of God and seeker of deliverance. In the same  way, however great the 
ideal of Gurudev, 9 if there is no one to implement that ideal, it wil l remain 
hidden in the profound darkness of the ages. Conver sely, if there are any to put 
it into practice, it will spread its light multipli ed many times over. The steps 
which one has to climb in order to practise an idea l constitute  tapas. 10 One 
should realize, therefore, how very necessary it is  to bring  tapas— discipline—
into the life of children. 
Blessings from, BAPU  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIII, pp. 37-39 
 
1 Maganlal Gandhi — Gandhiji's cousin; assisted Gandh iji for about a decade in his work in South 
Africa; left Phoenix in August 1914 with a party of  about 25 students and teachers for India 
and with them stayed for some time at Tagore's Sant iniketan; Manager, Sabarmati Ashram; 
Member, All-India Khadi Board. Such was his devotion  to Construtive Programme that Gandhiji 
felt widowed by his untimely death in 1928. 
2 Compassion 
3 Freedom from anger 
4 Freedom from the desire to be respected 
5 Any great moral or religious duty or observance Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27  6 "If Bharata had not been born, imbued with the ambro sia of love for Sita and Rama, then who 
would have practised such self-control and strict o bservance, continence, restraint and 
rigorous vows as scarce enter the imagination of sa ges?" — Ayodhya Kanda  (Second book) of 
Tulsidas' Ramayana.  (Hill's translation). 
7 The Self 
8 Meghnad, son of Ravana, who had earned the name of Indrajit, by his victory over Indra, 
Chief of the Gods. 
9 Rabindranath Tagore 
10  Penance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28   
9. TO MAGANLAL GANDHI 
Navagam,  
Thursday [July 25, 1918]  
CHI . MAGANLAL , 
You have been frightened by Raojibhai as he was by me. He read too much into 
my words. 
No, my ideals have not changed. Despite my bitter e xperiences in India, my 
conviction remains the same as ever, that we have b ut little to learn from the 
West. The evils I have seen here have made no chang e in my fundamental idea 
nor has this war. The old idea has developed into s omething purer. I have 
certainly not come to feel that we shall have to in troduce Western civilization. 
Nor do I suppose that we shall have to take to drin king and meat-eating. To be 
sure, I have felt, in all seriousness, that Swamina rayana 2 and Vallabhacharya 3 
have robbed us of our manliness. They made the peop le incapable of self-
defence. It was all to the good, of course, that pe ople gave up drinking, 
smoking, etc.; this, however, is not an end in itse lf, it is only a means. If a 
smoker happens to be a man of character his company  is worth cultivating. If, 
on the contrary, a man who has never smoked in his life is an adulterer, he can 
be of little service. The love taught by Swaminaray ana and Vallabh is all 
sentimentalism. It cannot make one a man of true lo ve. Swaminarayana and 
Vallabh simply did not reflect over the true nature  of non-violence. Non-
violence consists in holding in check all impulses in the  chitta. 3It comes into 
play especially in men's relations with one another . There is not even a 
suggestion of this idea in their writings. Having b een born in this degenerate 
age of ours, they could not remain unaffected by it s atmosphere and had, in 
consequence, quite an undesirable effect on Gujarat . Tukaram and Ramdas had 
no such effect. The Abhangas 4 of the former and the  shlokas 5 of the latter 
admit ample scope for manly striving. They, too, we re Vaishnavas. Do not mix 
up the Vaishnava tradition with the teaching of Val labh and Swaminarayana. 
Vaishnavism is an age-old truth. I have come to see , what I did not so clearly Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  before, that there is nonviolence in violence. This  is the big change which has 
come about. I had not fully realized the duty of re straining a drunkard from 
doing evil, of killing a dog in agony or one infect ed with rabies. In all these 
instances, violence is in fact non-violence. Violen ce is a function of the body.  
Brahmacharya 6 consists in refraining from sexual indulgence, but  we do not 
bring up our children to be impotent. They will hav e observed brahmacharya  
only if, though possessed of the highest virility, they can master the physical 
urge. In the same way, our offspring must be strong  in physique. If they cannot 
completely renounce the urge to violence, we may pe rmit them to commit 
violence, to use their strength to fight and thus m ake them non-violent. Non-
violence was taught by a Kshatriya 7 to a Kshatriya. 
The difference between the West and the East is wha t I have explained to be, 
and it is a great one. The civilization of the West  is based on self-indulgence, 
ours on self-control. If we commit violence, it wil l be as a last resort and with a 
view to  lokasangraha. 8 The West will indulge in violence in self-will. My  taking 
part in (the movement for) a Parliament and similar  activities is not a new 
development; it is quite an. old thing and is only intended to ensure a check on 
these bodies. You will see this if you read my arti cle on Mr Montagu's scheme. I 
simply cannot bring myself to take interest in the movement, but I can spread 
my ideals by working in it. When I saw that I could  continue in it only by sacri-
ficing my ideals, I decided to retire from the move ment. 
I think you have your reply in what I have said. I cannot explain much when I 
am there for a day and so I have set down the thing  in writing. This will enable 
you to think and ask me questions, if fresh doubts occur to you. 
 I continue to be in Navagam. I wanted to leave fro m here today, but 
perhaps I may not be able to do so. 
Blessings from, 
BAPU  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XIV PP- 504-5 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  1 The Vishnava sect whose founder was Swami Sahaja- n and (1781-1833). 
2 Vallabhacharya (1473-1531)—Religious Teacher, princ ipally responsible for spreading the 
Bhakti cult in Gujarat. 
3 Mind 
4 Devotional metrical composition in Marathi Poetry 
5 Devotional Metrical verse or composition 
6 Continence. Literally, conduct that leads one to Go d. 
7 A member of the military or second caste among Hind us 
8 That which promotes the conservation of society. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31   
10. TO NARHAR SHAMBHURAO BHAVE 1 
[Ahmedabad, After  June 7, 1916 2] 
Your son Vinoba 3 is with me. Your son has acquired at so tender an age such 
high-spiritedness and asceticism as took me years o f patient labour to do. 
[M.  K.  GANDHI ] 
Life of Vinoba,  p. 8 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIII, p. 279 
 
1 Acharya Vinoba's father, then at Baroda 
2 Vinoba met Gandhiji at the Kochrab Ashram on June 7 . 
3 Vinoba Bhave (1895-1982)—A revered Sarvodaya leader known for his ascetic life and deep 
learning; Father of Bhoodan (Land-gift) Movement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32   
11. TO MR MAFFEY, PRIVATE SECRETARY TO VICEROY 1 
Care District Magistrate,  
Motihari, 
April 16, 1917  
DEAR MR MAFFEY , 
I have come to this district to learn for myself wh ether there is truth in the 
allegations of the ryots against the planters. I sa w the Secretary of the Planters' 
Association and then the Commissioner of the Divisi on, and sought their co-
operation. Both politely rejected my advances and d issuaded me from my 
pursuit. I could not accept their advice, and have been proceeding with my 
work. The Magistrate has served upon me an order as king me to leave the 
District. The grounds for the order are such as I c annot subscribe to. I have 
therefore been reluctantly obliged to disobey the o rder and tell the Magistrate 
that I shall suffer the penalty for the breach. 
My motive is national service and that, too, so lon g as it is consistent with 
humanitarian dictates. I understand, because my Sou th African work was 
considered to be humanitarian that I was awarded th e Kaisar-i- Hind Gold 
Medal. So long as my humanitarian motive is questio ned, so long must I remain 
undeserving of holding the medal. I am therefore as king my people to return 
the medal to you, and I shall feel honoured to rece ive it back if it is returned to 
me when my motive is no longer questioned. 
As to the question itself, so far as I have been ab le to examine the evidence, 
given to me, it shows that the planters have succes sfully used the Civil and 
Criminal Courts and illegal force to enrich themsel ves at the expense of the 
ryots, and that the ryots are living under a reign of terror and that their 
property, their persons, and their minds are all un der the planters' heels. One 
man graphically said to me: "We belong to the plant ers, not to the Sircar. 2 
Thana 3 is nowhere, the planters are everywhere. We take w hat they allow, and 
we keep what they permit." I had hoped that a deepe r examination would have 
toned down the impression formed by me. Had I been left free, I would have Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33  concluded my studies and placed the results at the disposal of the authorities. I 
wish that His Excellency would consider the matter serious enough to have an 
independent inquiry made. 
The local administration admits that they are sitti ng upon a mine so dangerous 
that they cannot tolerate my presence. And yet they  manage to be satisfied 
with the slow inquiry of a settlement officer. Ever ything will depend upon 
swiftness and the proper choice of the members of t he Committee of Inquiry. 
This is the least that the ryots are entitled to. W ill you please place this before 
the Viceroy and ask for his forgiveness for sending  such a long letter in the 
midst of many imperative calls upon his time. The u rgency of the matter is the 
sole excuse for this letter. 
I am, etc., 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIII, pp. 368-69 
 
1 Lord Chelmsford 
2 Government 
3 The Police Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34   
12. TO W. B. HEYCOCK 
Bettiah, May 20, 1917  
DEAR MR. HEYCOCK , 
I have hitherto refrained from bringing to your not ice statements, which have 
continued to stream in, to the effect that the  raiyats  are being prevented from 
coming in to me and that those who have come in hav e been subjected to all 
kinds of pinpricks by the  kothai amlas  and in some cases by the managers 
themselves. I have discounted some of the statement s. I have taken down a 
few. But if what I have heard about the doing of th e Belwa and the Dhokraha 
concerns is true, it is calculated to end on one si de at least, the friendly spirit 
in which the inquiry has hitherto been carried on. I am most anxious to 
continue and to increase the friendly spirit. I am straining every [nerve] so far 
as in me lies, to so conduct my mission that nothin g but good-will should be left 
behind, when its labours are finished. I send you t he statements taken 
regarding the Belwa and the Dhokraha concerns. If t he statements are true, 
they do not reflect any credit upon the concerns in  question. I enclose, too, my 
letter to Mr Holttum which was written before I hea rd of the fire and which was 
despatched before I took the statements of the Dhok raha men last evening 
after 6-30 p.m. 
I can understand and even appreciate the feelings w hich are bound to fill those 
who are called upon to contemplate the prospect of having to forgo huge 
incomes which they have hitherto been in the habit for a long time of receiving 
from their  raiyats.  One cannot, therefore, mind any legitimate effort on their 
part to hold on to what they have considered as the ir rights. But what is 
reported to have happened at the Belwa and Dhokraha  dehats  does not in my 
opinion fall under such a category. 
It is a known fact that the desire of the planters generally is, that my friends 
and I should not carry on our work. I can only say that nothing but physical 
force from the Government or an absolute guarantee that the admitted or 
provable wrongs of the  raiyats  are to stop for ever, can possibly remove us Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35  from the District. What I have seen of the conditio ns of the  raiyats  is sufficient 
to convince me that if we withdrew at this stage, w e would stand condemned 
before man and God and, what is most important of a ll, we would never be 
able to forgive ourselves. 
But the mission is totally of peace. I cannot too o ften give the assurance that I 
bear no ill-will against the planters. I have been told that this is true of myself 
but that my friends are fired with an anti-English feeling and that for them this 
is an anti-English movement. I can only say that I do not know a body of men 
who have less of that feeling than my friends. I wa s not prepared for this 
pleasant revelation. I was prepared for some degree  of ill-will. I would have 
held it excusable. I do not know that I have not be en guilty of it myself under 
circumstances which have appeared to me most provok ing. But if I found that 
any of my associates were, in the conduct of this m ission, actuated by any ill-
will at all, I should disassociate myself entirely from them and insist upon their 
leaving the mission. At the same time, the determin ation to secure a freedom 
for the  raiyats  from the yoke that is wearing them down is inflexi ble. 
Cannot the Government secure that freedom ? This is  a natural exclamation. My 
answer is that they cannot, in cases like this, wit hout such assistance as is 
afforded to them by my mission. The Government mach inery is designedly slow. 
It moves, must move, along the line of least resist ance. Reformers like myself, 
who have no other axe to grind but that of reform t hey are handling for the 
time being, specialize and create a force which the  Government must reckon 
with. Reformers may go wrong by being over-zealous,  indiscreet or indolent and 
ignorant. The Government may go wrong by being impa tient of them or over-
confident of their ability to do without them. I ho pe, in this case, neither 
catastrophe will take place and the grievances, whi ch I have already submitted 
and which are mostly admitted, will be effectively redressed. Then the planters 
will have no cause to fear or suspect the mission o f which I have the honour to 
be in-charge and they will gladly accept the assist ance of volunteers who will 
carry on the work of education and sanitation among  the villagers and act as 
links between them and the  raiyats. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  Pray, excuse the length of this letter as also its argumentative character. I 
could not avoid it, if I was to place my true posit ion before you. In bringing the 
two matters which have necessitated this communicat ion, I have no desire to 
seek legal relief. But I ask you to use such admini strative influence as you can 
to preserve the friendly spirit which has hitherto prevailed between the kothis  
and my friends and myself. 
I do not wish to suggest that the  kothis  in question are responsible for the fire. 
That is the suspicion of some of the  raiyats.  I have talked to hundreds of them 
about the two fires. They say that the  raiyats  are not responsible for them, 
that they have no connection with the mission. I re adily accept this repudiation 
because we are incessantly telling the  raiyats  that this is not a mission of 
violence or reprisals and that any such thing on th eir part can only delay relief. 
But if the  kothis  may not be held responsible for them, they may not  seek to 
establish a connection between them and the mission . Fires have taken before 
now, and, mission or no mission, they will take pla ce for ever. Neither party 
may blame the other without the clearest possible p roofs. 
There is talk, too, about the lives of the planters  being in danger. Surely this 
cannot be serious talk. Any waj', the mission canno t render them less safe than 
they are. The character of the mission is wholly ag ainst any such activity. It is 
designed to seek relief by self- suffering, never b y doing violence to the 
supposed or real wrong-doer. And this lesson has be en inculcated among the  
raiyats  in season and out of season. 
Lastly, there is, I fear, ample proof of intimidati on such as is described in the 
statements thereto attached. Intimidation can only mean more trouble all-
round without meaning the slightest relief, to the planters in the shape of 
retention of the present system. 
I seek such help as you can vouchsafe in the circum stances I have ventured to 
place before you. I am sending a copy to Mr Lewis. 
Yours truly,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIII, pp. 404-06 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37   
13. TO SHANKARLAL 1 ON IDEAS ABOUT SATYAGRAHA' 
[September 2, 1917]  
BHAISHRI SHANKARLAL , 
You want to know my ideas about Satyagraha. Here th ey are in brief : 
The English phrase "passive resistance" does not su ggest the power I wish to 
write about; "Satyagraha" is the right word. Satyag raha is soul-force, as 
opposed to armed strength. Since it is essentially an ethical weapon, only men 
inclined to the ethical way of life can use it wise ly. Prahlad, Mirabai, and 
others were Satyagrahis. At the time of the Morocco  fighting, the Arabs were 
under fire from French guns. The Arabs were fightin g, as they believed, solely 
for their religion. Reckless of their lives, they a dvanced running towards the 
French guns with cries of "Ya Allah". 2 Here, there was no scope at all for 
fighting back to kill. The French gunners refused t o fire on these Arabs and, 
throwing up their caps, ran to embrace these brave Arabs with shouts of joy. 
This is an example of Satyagraha and the success it  can achieve. The Arabs 
were not Satyagrahis by deliberate choice. They got  ready to face death under 
pressure of a strong impulse, and had no love in th eir hearts. A Satyagrahi bears 
no ill-will, does not lay down his life in anger, b ut refuses rather to submit to 
his "enemy" or oppressor because he has the strengt h himself to suffer. He 
should, therefore, have a courageous spirit and a f orgiving and compassionate 
nature. Imam Hassan and Hussain 3 were merely two boys. They felt that an 
injustice had been done to them. When called upon t o surrender, they refused. 
They knew at the time that this would mean death fo r them. If, however, they 
were to submit to injustice, they would disgrace th eir manhood and betray 
their religion. In these circumstances, they yielde d to the embrace of death. 
The heads of these fine young men rolled on the bat tlefield. In my view, Islam 
did not attain its greatness by the power of the sw ord but entirely through the 
self- immolation of its fakirs. It is soldier-like to allow oneself to be cut down 
by a sword, not to use the sword on another. When h e comes to realize that he 
is guilty of murder, the killer, if he has been in the wrong, will feel sorry Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38  forever afterwards. The victim, however, will have gained nothing but victory 
even if he had acted wrongly in courting death. Sat yagraha is the way of non-
violence. It is, therefore, justified, indeed it is  the right course, at all times 
and all places. The power of arms is violence and c ondemned as such in all 
religions. Even those who advocate the use of arms put various limits on it. 
There are no limits on Satyagraha, or rather, none except those placed by the 
Satyagrahi's capacity for  tapascharya, 4 for voluntary suffering. 
Obviously, it is irrelevant to raise issues about t he legality of such Satyagraha. 
It is for the Satyagrahi to decide. Observers may j udge Satyagraha after the 
event. The world's displeasure will not deter a Sat yagrahi. Whether or not 
Satyagraha should be started is not decided by any mathematical rule. A man 
who believes that Satyagraha may be started only af ter weighing the chances of 
defeat and victory and assuring oneself of the cert ainty of victory, may be a 
shrewd enough politician or an intelligent man, but  he is no Satyagrahi. A 
Satyagrahi acts spontaneously. 
Satyagraha and arms have both been in use from time  immemorial. We find 
them praised in the extant scriptures. They are the  expressions, one of the  
daivi sampad  5and the other of the  asuri sampad ,6 We believe that in former 
times in India the  daivi sampad  was much the stronger of the two. Even today 
that is the ideal we cherish. Europe provides the m ost striking example of the 
predominance of the  asuri sampad.  
Both these forms of strength are preferable to weak ness, to what we know by 
the rather plain but much after word 'cowardice'. W ithout either, Swaraj or 
genuine popular awakening is impossible. Swaraj ach ieved otherwise than 
through resort to one or the other will not be true  Swaraj. Such Swaraj can 
have no effect on the people. Popular awakening can not be brought about 
without strength, without manliness. Let the leader s say what they like and the 
Government strive its utmost, unless they and we, a ll of us, strengthen the 
forces of Satyagraha, the methods of violence are b ound automatically to gain 
ascendancy. They are like weeds which grow wild in any soil. The crop of 
Satyagraha requires willingness to exert oneself or  a venturesome spirit by way Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  of manure. Just as, moreover, the seedlings are lik ely to be lost among the 
weeds if the latter are not plucked out, so also wi ll weeds of violence keep 
growing unless we keep the land free of them by  tapascharya  and, with 
compassion, pluck out those which have already grow n. We can, with the help 
of Satyagraha win over those young men who have bee n driven to desperation 
and anger by what they think to be the tyranny of t he Government and utilize 
their courage and their mettlesome spirit, their ca pacity for suffering, to 
strengthen the  daivi sampad  of Satyagraha. It is therefore very much to be 
desired that Satyagraha is propagated as quickly as  it can be. This is in the 
interest both of the rulers and the ruled. The Saty agrahi desires to harass 
neither the Government nor anyone else. He takes no  step without the fullest 
deliberation He is never arrogant. Consequently, he  will keep away from 
'boycott' but be always firm in the vow of Swadeshi  as a matter of duty. He 
fears God alone, so that no other power can intimid ate him. He will never, out 
of fear of punishment, leave a duty undone. 
I need hardly say now that it is our duty to resort  to Satyagraha to secure the 
release of the learned Annie Besant and her co-work ers. Whether we approve 
of every or any action of hers is another question.  I, for one, certainly do not 
approve of some of them; all the same, her incarcer ation by the Government is 
a great mistake and an act of injustice. I know, of  course, that the Government 
does not think it a mistake. Maybe the people are w rong in desiring her release. 
The Government has acted according to its lights. W hat can the people do to 
express their outraged feelings? Petitions, etc., a re good enough when one's 
suffering is bearable. When it is unbearable, there  is no remedy but 
Satyagraha. Only when people find it unbearable wil l they, and only those who 
find it unbearable will, devote their all, body, mi nd and possessions, to 
securing the release of Annie Besant. This will be a powerful expression of 
popular feeling. It is my unshakable faith that bef ore so great a self-sacrifice 
even the power of an emperor will give way. People may certainly restrain 
their feelings in view of the forthcoming visit of Mr Montague. That will be an 
expression of faith in his sense of justice. If she  is not released, however, 
before his arrival, it will be our duty to resort t o Satyagraha We do not want to Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40  provoke the Government or put difficulties in its w ay. By resorting to 
Satyagraha, we reveal the intensity of our injured feelings and thereby serve 
the Government. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIII, pp. 517-20 
 
1 Shankarlal Ghelabhai Banker—A renowned Constructive Worker and Labour Leader of the 
Gandhian School of Thought; Gandhiji's associate fo r many years. 
2 Oh God! 
3 Sons of Ali by his wife Fatima, daughter of the Pro phet. They refused to acknowledge the 
authority of Yazid (Caliph, 680-83). Hussain revolt ed against him, but was defeated and killed 
at Karbala. 
4 The practice of penance 
5 Godlike equipment  
6 Demoniac equipment  
4,5 & 6 (vide Bhagvad Gita, XVI, 3-4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41   
14. TO VINOBA BHAVE 1 
[Sabarmati, After  February 10, 1918]  
I do not know in what terms to praise you. Your lov e and your character 
fascinate me and so also your self-examination. I a m not fit to measure your 
worth. I accept your own estimate and assume the po sition of a father to you. 
You seem almost to have met a long-felt wish of min e. In my view a father is, 
in fact, a father only when he has a son who surpas ses him in virtue. A real son, 
likewise, is one who improves on what the father ha s done; if the father is 
truthful, firm of mind and compassionate, the son w ill be all this in a greater 
measure. This is what you have made yourself. I don 't see that you owe your 
achievement to any effort of mine. Hence, I accept the role you offer to me as 
a gift of love. I shall strive to be worthy of it; and, if ever I become another 
Hiranyakashipu, oppose me respectfully as Prahlad, who loved God, disobeyed 
him. 
It is true as you say that, though outside the Ashr am, you have scrupulously 
observed its rules. I never doubted that you would return. Besides, I had your 
written messages, read out by Mama. May God grant y ou long life, and use you 
for the uplift of India. 
I don't see any need for changes in your diet just yet. Do not give up milk for 
the present. On the contrary, increase the quantity , if necessary. 
About the railways, no Satyagraha is required. 
What is wanted is intelligent workers to carry on p ropaganda. In the issue in 
Kheda District, Satyagraha may possibly have to be offered. I am something of a 
tramp these days. In a day or two, I shall have to leave for Delhi. 
More when you arrive. Everyone is looking forward t o seeing you. 2 
Blessings from, 
BAPU  Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XIV pp. 188-89 
 
1 On reading Vinoba Bhave's letter explaining why he had not returned to the Ashram for a 
whole year, Gandhiji remarked: "So Gorakha [the dis ciple] has gone one better than 
Machchhindra [the master]. He is a Bhima indeed", an d dictated this letter. 
2 When he had finished dictating the letter, Mahadev Desai records Gandhiji as saying, "He is a 
great man. I have always felt that I am fortunate i n my dealings with Maharashtrians and 
Madrasis. Of the latter, there is none now. But no Maharashtrian has ever disappointed me. 
And among them all, Vinoba is beyond praise!" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43   
15. TO C. F. ANDREWS 
[Nadiad,] July 6, 1918  
MY DEAR CHARLIE , 
I have your letters. I prize them. They give me onl y partial consolation. My 
difficulties are deeper than you have put them. All  you raise I can answer. I 
must attempt in this letter to reduce my own to wri ting. They just now possess 
me to the exclusion of everything else. All the oth er things I seem to be doing 
purely mechanically. This hard thinking has told up on my physical system. I 
hardly want to talk to anybody. I do not want even to write anything, not even 
these thoughts of mine. I am therefore falling back  upon dictation to see 
whether I can clearly express them. I have not yet reached the bottom of my 
difficulties, much less have I solved them. The sol ution is not likely to affect 
my immediate work. But of the failure I can now say  nothing. If my life is 
spared I must reach the secret somehow. 
You say: "Indians as a race did repudiate it, blood lust, with full consciousness in 
days gone by and deliberately took their choice to stand on the side of 
humanity." Is this historically true? I see no sign  of it either in the  Mahabharata  
or the  Ramayana,  not even in my favourite Tulsidas which is much su perior in 
spirituality to Valmiki. 1 I am not now thinking of these works in their spir itual 
meanings. The incarnations are described as certain ly bloodthirsty, revengeful 
and merciless to the enemy. They have been credited  with having resorted to 
tricks also for the sake of overcoming the enemy. T he battles are described 
with no less zest than now, and the warriors are eq uipped with weapons of 
destruction such as could be possibly conceived by the human imagination. The 
finest hymn composed by Tulsidas in praise of Rama gives the first place to his 
ability to strike down the enemy... Then take the M ahomedan period. The 
Hindus were not less eager than the Mahomedans to f ight. They were simply 
disorganized, physically weakened and torn by inter nal dissensions. The code of 
Manu prescribes no such renunciation that you imput e to the race. Buddhism, 
conceived as a doctrine of universal forbearance, s ignally failed, and, if the Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44  legends are true, the great Shankaracharya did not hesitate to use unspeakable 
cruelty in banishing Buddhism out of India. And he succeeded ! Then the English 
period. There has been compulsory renunciation of a rms but not the desire to 
kill. Even among the Jains the doctrine has signall y failed. They have a 
superstitious horror of blood (shed), but they have  as little regard for the life of 
the enemy as a European. What I mean to say is that  they would rejoice equally 
with anybody on earth over the destruction of the e nemy. All then that can be 
said of India is that individuals have made serious  attempts, with greater 
success than elsewhere, to popularize the doctrine.  But there is no warrant for 
the belief that it has taken deep root among the pe ople. 
You say further: "My point is that it has become an  unconscious instinct, which 
can be awakened any time as you yourself have shown ." I wish it was true. But I 
see that I have shown nothing of the kind. When fri ends told me here that 
passive resistance was taken up by the people as a weapon of the weak, I 
laughed at the libel, as I called it then. But they  were right and I was wrong. 
With me alone and a few other co-workers it came ou t of our strength and was 
described as Satyagraha, but with the majority it w as purely and simply passive 
resistance what they resorted to, because they were  too weak to undertake 
methods of violence. This discovery was forced on m e repeatedly in Kaira. The 
people here being comparatively freer, talked to me  without reserve, and told 
me plainly that they took up my remedy because they  were not strong enough 
to take up the other, which they undoubtedly held t o be far more manly than 
mine. I fear that the people whether in Champaran o r in Kaira would not 
fearlessly walk to the gallows or stand a shower of  bullets and yet say, in one 
case, 'we will not pay the revenue', and in the oth er, 'we will not work for you'. 
They have it not in them. And I contend that they w ill not regain the fearless 
spirit until they have received the training to def end themselves. Ahimsa was 
preached to man when he was in full vigour of life and able to look his 
adversaries straight in the face. It seems to me th at full development of body-
force is a  sine qua non  of full appreciation and assimilation of Ahimsa. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  I do agree with you that India with her moral force  could hold back from her 
shores any combination of armies from the West or t he East or the North or the 
South. The question is, how can she cultivate this moral force? Will she have to 
be strong in body before she can understand even th e first principles of this 
moral force ? This is how millions blaspheme the Lo rd of the Universe every 
morning before sunrise. 
"I am changeless Brahma, 1 not a collection of the five elements—earth, etc.— I 
am that Brahma whom I recall every morning as the S pirit residing in the 
innermost sanctuary of my heart, by whose grace the  whole speech is adorned, 
and whom the Vedas have described as—' Neti, neti' ". 2 
I say we blaspheme the Lord of the Universe in reci ting the above verse 
because it is a parrot recitation without any consi deration of its grand 
significance. One Indian realizing in himself all t hat the verse means is enough 
to repel the mightiest army that can approach the s hores of India. But it is not 
in us today and it will not come until there is an atmosphere of freedom and 
fearlessness on the soil. How to produce that atmos phere ? Not without the 
majority of the inhabitants feeling that they are w ell able to protect 
themselves from the violence of man or beast. Now I  think I can state my 
difficulty. It is clear that before I can give a ch ild an idea of  moksha ,3 I must let 
it grow into full manhood. I must allow it to a cer tain extent to be even 
attached to the body, and then when it has understo od the body and so the 
world around it, may I easily demonstrate the trans itory nature of the body and 
the world, and make it  feel  that the body is given not for the indulgence of s elf 
but for its liberation. Even so must I wait for ins tilling into any mind the 
doctrine of Ahimsa, i.e., perfect love, when it has  grown to maturity by having 
its full play through a vigorous body. My difficult y now arises in the practical 
application of the idea. What is the meaning of hav ing a vigorous body? How far 
should India have to go in for a training in arms-b earing? Must every individual 
go through the practice or is it enough that a free  atmosphere is created and 
the people will, without having to bear arms, etc.,  imbibe the necessary 
personal courage from their surroundings ? I believ e that the last is the correct Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46  view, and, therefore, I am absolutely right as thin gs are in calling upon every 
Indian to join the army, always telling him at the same time that he is doing so 
not for the lust of blood, but for the sake of lear ning not to fear death. Look at 
this from Sir Henry Vane. I copy it from Morley's  Recollections  (Vol. II) : 
Death holds a high place in the policy of great com munities of the world.... It is 
the part of a valiant and generous mind to prefer s ome things before life, as 
things for which a man should not doubt, nor fear t o die.... True natural 
wisdom pursueth the learning and practice of dying well, as the very end of 
life, and indeed he hath not spent his life ill tha t hath learnt to die well. It is 
the chiefest thing and duty of life. The knowledge of dying is the knowledge of 
liberty, the state of true freedom, the way to fear  nothing, to live well, 
contentedly, and peaceable.... It is a good time to  die when to live is rather a 
burden than a blessing, and there is more ill in li fe than good. 
"When his hour came, Vane's actual carriage on Towe r Hill was as noble and 
resolute as his words" is Morley's commentary. Ther e is not a single recruiting 
speech in which I have not laid the greatest stress  upon this part of a warrior's 
duty. There is no speech in which I have yet said, "Let us go to kill the 
Germans." My refrain is, "Let us go and die for the  sake of India and the 
Empire", and I feel that, supposing that the respon se to my call is overwhelming 
and we all go to France and turn the scales against  the Germans, India will then 
have a claim to be heard and she may then dictate a  peace that will last. 
Suppose further that I have succeeded in raising an  army of fearless men, they 
fill the trenches and with hearts of love lay down their guns and challenge the 
Germans to shoot them—their fellow men—I say that e ven the German heart 
will melt. I refuse to credit it with exclusive fie ndishness. So it comes to this, 
that under exceptional circumstances, war may have to be resorted to as a 
necessary evil, even as the body is. If the motive is right, it may be turned to 
the profit of mankind and that an  ahimsaist  may not stand aside and look on 
with indifference but must make his choice and acti vely co-operate or actively 
resist. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  Your fear about my being engrossed in the political  strife and intrigues may be 
entirely set aside. I have no stomach for them, lea st at the present moment, 
had none even in South Africa. I was in the politic al life because there through 
lay my own liberation. Montagu said, "I am surprise d to find you taking part in 
the Political life of the country!" Without a momen t's thought I replied, "I am in 
it because without it I cannot do my religious and social work," and I think the 
reply will stand good to the end of my life. 
You can't complain of my having given you only a sc rap of a letter. Instead of a 
letter, I have inflicted upon you what may almost r ead like an essay. But it was 
necessary that you should know what is passing in m y mind at the present 
moment. You may now pronounce your judgment and mer cilessly tear my ideas 
to pieces where you find them to be wrong. 
I hope you are getting better and stronger. I need hardly say that we shall all 
welcome you when you are quite able to undertake a journey. 
With love, 
MOHAN  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIV pp. 474-78 
 
1 The author of the original  Ramayana  in Sanskrit 
2 The Universal Soul, the Being of all creation 
3 Not this, not this 
4 Liberation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48   
16. TO C. F. ANDREWS 
[Nadiad,] July 29, 1918  
MY DEAR CHARLIE , 
I must indulge myself again. I begin to perceive a deep meaning behind the 
Japanese reluctance to listen to the message of a P rophet from a defeated 
nation. 1 War will be always with us. There seems to be no po ssibility of the 
whole human nature becoming transformed.  Moksha  and Ahimsa [are] for 
individuals to attain. Full practice of Ahimsa is i nconsistent with possession of 
wealth, land or rearing of children. There is a rea l Ahimsa in defending my wife 
and children even at the risk of striking down the wrongdoer. It is perfect 
Ahimsa not to strike him but intervene to receive h is blows. India did neither on 
the field on Plassey. We were a cowardly mob warrin g against one another, 
hungering for the Company's 2 silver and selling our souls for a mess of pottage . 
And so have we remained more or less—more rather th an less—up to today. 
There was no Ahimsa in their miserable performance,  notwithstanding 
examples of personal bravery and later corrections of the exaggerated accounts 
of those days. Yes, the Japanese reluctance was rig ht. I do not know 
sufficiently what the fathers of old did. They suff ered, I expect, not out of 
their weakness, but out of their strength. The  rishis 3 of old stipulated that their 
religious practices were to be protected by the Ksh atriyas. Rama protected 
Vishwa-mitra from the  rakshasas 4 disturbing his meditations. He could later on 
dispense with this protection. I find great difficu lties in recruiting but do you 
know that not one man has yet objected because he w ould not kill. They object 
because they fear to die. This unnatural fear of de ath is mining the nation. For 
the moment, I am simply thinking of the Hindus. Tot al disregard of death in a 
Mahomedan lad is a wonderful possession. 
I have not written a coherent letter today but I ha ve given you indications of 
my mental struggle. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49  Do you know that Sorabji is dead. He died in Johann esburg. A life full of 
promise has come to an abrupt end. The ways of God are inscrutable. 
With deep love, 
Yours, 
 MOHAN  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. Xiy pp. 509-10 
 
1 The reference is to Rabindranath Tagore whose speec h in Tokyo against Japan's imitating the 
West was greeted with unbecoming derision. 
2 East India Company 
3 Ascetics 
4 Demons 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50   
17. TO C. F. ANDREWS 
MY DEAR CHARLIE , 
You have written to me more or less regularly but o wing to your wanderings, I 
have not known where to write. Your latest has give n me a deliberate address. 
I hope therefore this will reach you safely whereve r you may be. 
I have read your article in the  New Republic.  I am not taking it in  Y.I.  It is 
therefore being sent to Brelvi as you have desired.  
The events have moved fairly fast. I see as clearly  as never before that the 
spirit of violence must be dealt with by non-violen t action if the situation is to 
be at all saved. There is the growing violence of t he Government expressing 
itself in a variety of ways—the subtle exploitation  and the necessary 
prosecutions as a consequence of that exploitation for instance. You will note 
the extended meaning I have given to violence. Gree d, pilfering, untruth, 
crooked diplomacy—all these are phases or signs or results of violent thought 
and action. The reaction of this violence upon the thinking educated people is 
remarkable and daily growing. I have therefore to d eal with this double 
violence. To sit still at this juncture is stupid i f not cowardly. I have made up 
my mind to run the boldest risks. I have arrived at  this definite conclusion as a 
result of deep and prayerful thinking. Lahore revea led it all to me. The nature 
of the action is not yet clear to me. It has to be civil disobedience. How it is to 
be undertaken and by whom besides me I have not yet  seen quite clearly. But 
the shiny cover that over-lays the truth is thinnin g day by day and will presently 
break. 
I hardly wanted to write this when I begin this let ter. But there you are. 
Guruedev passed delightful two hours with me. He ha s aged considerably. We 
came nearer each other this time and I was so thank ful. We had fully intended 
to meet again but Bomanji suddenly took him away to  Baroda. 
Manilal and his wife and baby are here. Ramdas has already. He is in Bardoli 
assisting Vallabhbhai's work. Mahadev is just now h ere. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51  We did not get your first volume from the publisher s. I asked the  Young India  
people to purchase a copy. It is on my desk at pres ent. I have read the first 
chapter. It is a fair representation of my religiou s attitude. 
Love, 
SD. MOHAN  
DATED 2-2-1930   
From the Photostat:  S.N. 16424 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52   
18. TO KASTURBA GANDHI 
[Nadiad,] July 29, 1918  
BELOVED KASTUR , 
I know you are pining to stay with me. I feel, thou gh, that we must go on with 
our tasks. At present, it is right that you remain where you are. If you but look 
upon all the children there as your own, quite soon  you will cease to feel the 
absence of the latter. This is the least one can do  as one gets older. As you 
come to love others and serve them, you will have a  joy welling up from within. 
You should make it a point to visit early in the mo rning all those who may be 
sick, and nurse them. Special food should be prepar ed or kept apart for anyone 
who needs such food. You should visit the Maharasht rian ladies, amuse their 
children or take them out for a walk. You should ma ke them feel that they are 
no strangers. Their health should improve. 
You should converse with Nirmala on useful subjects , that is, on religious 
matters and the like. You may ask her to read out t he  Bhagavat 1 to you. She 
will even find the thing interesting. If you thus k eep yourself busy in the service 
of others, believe me the mind will always be full of joy. And you must not 
omit to look after Punjabhai's meals and other requ irements. 
MOHANDAS  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIV p. 514 
 
1 One of the 18 Puranas 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53   
19. TO KISHORELAL MASHRUWALA 1 
[Nadiad,] July 29, 1918  
DEAR KISHORELAL , 
This letter is meant for you and Shri Narahari. To the extent that Shri 
Narayanarao's charge that distinctions are made bet ween Maharashtrians and 
Gujaratis is justified, it is our duty to try to re move the causes. Here is a field 
for the exercise of non-violence. The first step to  take is for you all to come 
together and examine how much of truth there is in the charge. The Gujarati 
ladies should try to mix freely with the Maharashtr ian ladies. The most 
important thing is to see that the children make no  such distinction. It is not 
necessary to give exaggerated importance to what I have said; just reflect over 
it for a moment and do all that may need to be done . 
As for prayers, I place this before you for conside ration. We should not take the 
plea of inability so far that, in the end, we find ourselves incapable of doing 
anything at all. We should do the teaching as well as we can and overcome our 
shortcomings by gradual effort. Do you think I woul d use the plea of inability if 
I was myself required to teach Sanskrit? I know tha t my Sanskrit is no Sanskrit. 
But I would certainly teach it if no other person w as available and I would get 
over my deficiency day by day. It was in this way t hat Parnell topped them all 
in his knowledge of the rules of business in the Ho use of Commons. You always 
think of your weakness and are afraid of doing anyt hing. Would you not be 
happier if, using all your strength, you disposed o f every task that fell to you? 
In what manner should the children learn to use the ir strength? It is a difficult 
thing to teach them to defend themselves and yet no t be overbearing. Till now, 
we used to teach them not to fight back if anyone b eat them. Can we go on 
doing so now? What will be the effect of such teach ing on a child? Will he, in his 
youth, be a forgiving or a timid man? My powers of thinking fail me. Use yours. 
This new aspect of non-violence which has revealed itself to me has enmeshed 
me in no end of problems. I have not found one mast er-key for all the riddles, Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54  but it must be found. Shall we teach our boys to re turn two blows for one, or 
tolerate a blow from anyone weaker than themselves but to fight back, should 
a stronger one attack them, and take the beating th at might follow ? What 
should one do if assaulted by a Government official ? Should the boy submit to 
the beating at the moment and then come to us for a dvice, or should he do 
what might seem best in the circumstances and take the consequences? These 
are the problems which face us if we give up the ro yal road of turning the other 
cheek. Is the first course the right one because ea sier to take? Or is it that we 
shall come upon the right path only by treading thr ough a dangerous one? The 
foot-tracks which go up the Himalayas lead in all d irections, sometimes even 
away from the destination and yet an experienced gu ide will take us in the end 
to the summit. One cannot climb the Himalayas in a straight line. Can it be 
that, in like fashion, the path of non-violence, to o, is difficult? May God protect 
us, may He indeed. 
Vandematram from 
MOHANDAS  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIV PP- 515-16 
 
1 Kishorelal G. Mashruwala (1890-1952)—Most authorita tive interpreter of Gandhian thought; 
Gandhiji's life-long associate: Editor  Harijan  (48-52); Author of  Gandhi and Marx, Practical 
Non-violence,  etc 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55   
20. TO SAROJINI NAIDU 
November 18, 1918  
DEAR SISTER , 
I appreciated your little note. I observe that you have survived the operation. I 
hope that it will be entirely successful, so that I ndia may for many a year to 
come continue to hear your songs. For me I do not k now when I shall be able to 
leave this sickbed of mine. Somehow or other, I can not put on flesh and gain 
more strength than I have. I am making a mighty att ack. The doctors of course 
despair in face of the self-imposed restrictions un der which I am labouring. I 
assure you that they have been my greatest consolat ion during this protracted 
illness. I have no desire whatsoever to live upon c ondition of breaking those 
disciplinary and invigorating restrictions. For me,  although they restrict the 
body somewhat, they free the soul and they give me a consciousness of it which 
I should not otherwise possess. "You can't serve Go d and Mammon" has a clearer 
and deeper meaning for me after those vows. I do no t infer that they are 
necessary for all, but they are for me. If I broke them I feel that I should be 
perfectly worthless. 
Do let me have an occasional line from you. 
Yours,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Collected, Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. XV, pp. 64 -65  
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56   
21. TO SRINIVAS SASTRI 
Bombay, 18th March, 1920  
DEAR MR. SASTRI , 
As I took an active part in the Congress affairs la st year I have been asked to 
interest myself still more actively to the extent o f joining an organization. The 
demand has come from those with whom I have had the  privilege of working 
although I was not connected with their organizatio n. They have asked me to 
join the All- India Home Rule League. 1 I have told them that at my time of life 
and with views firmly formed on several matters I c ould only join an 
organization to affect its policy and not be affect ed by it. This does not mean 
that I would not keep or that I do not have an open  mind to receive new light. I 
simply wish to emphasise the fact that any new ligh t will have to be specially 
dazzling in order to entrance me. I placed before t he friends the following 
points on which I hold decided views: 
1 Highest honesty must be introduced in the political  life of the country if 
we are to make our mark as a nation. This presuppos es at the present 
moment a very firm and definite acceptance of the c reed of Truth at any 
cost. 
2 Swadeshi must be our immediate goal. The future asp irants after 
membership of the council should be asked to pledge  themselves to an out 
and out protection of the country's industries — sp ecially cloth 
manufacture. 
3 Definite acceptance of Hindustani—a resultant of Hi ndi and Urdu as a 
National Language of intercourse in the immediate f uture. The would- be 
members will be therefore pledged so to work in the  Imperial Councils as 
to introduce Hindustani and in the Local Councils t he respective 
vernaculars at least as an optional medium for the time being till we are 
able to dispense with English for the conduct of Na tional Affairs. They will 
also be pledged to introduce Hindustani as a compul sory second language Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57  in our schools with Devanagari or Urdu as an option al script. English will be 
recognized as a language of imperial intercourse, d iplomacy and 
international commerce. 
4 Acceptance of the principles of redistribution of p rovinces so far as 
possible on a linguistic basis at the earliest oppo rtunity. 
5 Hindu-Mohamedan Unity in its essence and from a pol itical and religious 
standpoint as an unalterable article of faith. This  contemplates mutual 
help, mutual toleration and recognition of the suff erings of one section to 
be the sufferings of all. This will exclude, from t he official programme of 
the League, the Unity propaganda by means of inter dining and 
intermarriage and will include vigorous cooperation  on the Khilafat 
question. In my discussions amongst the friends I h ave also told them that I 
will not think of asking for official recognition o f my creed of civil 
disobedience and that I do not belong to any party and would like to make 
the League a non-party organization helping all hon est men if they are 
otherwise capable of doing justice to the service t hey may choose 
irrespective of party. The League, according to my opinion, cannot 
become an anti- Congress organization but it should  work as it is now doing 
to further the interests of the Congress. 
Do you advise me, knowing me as you do with my qual ifications and limitations, 
to join the League ? 
Yours sincerely, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Letters of Srinivasa Sastri,  pp. 69-71 
 
1 Organized by Mrs Besant 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58   
22. TO SRINIVAS SASTRI 
20th March, 1920  
DEAR FRIEND , 
I hope you have read my proposal about the observan ce of what may be called 
the Satyagraha Week from the 6th to the 13th April.  I am hoping that during 
the week there will be no difficulty about collecti ng ten lacs of rupees. If there 
are volunteers of known respectability and unquesti onable honesty we need 
have no receipts but simple collection from all and  sundry, moneyed men and 
women can go out and collect in the quarters best k nown to them. But it is not 
so much the manner as the matter which I wish to em phasize. I hope that there 
will be no difference of opinion as to the desirabi lity of passing the week in the 
manner suggested by me or of having a memorial in c onnection with the 
massacre 1 of the 13th. In presenting the case to the people I would advise that 
the memory of the dead and not of the atrocity be t reated as the impelling 
motive. 
I trust that those who do not approve of the method  of Satyagraha will not on 
that account refrain from participating in the coll ection. This should be a truly 
national memorial. 
But there is fasting and prayer too on which I myse lf lay even greater stress 
than on the memorial; for if there is universal fas ting and prayer I know that 
money and whatever we want will rain down from heav en without further 
effort. I wish to give you my experience in this di rection as a specialist  par 
excellence. I do not know any contemporary of mine who has redu ced fasting 
and prayer to an exact science and who has reaped a  harvest so abundant as I 
have. I wish that I could infect the nation with my  experience and make it 
resort to fasting and prayer with intelligence, hon esty and intensity We would 
thus, incredible as it may appear, do millions of t hings pertaining to the nation 
without elaborate organization and checks upon chec ks, but I know that fasting 
and prayer, to be as effective as I have found them  to be in my own Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59  experience, have to be not mechanical things but de finite spiritual acts. 
Fasting then is crucifixion of the flesh with a cor responding freedom of the 
spirit and prayer is a definite conscious longing o f the soul to be utterly pure,—
the purity thus attained being dedicated to the rea lization of a particular 
object which is in itself pure. I hope therefore th at if you believe in the ancient 
institution of fasting and prayer you will dedicate  the 6th and the 13th to that 
purpose and induce your neighbours to do likewise. 
Then there remain the three meetings which I doubt not you will organize and 
make them a thorough success. 
Yours sincerely, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Letters of Srinivasa Sastri,  pp. 74-75 
 
1 The reference is to Jalianwala Bagh Massacre. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60   
23. TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE 1 
[Bombay,] April 5, 1919  
DEAR GURUDEV , 
This is an appeal to you against our mutual friend,  Charlie Andrews. I have been 
pleading with him for a message from you for public ation in the national 
struggle which, though in form it is only directed against a single piece of 
legislation, is in reality a struggle for liberty w orthy of a self-respecting nation. 
I have waited long and patiently. Charlie's descrip tion of your illness made me 
hesitate to write to you personally. Your health is  a national treasure and 
Charlie's devotion to you is superhuman. It is divi ne and I know that if he could 
help it he would not allow a single person, whether  by writing or his presence, 
to disturb your quiet and rest. I have respected th is lofty desire of his to 
protect you from all harm. But I find that you are lecturing in Benaras. I have, 
therefore, in the light of this fact corrected Char lie's description of your health 
which somewhat alarmed me and I venture to ask you for a message from you —
a message of hope and inspiration for those who hav e to go through the fire. I 
do it because you were good enough to send me your blessings when I 
embarked upon the struggle. The forces arrayed agai nst me are, as you know, 
enormous. I do not dread them, for I have an unquen chable belief that they are 
supporting untruth and that if we have sufficient f aith in truth, it will enable us 
to overpower the former. But all forces work throug h human agency. 
I am therefore anxious to gather round this mighty struggle the ennobling 
assistance of those who approve it. I will not be h appy until I have received 
your considered opinion on this endeavour to purify  the political life of the 
country. If you have seen anything to alter your fi rst opinion of it, I hope you 
will not hesitate to make it known. I value even ad verse opinions from friends, 
for though they may not make me change my course, t hey serve the purpose of 
so many lighthouses to give out warnings of dangers  lying in the stormy paths of 
life. Charlie's friendship has been to me on this a ccount an invaluable treasure, 
because he does not hesitate to share with me even his unconsidered notes of Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61  dissent. This I count a great privilege. May I ask you to extend at this critical 
moment the same privilege that Charlie has? 
I hope that you are keeping well and that you have thoroughly recuperated 
after your fatiguing journey through the Madras Pre sidency. 
Yours sincerely, 
 M. K. G. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XV pp. 179-80 
 
1 Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941)—Poet laureate and v ersatile author; was awarded Nobel 
Prize for Literature in 1913; Founded Shantiniketan  later known as Vishva Bharati. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62   
23A. FROM RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
Shanti Niketan, April 12, 1919  
DEAR MAHATMAJI  
Power in all its forms is irrational,—it is like th e horse that drags the carriage 
blindfolded. The moral element in it is only repres ented in the man who drives 
the horse. Passive resistance a force which is not necessarily moral in itself, it 
can be used against truth as well as for it. The da nger inherent in all force 
grows stronger when it is likely to gain success, f or then it becomes 
temptation. 
I know your teaching is to fight against evil by th e help of the good. But such a 
fight is for heroes and not for men led by impulses  of the moment. Evil on one 
side naturally begets evil on the other, injustice leading to violence and insult 
to vengefulness. Unfortunately such a force has alr eady been started, and 
either through panic or through wrath our authoriti es have shown us the claws 
whose sure effect is to drive some of us into the s ecret path of resentment and 
others into utter demoralization. In this crisis yo u, as a great leader of men, 
have stood among us to proclaim your faith in the i deal which you know to be 
that of India, the ideal which is both against the cowardliness of hidden 
revenge and the cowed submissiveness of the terror-  stricken. You have said, as 
Lord Buddha has done in his time and for all time t o come,— 
Akkodhena jine kodham, asadhum sadhuna jine,— "Conquer anger by the power 
of non-anger and evil by the power of good." 
This power of good must prove its truth and strengt h by its fearlessness, by its 
refusal to accept any imposition which depends for its success upon its power 
to produce frightfulness and is not ashamed to use its machines of destruction 
to terrorize a population completely disarmed. We m ust know that moral 
conquest does not consist in success, that failure does not deprive it of its 
dignity and worth. Those who believe in spiritual l ife know that to stand against Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63  wrong which has overwhelming material power behind it is victory itself,—it is 
the victory of the active faith in the ideal in the  teeth of evident defeat. 
I have always felt, and said accordingly, that the great gift of freedom can 
never come to a people through charity. We must win  it before we can own it. 
And India's opportunity for winning it will come to  her when she can prove that 
she is morally superior to the people who rule her by their right of conquest. 
She must willingly accept her penance of suffering— the suffering which is the 
crown of the great. Armed with her utter faith in g oodness she must stand 
unabashed before the arrogance that scoffs at the p ower of spirit. 
And you have come to your motherland in the time of  her need to remind her of 
her mission, to lead her in the true path of conque st, to purge her present day 
politics of its feebleness which imagines that it h as gained its purpose when it 
struts in the borrowed feathers of diplomatic disho nesty. 
This is why I pray most fervently that nothing that  tends to weaken our spiritual 
freedom may intrude into your marching line, that m artyrdom for the cause of 
truth may never degenerate into fanaticism for mere  verbal forms, descending 
into the self-deception that hides itself behind sa cred names. 
With these few words for an introduction allow me t o offer the following as a 
poet's contribution to your noble work: 
I 
Let me hold my head high in this faith that thou ar t our shelter, that all fear is 
mean distrust of these. 
Fear of man? But what man is there in this world, w hat king, King of kings, who 
is thy rival, who has hold of me for all time and i n all time and in all truth? 
What power is there in this world to rob me of my f reedom? For do not thy arms 
reach the captive through the dungeon-walls, bringi ng unfettered release to 
the soul? 
And must I cling to this body in fear of death, as a miser to his barren treasure? 
Has not this spirit of mine the eternal call to thy  feast of everlasting life ? Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64  Let me know that all pain and death are shadows of the moment; that the dark 
force which sweeps between me and thy truth is but the mist before the 
sunrise; that thou alone art mine for ever and grea ter than all pride of strength 
that dares to mock my manhood with its menace. 
 
II 
Give me the supreme courage of love, this is my pra yer,—the courage to speak, 
to do, to suffer at thy will, to leave all things o r be left alone. 
Give me the supreme faith of love, this is my praye r,—the faith of the life in 
death, of the victory in defeat, of the power hidde n in the frailness of beauty, 
of the dignity of pain that accepts hurt, but disda ins to return it. 
Very sincerely yours,  
RABINDRANATH TAGORE  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XV pp. 495-96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65   
24. TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
Yeravda Central Prison  
DEAR GURUDEV , 
This is early morning 3 o'clock of Tuesday. I enter  the fiery gate at noon. If you 
can bless the effort, I want it. You have been to m e a true friend because you 
have been a candid friend often speaking your thoug hts aloud. I had looked 
forward to a firm opinion from you one way or the o ther. But you have refused 
to criticise. Though it can now only be during my f ast, I will yet prize your 
criticism, if your heart condemns my action. I am n ot too proud to make an 
open confession to my blunder, whatever the cost of  the confession, if I find 
myself in error. If your heart approves of the acti on I want your blessing. It will 
sustain me. I hope I have made myself clear. 
My love 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Y.C.P.  
20-9-'32 
10-30 a.m. 
Just as I was handing this to the Superintendent, I  got your loving and 
magnificent wire. It will sustain me in the midst o f the storm I am about to 
enter. I am sending you a wire. 
Thank you. 
M.K.G. 
From a photostat : S.N. 26400 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66   
25. FROM RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
Calcutta, 
Sept. 30, 1932  
MAHATMAJI , 
Our people are wonderstruck at the impossible being  made possible in these 
few days and there is a universal feeling of immens e relief at your being saved 
for us. Now is the opportune moment when a definite  command from you will 
rouse the Hindu community to make a desperate effor t to win over 
Mohamedans to our common cause. It is even more dif ficult of success than 
your fight against untouchability, for there is a d eep rooted antipathy against 
the Muslims in most of our people and they also hav e not much love for 
ourselves. But you know how to move the hearts of t hose that are obdurate, 
and only you, I am sure, have the patient love that  can conquer the hatred that 
has accumulated for ages. I do not know how to calc ulate political conse-
quences but I believe that nothing can be too costl y which would enable us to 
win their confidence and convince them that we unde rstand their difficulties 
and their own point of view. However, it is not for  me to advise you and I shall 
fully rely upon your own judgment as to the course that should be taken. Only 
one suggestion I must venture to make to you that y ou might ask the Hindu 
Maha Sabha to make a conciliatory gesture towards t he other party. 
I have no doubt that you are gaining strength and i nspiring every moment 
strength and hope around you. 
With reverent love, 
I am,  
Ever yours,  
RABINDRANATH TAGORE  
From a Photostat:  S.N. 18565 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67   
25A. TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
Yervada Central Prison (Poona)  
DEAR GURUDEV , 
I have your beautiful letter. I am daily seeking li ght. This unity between Hindus 
and Muslims is also life's mission. The restriction s too hamper me. But I know 
that when I have the light, it will pierce through the restrictions. Meanwhile I 
pray though I do not yet fast. 
I hope you were none the worse for the strenuous wo rk in Poona and equally 
fatiguing long journey. 
Mahadev translated for us your beautiful sermon to the villagers on the 20th 
ultimo. With love, 
Yours,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
9-1 0-'32 
Y.C.P. 
From a photostat : S.N. 23905 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68   
26. FROM RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
Visva-Bharati,  
Santiniketan, Bengal, 
November 15, 1932  
DEAR MAHATMAJI , 
I can realize the sanctity of the promise given by you to Kelappan, and 
certainly nobody from outside can presume to critic ize any actions that you 
may decide upon guided by your own direct revelatio n of truth. What I fear is 
that following so close upon the tremendous impact made on our consciousness 
by the recent fast a repetition of it may psycholog ically be too much for us 
properly to evaluate and effectively to utilise for  the uplift of humanity. The 
mighty liberating forces set in motion by your fast  still continue to operate and 
spread from village to village, removing age-long i niquities, transforming the 
harshness of the callously superstitious to a new f eeling of sympathy for the 
distressed. Were I convinced that the movement has suffered any abatement or 
in any way shows signs of lacunae, I would welcome even the highest sacrifice 
which humanity today is capable of making, the sacr ifice of your life in penance 
for our sins. But all my experiences, of the activi ties of the villages around us 
here, as well as of other localities, convince me t hat the movement generated 
by your fast continue to gain in strength and conqu er formidable obstacles. The 
testimony of my friends from all parts of India con firm this truth. It may be that 
there are reactionary elements but it seems to me t hat we should allow them 
time— the pressure of a growing public opinion is s ure to win them over. Even 
as to the Guruvayyur temple if my information is co rrect, excepting a few 
misguided individuals, the majority of men is overw helmingly on the side of 
reform. I pray and hope that the former will yet yi eld to sanity and 
constitutionally remove the legal barriers which se em to stand in the way of 
reform. Should we take too seriously the activities  of some isolated groups of 
individuals and subject millions of our countrymen to the extremest form of Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69  suffering while they themselves are unquestionably on the side of truth ? The 
influence which is at work may have a check if anyt hing happens to you. Should 
we risk that possibility now that we have won? Thes e are the thoughts which 
naturally rise in my mind and I was thinking of put ting them before Mahadev 
when your letter arrived. I shall continue to follo w events with my thoughts and 
prayers and fervently hope that those who now stand  in the way of truth will be 
converted to it. 
With reverent love, 
Yours, 
RABINDRANATH TAGORE  
From a photostat:  S.N. 18622 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70   
26A. TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
DEAR GURUDEV , 
Your previous letter comforts me. It is enough for me that you are watching and 
praying. With deep love, 
Yours,  
M.  K.  G. 
24-11-'32 From a photostat:  S.N. 18622 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71   
27. TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
Ahmedabad, July 27, 1933  
DEAR GURUDEV , 
I have read your press message regarding the Yeravd a Pact, in so far as it 
applied to Bengal. It caused me deep grief to find that you were misled by very 
deep affection for me and by your confidence in my judgment into approving of 
a Pact which was discovered to have done a grave in justice to Bengal. It is now 
no use my saying that affection for me should not h ave affected your judgment 
out or that, confidence in my judgment ought not to  have made you accept a 
Pact about which you had ample means for coming to an independent 
judgment. Knowing as I do your very generous nature , you could not have acted 
otherwise than you did and in spite of the discover y made by you that you have 
committed a grave error you would continue to repea t such errors if the 
occasions too were repeated. 
But I am not at all convinced that there was any er ror made. As soon as the 
agitation for an amendment of the Pact arose I appl ied my mind to it, 
discussed, it with friends who ought to know and I was satisfied that there was 
no injustice done to Bengal. I corresponded with th ose who complained of 
injustice. But they too, including Ramanand Babu, c ould not convince me of 
any injustice. Of course our points of view were di fferent. In my opinion, the 
approach to the question was also wrong. 
A Pact arrived at by mutual arrangement cannot poss ibly be altered by the 
British Government except through the consent of th e parties to the Pact. But 
no serious attempt seems to have been made to secur e any such agreement. 
Your appearance, therefore, on the same platform as  the complainants, I, for 
one, welcome, in the hope that it could lead to a m utual discussion, instead of 
a futile appeal to the British Government. If, ther efore, you have, for your own 
part, studied the subject and have arrived at the o pinion that you have now 
pronounced, I would like you to convene a meeting o f the principal parties and Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72  convince them that a grave injustice has been done to Bengal. If it can be 
proved, I have no doubt that the Pact will be recon sidered and amended so as 
to undo the wrong, said to have been done to Bengal . If I felt convinced that 
there was an error of judgment, so far as Bengal wa s concerned, I would strain 
every nerve to see that the error was rectified. Yo u may know that up to now I 
have studiously refrained from saying anything in p ublic, in defence of the Pact 
save by way of reiterating my opinion, accompanied by the statement that if 
injustice could be proved, redress would be given. I am, therefore, entirely at 
your service. 
Just now, I am absorbed in disbanding the Ashram an d devising means of saving 
as much as can be for public use. My service will, therefore, be available after I 
am imprisoned which event may take place any day af ter the end of this 
month. I hope you are keeping good health. 
Yours sincerely, 
 M.  K.  GANDHI  
DR. RABINDRANATH TAGORE  
From a photostat:  S.N.  19127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73   
28. TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
Wardha,  
15th November, 1934  
DEAR GURUDEV , 
The All-India Village Industries Association which is being formed under the 
auspices of the Indian National Congress will need the assistance of expert 
advisers in the various matters that will engage it s attention. It is not intended 
to trouble them to meet together or even the member s of the Association but 
merely to advise the Association whenever reference  is made to them in 
matters in which they possess special knowledge, e. g., in chemical analysis, 
food values, sanitation, distribution of village ma nufactures, improved methods 
of developing village industries, cooperation, disp osal of village waste as 
manure, methods of village transport, education (ad ult and other), care of 
infants, and many other things too numerous to ment ion here. 
Will you please allow your name to appear among suc h advisers of the All-India 
Village Industries Association? Naturally I approac h you in the belief that the 
object of the Association and the method of approac h to its task have your 
approval. 
Yours sincerely, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
From a photostat:  S.N. 26409 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74   
29. TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
Segaon, Wardha, 
19-2-'3 7  
DEAR GURUDEV , 
I got your letter of the 10th inst. five days ago. Your trust in me and affection 
for me are there to be seen in every line but what about my amazing 
limitations? My shoulders are too weak to bear the burden you wish to impose 
upon me. My regard for you pulls me in one directio n, my reason in the 
opposite and it would be folly on my part to surren der reason to emotion in a 
question like the one that faces me. I know that if  I undertake the trust I would 
not need to go into details of administration but i t does imply capacity for 
financing the Institution and what I heard two days  ago has deepened my 
reluctance for I understand that in spite of your p romise to me in Delhi you are 
about to go to Ahmedabad on a begging expedition. I  was grieved and I would 
ask you on bended knee to forgo the expedition if i t is really decided upon. And 
in any case I would beg of you to recall my appoint ment as one of the trustees. 
With love and reverence, 
M. K.  GANDHI  
From a photostat:  S.N. 26412 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75   
30. TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
DEAR GURUDEV , 
I have just received your letter of 5th inst. Had I  not to go to Belgaum on the 
very date you will have the opening ceremony, I wou ld most certainly have 
come not only for the ceremony but also to see you and Santiniketan which I 
have not seen now for years. As it is I shall be wi th you in spirit when 
Jawaharlal will be performing the ceremony. May the  Chinese Hall be a symbol 
of living contact between China and India. 
The letter you wrote to me over that momentary misu nderstanding lies in my 
jacket as a treasure. It brought tears of joy to my  eyes. It was so worthy of you. 
With love and respects, 
Yours, M.  K.  GANDHI  
SEGAON , 
WARDHA , 
9-4-'37 
From a photostat:  S.N. 26413 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76   
31. TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
DEAR GURUDEV , 
Your precious letter is before me. You have anticip ated me. I wanted to write 
as soon as Sir Nilratan sent me his last reassuring  wire. But my right hand needs 
rest. I did not want to dictate. The left hand work s slow. This is merely to show 
you what love some of us bear towards you. I verily  believe that the silent 
prayers from the hearts of your admirers have been heard and you are still with 
us. You are not a mere singer of the world. Your li ving word is a guide and an 
inspiration to thousands. May you be spared for man y a long years yet to come. 
With deep love, 
Yours sincerely,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
SEGAON , WARDHA ,  
23-9-'37 
From a photostat:  S.N. 26415 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77   
32. FROM RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
'Uttrayan" 
Santiniketan, Bengal  
19-2-'40  
DEAR MAHATMAJI , 
You have just had a bird's-eye view this morning of  our Visva-Bharati centre of 
activities. I do not know what estimate you have fo rmed of its merit. You know 
that though this institution is national in its imm ediate aspect it is international 
in its spirit, offering according to the best of it s means India's hospitality of 
culture to the rest of the world. 
At one of its critical moments you have saved it fr om an utter breakdown and 
helped it to its legs. We are ever thankful to you for this act of friendliness. 
And, now before you take your leave of Santiniketan  I make my fervent appeal 
to you. Accept this institution under your protecti on, giving it an assurance of 
permanence if you consider it to be a national asse t. Visva-Bharati is like a 
vessel which is carrying the cargo of my life's bes t treasure, and I hope it may 
claim special care from my countrymen for its prese rvation. 
I hope we shall be able to keep close to a reticent  expression of love and 
reverence in welcoming you into our Ashram and neve r allow it to overflow into 
any extravagant display of phrases. Homage to the g reat naturally seeks its 
manifestation in the language of simplicity, and we  offer you these few words 
to let you know that we accept you as our own and a s one who belongs to all 
humanity. 
Just at this moment there are problems that darken our destiny. These, we 
know are crowding your path and none of us is free from their attack. Let us for 
a while pass beyond the bounds of this turmoil and make our meeting today a 
simple meeting of hearts whose memory will remain w hen all the moral Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78  confusions of our distracted politics will be allay ed and the eternal value of all 
our true endeavours will be revealed. 
With love, 
RABINDRANATH TAGORE  
From a photostat:  S.N. 1536-37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79   
32A. TO RABINDRANATH TAGORE 
On the way to Calcutta, 19-2-'40  
DEAR GURUDEV , 
The touching note that you put into my hands as we parted has gone straight 
into my heart. Of course Visva-Bharati is a nationa l institution. It is 
undoubtedly also international. You may depend upon  my doing all I can in the 
common endeavour to assure its permanence. I look t o you to keep your 
promise to sleep religiously for about an hour duri ng the day 
Though I have always regarded Santiniketan as my se cond home, this visit has 
brought me nearer to it than ever before. 
With reverence and love, 
Yours,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Truth Called Them Differently,  p. 139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80   
33. FROM G. S. ARUNDALE 1 
2nd Line Beach, Madras,  
July 26, 1919  
DEAR MR. GANDHI , 
Now that you have temporarily suspended Civil Disob edience, may I venture to 
urge with all the earnestness at my command that yo u should devote some of 
your attention and power towards strengthening the efforts being made by so 
many of our most eminent leaders in London to secur e for India a substantial 
measure of political freedom? 
I am well aware of the fact that the removal of the  Rowlatt Act from the 
Statute Book is your first duty. I entirely agree t hat continuous agitation against 
it is of vital importance. I would add that of equa lly vital importance is 
agitation against the Press Act. But now that you h ave for the moment given up 
the Civil Disobedience method of constitutional agi tation, do you not think that 
we might all join in one great common movement havi ng as its objective : 
1 The improvement of the Indian Reform Bill. 
2 The abolition of the Rowlatt Act and the Press Act.  
3 The insistence on the safeguarding of the rights of  the Indian citizen as set 
forth in the Declaration of Rights originally propo unded at a Madras 
Provincial Conference, and adopted at the Bombay Sp ecial Sessions of the 
Indian National Congress and of the All-India Musli m League in August-
September, 1918. 
I do not suggest that the order in which I have pla ced the various aspects of this 
objective need necessarily be kept; but I would mos t earnestly urge that unity 
is India's need of needs, and that we are all bound  to establish and maintain 
that unity by every means within our power. 
At present, there are two roads of service—the road  of Satyagrahis and the road 
of those who are concentrating their efforts on the  Indian Reform Bill. Can we 
not join together for the time being, or at least f or some common work? Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81  I know well that some of your followers have no fai th in any good coming out of 
the Indian Reform Bill. But is there not just a cha nce that it may be a useful 
stepping stone, and ought we not to support the man y leaders in London who, 
representing India's National Assemblies and the mo vements, are striving hard 
to make the Bill worthy of the land it is intended to serve? 
I am so eager in India's service, and so passionate ly anxious that even the 
smallest chance should not be overlooked, that I do  not hesitate to place these 
considerations before you. How glorious a testimony  of India's greatness were 
we able to make at this critical moment a united In dia working hard towards a 
common goal? I know it could be done with your help  and guidance and 
inspiration. In a conversation the other day with S ir Sankaran Nair he told me of 
those essential improvements which would make the I ndian Reform Bill really 
worth having, and which he thought could be gained.  Mrs Besant, after a long 
interview with Mr. Montagu, wrote to me that the ou tlook was distinctly 
hopeful. Could we in India not give our strength in  this direction also? Could we 
not join hands and work together? Could there not, at least for a few months, 
be one great movement, with yourself as one of its principal leaders? 
As one of the rank and file, let me say that we loo k with sadness upon the fact 
that there is no little union among our leaders. We  desire united action with all 
our hearts. Ought it not to be given to us for Indi a's sake, and could it not come 
on the basis of a combined agitation in favour of t he abolition of the two 
obnoxious Acts, of the modification of the Reform B ill, and of the Declaration 
of Rights? A noble and inspiring programme this, to  which, I believe, there is 
not a single patriotic Indian who would not adhere.  Your temporary suspension 
of Civil Disobedience should make it possible for u s all to work together without 
the slightest reservation; and I beg you to conside r whether we could not, at 
least for the time being, go forward together. 
With all respect, 
Yours sincere admirer, 
GEORGE ARUNDALE  
Young India,  6-8-1919 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82   
1 G. S. Arundale—Theosophist; Editor,  New India-,  took active part in Annie Besant's Home Rule 
League. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83   
33A. TO G. S. ARUNDALE 
Laburnum Road,  
Bombay, 
August 4, 1919  
DEAR MR. ARUNDALE , 
I have read and re-read your kind letter for which I thank you. I am publishing 
the letter in  Young India together with this reply. 
Much as I should like to follow your advice, I feel  that I am incompetent for the 
task set forth by you in your letter. I am fully aw are of my limitations. My bent 
is not political but religious and I take part in p olitics because I feel that there 
is no department of life which can be divorced from  religion and because 
politics touch the vital being of India almost at e very point. It is therefore 
absolutely necessary that the political relations b etween Englishmen and 
ourselves should be put on a sound basis. I am ende avouring to the best of my 
ability to assist in the process. I do not take muc h interest in the reforms 
because they are in safe hands and because reforms  cum  Rowlatt legislation 
mean to my mind a stalemate. Rowlatt legislation re presents a poisonous spirit. 
After all, the English civilians can, unless Indian  opinion produces a healthy 
reaction upon them, reduce the reforms practically to a nullity. They distrust 
us and we distrust them. Each considers the other a s his natural enemy. Hence 
the Rowlatt legislation. The Civil Service has devi sed the legislation to keep us 
down. In my opinion, that legislation is like the c oil of the snake round the 
Indian body. The obstinacy of the Government in cli nging to the hateful 
legislation in spite of the clearest possible demon stration they have had of 
public opinion against it makes me suspect the wors t. With the views 
enunciated above, you will not wonder at my inabili ty to interest myself in the 
reforms. Rowlatt legislation blocks the way. And my  life is dedicated among 
other things to removing the block. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84  Let there be no mistake. Civil resistance has come to stay. It is an eternal 
doctrine of life which we follow consciously or unc onsciously in many walks of 
life. It is the new and extended application of it which has caused misgivings 
and excitement. Its suspension is designed to demon strate its true nature, and 
to throw the responsibility for the removal of the Rowlatt legislation on the 
Government as also the leaders (you among them) who  have advised me to 
suspend it. But if within a reasonable time the leg islation is not removed, civil 
resistance will follow as surely as day follows nig ht. No weapon in the 
Government armoury can either overcome or destroy t hat eternal force. Indeed 
a time must come when civil resistance will be reco gnized as the most effica-
cious, if also the most harmless, remedy for securi ng redress of grievances. 
You suggest the desirability of unity. I think unit y of goal we have. But parties 
we shall always have and we may not find a common d enominator for improve-
ments. For some will want to go further than some o thers. I see no harm in a 
wholesome variety. What I would rid ourselves of is  distrust of one another and 
imputation of motives. Our besetting sin is not our  differences but our 
littleness. We wrangle over words, we fight often f or shadow and lose the 
substance. As Mr. Gokhale used to say, our politics  are a pastime of our leisure 
hours when they are not undertaken as a stepping st one to a carrier in life. 
I would invite you and every editor to insist on in troducing charity, seriousness 
and selflessness in our politics. And our disunion will not jar as it does today. It 
is not our differences that really matter. It is th e meanness behind that is 
undoubtedly ugly. 
The Punjab sentences are inextricably mixed up with  the Rowlatt agitation. It is 
therefore as imperatively necessary to have them re vised as it is to have the 
Act removed. I agree with you that the Press Act re quires overhauling. The 
Government are actually promoting sedition by high- handed executive action. 
And I was sorry to learn that Lord Willingdon 1 is reported to have taken the sole 
responsibility for the— in my opinion unwarranted—a ction 2 against  The Hindu  
and the  Swadesha Mitran.  By it, they have not lost in prestige or popularit y. 
They have gained in both. Surely there are judges e nough in the land who Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85  would convict where a journalist has overstepped th e bounds of legitimate 
criticism and uttered sedition. I am not enamoured of the Declaration of Rights 
business. When we have changed the spirit of the En glish civilian, we shall have 
made considerable headway with the Declaration of R ights. We must be 
honourable friends, or equally honourable enemies. We shall be neither, unless 
we are manly, fearless and independent. I would hav e us to treasure Lord 
Willingdon's advice and say "no" when we mean "no" without fear of 
consequences. This is unadulterated civil resistanc e. It is the way to 
friendliness and friendship. The other is the age-w orn method of open violence 
on honourable lines in so far as violence can be al lowed to be honourable. For 
me the roots of violence are in dishonour. I have t herefore ventured to present 
to India the former, in its complete form called Sa tyagraha, whose roots are 
always in honour. 
Yours sincerely, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Young India,  6-8-1919 
 
1 Lord Willingdon (1866-1941)—Governor of Bombay; late r Viceroy of India, 1931-36. 
2 The Government had demanded a security of Rs. 2,000  each from these Madras dailies and 
banned  The Hindu  for Punjab and Burma. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86   
34. TO EVERY EHGLISHMAN IN INDIA 
DEAR FRIEND , 
I wish that every Englishman will see this appeal a nd give thoughtful attention 
to it. 
Let me introduce myself to you. In my humble opinio n, no Indian has co-
operated with the British Government more than I ha ve for an unbroken period 
of twenty-nine years of public life in the face of circumstances that might well 
have turned any other man into a rebel. I ask you t o believe me when I tell you 
that my co-operation was not based on the fear of t he punishments provided by 
your laws or any other selfish motives. It was free  and voluntary co-operation 
based on the belief that the sum total of the activ ity of the British Government 
was for the benefit of India. I put my life in peri l four times for the sake of the 
Empire,—at the time of the Boer war when I was in c harge of the Ambulance 
corps whose work was mentioned in General Buller's dispatches, at the time of 
the Zulu revolt in Natal when I was in charge of a similar corps, at the time of 
the commencement of the late War when I raised an A mbulance corps and as a 
result of strenuous training had a severe attack of  pleurisy, and lastly, in 
fulfillment of my promise to Lord Chelmsford at the  War Conference in Delhi, I 
threw myself in such an active recruiting campaign in Kaira District involving 
long and trying marches, that I had an attack of dy sentery, which proved 
almost fatal. I did all this in the full belief tha t acts such as mine must gain for 
my country an equal status in the Empire. So late a s last December I pleaded 
hard for a trustful cooperation. I fully believed t hat Mr Lloyd George would 
redeem his promise to the Mussalmans and that the r evelations of the official 
atrocities in the Punjab would secure full reparati on for the Punjabis. But the 
treachery of Mr Lloyd George and its appreciation b y you, and the condonation 
of the Punjab atrocities have completely shattered my faith in the good 
intentions of the Government and the nation which i s supporting it. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87  But though my faith in your good intentions is gone , I recognize your bravery, 
and I know that what you will not yield to justice and reason, you will gladly 
yield to bravery. 
See What This Empire Means to India:  
Exploitation of India's resources for the benefits of Great Britain, an ever-
increasing military expenditure, and a civil servic e the most expensive in the 
world, extravagant working of every department in u tter disregard of India's 
poverty, disarmament and consequent emasculation of  a whole nation lest an 
armed nation might imperil the lives of a handful o f you in our midst, traffic in 
intoxicating liquors and drugs for ' the purpose of  sustaining a top-heavy 
administration, progressively repressive legislatio n in order to suppress an ever-
growing agitation seeking to give expression to a n ation's agony, degrading 
treatment of Indians residing in your dominions and  you have shown total 
disregard of our feelings by glorifying the Punjab administration and flouting 
the Mussalman sentiment. 
I know you would not mind if we could fight and wre st the sceptre from your 
hands. You know that we are powerless to do that, f or you have ensured our 
incapacity to fight in open and honourable battle. Bravery on the battlefield is 
thus impossible for us. Bravery of the soul still r emains open to us. I know you 
will respond to that also. I am engaged in evoking that bravery. Non-co-
operation means nothing less than training in self- sacrifice. Why should we co-
operate with you when we know that by your administ ration of this great 
country we are being daily enslaved in an increasin g degree? This response of 
the people to my appeal is not due to my personalit y. I would like you to 
dismiss me, and for that matter the Ali Brothers to o, from your consideration. 
My personality will fail to evoke any response to a nti-Muslim cry if I were 
foolish enough to raise it, as the magic name of th e Ali Brothers would fail to 
inspire the Mussalmans with enthusiasm if they were  madly to raise an anti-
Hindu cry. People flock in their thousands to liste n to us because we today 
represent the voice of a nation groaning under your  iron heels. The Ali Brothers 
were your friends as I was, and still am. My religi on forbids me to bear any ill Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88  will towards you. I would not raise my hand against  you even if I had the power. 
I expect to conquer you only by my suffering. The A li Brothers will certainly 
draw the sword, if they could, in defence of their religion and their country. 
But they and I have made common cause with the peop le of India in their 
attempt to voice their feelings and to find a remed y for their distress. 
You are in search of a remedy to suppress this risi ng ebullition of national 
feeling. I venture to suggest to you that the only way to suppress it is to 
remove the causes. You have yet the power. You can repent of the wrongs done 
to Indians. You can compel Mr Lloyd George to redee m his promises. I assure 
you he has kept many escape-doors. You can compel t he Viceroy to retire in 
favour of a better one, you can revise your ideas a bout Sir Michael O'Dwyer and 
General Dyer. You can compel the Government to summ on a conference of the 
recognized leaders of the people, duly elected by t hem and representing all 
shades of opinion so as to revise means for grantin g Swaraj in accordance with 
the wishes of the people of India. 
But this you cannot do unless you consider every In dian to be in reality your 
equal and brother. I ask for no patronage, I merely  point out to you, as a 
friend, an honourable solution of a grave problem. The other solution, namely 
repression, is open to you. I prophesy that it will  fail. It has begun already. The 
Government has already imprisoned two brave men of Panipat for holding and 
expressing their opinions freely. Another is on his  trial in Lahore for having 
expressed similar opinions. One in the Oudh Distric t is already imprisoned. 
Another awaits judgment. You should know what is go ing on in your midst. Our 
propaganda is being carried on in anticipation of r epression. I invite you 
respectfully to choose the better way and make comm on cause with the people 
of India whose salt you are eating. To seek to thwa rt their aspirations is 
disloyalty to the country. 
I am,  
Your faithful friend, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Young India,  27-10-1920 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89   
35. TO VICEROY 1 
[Bardoli, 
February 1, 1922]  
To 
His  EXCELLENCY THE VICEROY , 
DELHI  
SIR , 
Bardoli is a small  tahsil  in the Surat District in the Bombay Presidency, ha ving a 
population of about 87,000 all told. 
On the 29th  ultimo,  it decided under the presidency of Vithalbhai Pate l to 
embark on mass Civil Disobedience, having proved it s fitness for it in terms of 
the resolution of the All-India Congress Committee which met at Delhi during 
the first week of November last. But, as I am perha ps chiefly responsible for 
Bardoli's decision, I owe it to Your Excellency and  the public to explain the 
situation under which the decision has been taken. 
It was intended under the Resolution of the All- In dia Congress Committee 
before referred to, to make Bardoli the first unit for mass Civil Disobedience in 
order to mark the national revolt against the Gover nment of India for its 
consistently criminal refusal to appreciate India's  just resolve regarding the 
Khilafat, the Punjab and Swaraj. 
Then followed the unfortunate and regrettable rioti ng in Bombay on the 17th 
November last, resulting in the postponement of the  step contemplated by 
Bardoli. 
Meanwhile, repression of virulent type has taken pl ace with the concurrence of 
the Government of India in Bengal, Assam, the Unite d Provinces, the Punjab, 
the Province of Delhi and, in a way, in Bihar and O rissa and elsewhere. I know 
that you have objected to the use of the word "repr ession" for describing the 
action of the authorities in those provinces. In my  opinion, when action is taken Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90  which is in excess of the requirements of a situati on, it is undoubtedly 
repression. The looting of property, assaults on in nocent people, the brutal 
treatment of prisoners in the jails including flogg ing can in no sense be 
described as legal, civilized or in any way necessa ry. This official lawlessness 
cannot be described by any other term but lawless r epression. Intimidation by 
Non-co-operators or their sympathizers to a certain  extent in connection with 
hartals and picketing may be admitted, but in no ca se can it be held to justify 
the wholesale suppression of peaceful volunteering or equally peaceful public 
meetings under a distorted use of an extraordinary law which was passed in 
order to deal with activities which were manifestly  violent both in intention 
and action, nor is it possible to designate, as oth erwise than repression, action 
taken against innocent people under what has appear ed to many of us an illegal 
use of the ordinary law, nor again can the administ rative interference with the 
liberty of the Press under a law that is under prom ise of repeal be regarded as 
anything but repression. 
The immediate task before the country, therefore, i s to rescue, from paralysis 
freedom of speech, freedom of association and freed om of the Press. In the 
present mood of the Government of India and in the present unprepared state 
of the country in respect of complete control of th e forces of violence, Non-co-
operators were unwilling to have anything to do wit h the Malaviya Conference 
whose object was to induce Your Excellency to conve ne a Round Table 
Conference. But as I was anxious to avoid all avoid able suffering, I had no hesi-
tation in advising the Working Committee of the Con gress to accept the 
recommendations of that Conference. Although in my opinion the terms were 
quite in keeping with your own requirements as I un derstood them through your 
Calcutta speech and otherwise, you have summarily r ejected the proposal. 
In the circumstances, there is nothing before the c ountry but to adopt some 
non-violent method for the enforcement of its deman ds including the 
elementary rights of free speech, free association and free Press. In my humble 
opinion, the recent events are a clear departure fr om the civilized policy laid 
down by Your Excellency at the time of the generous , manly and unconditional Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91  apology of the Ali brothers, viz., that the Governm ent of India should not 
interfere with the activities of Non-co-operation s o long as they remained non-
violent in word and deed. Had the Government's poli cy remained neutral and 
allowed public opinion to ripen and have its full e ffect, it would have been 
possible to advise postponement of the adoption of civil disobedience of an 
aggressive type till the Congress had acquired full er control over the forces of 
violence in the country and enforced greater discip line among the millions of 
its adherents. But this lawless repression (in a wa y unparalleled in the history 
of this unfortunate country) has made the immediate  adoption of mass Civil 
Disobedience an imperative duty. The Working Commit tee of the Congress has 
restricted it to only certain areas to be selected by me from time to time, and 
at present it is confined only to Bardoli. I may, u nder the said authority, give 
my consent at once in respect of a group of hundred  villages in Guntur in the 
Madras Presidency, provided they can strictly confo rm to the conditions of non-
violence, unity among different classes, the adopti on and manufacture of hand-
spun Khadi and untouchability. 
But before the people of Bardoli actually commence mass Civil Disobedience, I 
would respectfully urge you, as head of the Governm ent of India, finally to 
revise your policy and set free all the non-co-oper ating prisoners who are 
convicted or under trial for non-violent activities , and to declare in clear terms 
a policy of absolute non-interference with all non- violent activities in the 
country whether they be regarding the redress of th e Khilafat or the Punjab 
wrongs or Swaraj or any other purpose and even thou gh they fall under the 
repressive sections of the Penal Code or the Crimin al Procedure Code or other 
repressive laws subject always to the conditions of  non-violence. I would 
further urge you to free the Press from all adminis trative control and to restore 
all the fines and forfeitures recently imposed. In thus urging I am asking Your 
Excellency to do what is being done today in every country which is deemed to 
be under civilized government. If you can see your way to make the necessary 
declaration within seven days of the date of public ation of this manifesto, I 
shall be prepared to advise postponement of civil d isobedience of an aggressive 
character, till the imprisoned workers have, after their discharge, reviewed the Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 92  whole situation and considered the position  de novo . If the Government makes 
the requested declaration, I shall regard it as an honest desire on its part to 
give effect to public opinion and shall have no hes itation in advising the country 
to be engaged in further moulding public opinion wi thout violent restraint from 
either side and trust to its working to secure the fulfillment of its unalterable 
demands. Aggressive civil disobedience in that case  will be taken up only when 
the Government departs from its policy of strictest  neutrality or refuses to 
yield to clearly expressed opinion of the vast majo rity of the people of India. 
I remain,  
Your Excellency's faithful  
servant and friend,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Young India,  9-2-1922 
 
1. Lord Reading (1860-1935) — Viceroy and Governor Gen eral of India, 1921-26. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 93   
36. TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 1 
Bardoli, February 19, 1922  
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL , 
I see that all of you are terribly cut up over the resolutions of the Working 
Committee. I sympathize with you, and my heart goes  out to Father. I can 
picture to myself the agony through which he must h ave passed, but I also feel 
that this letter is unnecessary because I know that  the first shock must have 
been followed by a true understanding of the situat ion. Let us not be obsessed 
by Devidas's youthful indiscretions. It is quite po ssible that the poor boy has 
been swept off his feet and that he has lost his ba lance, but the brutal murder 
of the constables by an infuriated crowd which was in sympathy with Non-co-
operation cannot be denied. Nor can it be denied th at it was politically minded 
crowd. It would have been criminal not to have heed ed such a clear warning. 
I must tell you that this was the last straw. My le tter to the Viceroy was not 
sent without misgivings as its language must make i t clear to anyone. I was 
much disturbed by the Madras doings, but I drowned the warning voice. I 
received letters both from Hindus and Mohammedans f rom Calcutta, Allahabad 
and the Punjab, all these before the Gorakhpur inci dent, telling me that the 
wrong was not all on the Government side, that our people were becoming 
aggressive, defiant and threatening, that they were  getting out of hand and 
were not non-violent in demeanour. Whilst the Feroz epur Jirka incident 2 is 
discreditable to the Government, we are not altoget her without blame. Hakimji 
complained about Bareilly. I have bitter complaints  about Jajjar. In 
Shahajanpur too there has been a forcible attempt t o take possession of the 
Town Hall. From Kanouj to the Congress Secretary hi mself telegraphed saying 
that the volunteer boys had become unruly and were picketing a High School 
and preventing youngsters under 16 from going to th e school. 36,000 volunteers 
were enlisted in Gorakhpur, not 100 of whom conform ed to the Congress 
pledge. In Calcutta Jamnalalji tells me there is ut ter disorganization, the 
volunteers wearing foreign cloth and certainly not pledged to non-violence. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 94  With all this news in my possession and much more f rom the South, the Chauri 
Chaura news came like a powerful match to ignite th e gunpowder, and there 
was a blaze. I assure you that if the thing had not  been suspended we would 
have been leading not a non-violent struggle but es sentially a violent struggle. 
It is undoubtedly true that non-violence is spreadi ng like the scent of the otto 
of roses throughout the length and breadth of the l and, but the foetid smell of 
violence is still powerful, and it would be unwise to ignore or underrate it. The 
cause will prosper by this retreat. The movement ha d unconsciously drifted 
from the right path. We have come back to our moori ngs, and we can again go 
straight ahead. You are in as disadvantageous a pos ition as I am advantageously 
placed for judging events in this due proportion. 
May I give you my own experience of South Africa? W e had all kinds of news 
brought to us in South Africa in our jails. For two  or three days during my first 
experience I was glad enough to receive tit-bits, b ut I immediately realized the 
utter futility of interesting myself in this illega l gratification. I could do 
nothing, I could send no message profitably, and I simply vexed my soul 
uselessly. I felt that it was impossible for me to guide the movement from the 
Jail. I therefore simply waited till I could meet t hose who were outside and talk 
to them freely, and then too I want you to believe me when I tell you that I 
took only an academic interest because I felt it wa s not my province to judge 
anything, and I saw how unerringly right I was. I w ell remember how the 
thoughts I had up to the time of my discharge from the jail on every occasion 
were modified immediately after discharge and after  getting first-hand 
information myself. Somehow or other the jail atmos phere does not allow you 
to have all the bearings in your mind. I would ther efore like you to dismiss the 
outer world from your view altogether and ignore it s existence. I know this is a 
most difficult task, but if you take up some seriou s study and some serious 
manual work you can do it. Above all, whatever you do, don't you be disgusted 
with the spinning wheel. You and I might have reaso n to get disgusted with 
ourselves for having done many things and having be lieved many things, but we 
shall never have the slightest cause for regret tha t we have pinned our faith to 
the spinning wheel or that we have spun so much goo d yarn per day in the Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 95  name of the motherland. You have the  Song Celestial  with you. I cannot give 
you the inimitable translation of Edwin Arnold, but  this is the rendering of the 
Sanskrit text. "There is no waste of energy; there is no destruction in this. Even 
a little of this Dharma saves one from many a pitfa ll." "This Dharma" in the 
original refers to Karma Yoga, and the Karma Yoga o f our age is the spinning 
wheel. I want a cheering letter from you after the freezing dose you have sent 
me through Pyarelal. 
Yours sincerely,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
A Bunch of Old Letters,  pp. 22-25 
 
1 In December 1921, began the first mass jail going p eriod in the Non-co-
operation Movement in India. Tens of thousands of p ersons were sent to 
prison for some technical breach of the law. Most o f us, including my father, 
were in prison when we heard that Mahatma Gandhi ha d suddenly ordered 
the withdrawal of this movement. The reason given was  that an excited 
crowd of peasants at Chauri Chaura in Gorakbpur Dis trict of the U.E had 
attacked a police outpost, set fire to it and kille d a few policemen who 
were there. All of us in prison were greatly distre ssed at this sudden 
withdrawal of a great movement because of the mis-be haviour of a group of 
people in a village. Mahatma Gandhi was at that tim e free, that is, not in 
prison. We managed to convey to him from prison our deep distress at the 
step he had taken. This letter was written by Gandh iji on that occasion. It 
was given to my sister (now Vijayalakshmi Pandit) to  read out to us in prison 
during an interview. 
2 The shooting of December 23, 1921 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 96   
37. TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 
The Ashram, Sabarmati,  
January, 17, 1928  
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL , 
I must dictate and save time and give rest to my ac hing shoulder. I wrote to you 
on Sunday about Fenner Brockway. I hope you got tha t letter in due time. 
Do you know that it was because you were the chief partner in the transactions 
referred to that I wrote the articles you have crit icized, except of course about 
the so-called 'All India Exhibition' ? I felt a kin d of safety that in view of the 
relations between you and me my writings would be t aken in the spirit in which 
they were written. However I see that they were a m isfire all round. I do not 
mind it. For, it is evident that the articles alone  could deliver you from the 
self-suppression under which you have been labourin g apparently for so many 
years. Though I was beginning to detect some differ ences in viewpoint between 
you and me, I had no notion whatsoever of the terri ble extent of these 
differences. Whilst you were heroically suppressing  yourself for the sake of the 
nation and in the belief that by working with and u nder me in spite of yourself, 
you would serve the nation and come out scatheless,  you were chafing under 
the burden of this unnatural self- suppression. And , while you were in that 
state, you overlooked the very things which appear to you now as my serious 
blemishes. I could show you from the pages of  Young India  equally strong 
articles written by me, when I was actively guiding  the C., with reference to 
the doings of the All India Congress Committee. I h ave spoken similarly at the 
All India Congress Committee meetings whenever ther e has been irresponsible 
and hasty talk or action. But whilst you were under  stupefaction these things 
did not jar on you as they do now. And it seems to me therefore useless to 
show you the discrepancies in your letter. What I a m now concerned with is 
future action. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 97  If any freedom is required from me I give you all t he freedom you may need 
from the humble, unquestioning allegiance that you have given to me for all 
these years and which I value all the more for the knowledge I have now gained 
of your state. I see quite clearly that you must ca rry on open warfare against 
me and my views. For, if I am wrong I am evidently doing irreparable harm to 
the country and it is your duty after having known it to rise in revolt against 
me. Or, if you have any doubt as to the correctness  of your conclusions, I shall 
gladly discuss them with you personally. The differ ences between you and me 
appear to me to be so vast and radical that there s eems to be no meeting 
ground between us. I can't conceal from you my grie f that I should lose a 
comrade so valiant, so faithful, so able and so hon est as you have always been; 
but in serving a cause, comradeships have got to be  sacrificed. The cause must 
be held superior to all such considerations. But th is dissolution of 
comradeship—if dissolution must come in no way affe cts our personal intimacy. 
We have long become members of the same family, and  we remain such in 
spite of grave political differences. I have the go od fortune to enjoy such 
relations with several people. To take Sastri for i nstance, he and I differ in the 
political outlook as poles asunder, but the bond be tween him and me that 
sprung up before we knew the political differences has persisted and survived 
the fiery ordeals it had to go through. 
I suggest a dignified way of unfurling your banner.  Write to me a letter for 
publication showing your differences. I will print it in  Young India  and write a 
brief reply. Your first letter I destroyed after re ading and replying to it, the 
second I am keeping, and if you do not want to take  the trouble of writing 
another letter, I am prepared to publish the letter  that is before me. I am not 
aware of any offensive passage in it. But if I find  any, you may depend upon my 
removing every such passage. I consider that letter  to be a frank and honest 
document. 
With love,  
BAPU  
A Bunch of Old Letters,  pp. 58-60 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 98   
38. TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 
Segaon, Wardha, July 29, 1939  
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL , 
Instead of guiding the Dhami people I have passed t hem on to you. I feel that 
you should discharge this burden without any interf erence from me. The idea in 
the States seems to be to isolate and ignore the Co ngress and hence the States' 
Conference. I have already suggested in  Harijan  that no State association or 
mandal  should act on its own without reference to your co mmittee. I should 
act, if at all, through you, i.e. when you refer to  me, I should give my opinion 
as I do in respect of the W.C. I told the Gwalior p eople also likewise yesterday. 
You will have to reorganize your committee a bit, i f it is to function properly. 
After all I could not go to Kashmir. Sheikh Abdulla  and his friends won't tolerate 
the idea of my being State guest. Banking on my pas t experience, I had 
accepted State offer in anticipation of Sheikh Abdu lla's approval. But I saw that 
I was mistaken. I therefore cancelled the acceptanc e of the State hospitality 
and accepted the Sheikh's. This embarrassed the Sta te. So I cancelled the visit 
altogether. I was guilty of double stupidity in dar ing to think of going there 
without you and in not getting Sheikh's permission before accepting the State 
offer. I had thought that I would serve the people by accepting the State offer. 
I must confess that I was not pleased with my conta ct [with] the Sheikh and his 
friends. They seemed to all of us to be most unreas onable. Khan Saheb 
reasoned with them. But it was to no purpose. 
Your visit to Ceylon was glorious. I don't mind wha t the immediate outcome is. 
Saleh Tyabji asks me to send you to Burma and Andre ws thinks of you in 
connection with S.A. As for Ceylon the idea of a Co ngress deputation came to 
me spontaneously, not so these two even after the p romptings. But of these 
when we meet. I hope you are fresh and that Krishna  is enjoying herself. 
Love, BAPU  
A Bunch of Old Letters , pp. 387-88 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 99   
39. TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU * 
October 5, 1945  
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL , 
I have been desirous of writing to you for many day s but have not been able to 
do so before today. The question of whether I shoul d write to you in English or 
Hindustani was also in my mind. I have at length pr eferred to write to you in 
Hindustani. 
The first thing I want to write about is the differ ence of outlook between us. If 
the difference is fundamental then I feel the publi c should also be made aware 
of it. It would be detrimental to our work for Swar aj to keep them in the dark. I 
have said that I still stand by the system of Gover nment envisaged in  Hind 
Swaraj.  These are not mere words. All the experience gaine d by me since 1908 
when I wrote the booklet has confirmed the truth of  my belief. Therefore if I 
am left alone in it I shall not mind, for I can onl y bear witness to the truth as I 
see it. I have not  Hind Swaraj  before me as I write. It is really better for me t o 
draw the picture anew in my own words. And whether it is the same as I drew 
in  Hind Swaraj  or not is immaterial for both you and me. It is no t necessary to 
prove the Tightness of what I said then. It is esse ntial only to know what I feel 
today. I am convinced that if India is to attain tr ue freedom and through India 
the world also, then sooner or later the fact must be recognized that people 
will have to live in villages, not in towns, in hut s, not in palaces. Crores of 
people will never be able to live at peace with eac h other in towns and 
palaces. They will then have no recourse but to res ort to both violence and 
untruth. I hold that without truth and non-violence  there can be nothing but 
destruction for humanity. We can realize truth and non-violence only in the 
simplicity of village life and this simplicity can best be found in the Charkha 
and all that Charkha connotes. I must not fear if t he world today is going the 
wrong way. It may be that India too will go that wa y and like the proverbial 
moth burn itself eventually in the flame round whic h it dances more and more 
furiously. But it is my bounden duty up to my last breath to try to protect India Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 100  and through India the entire world from such a doom . The essence of what I 
have said is that man should rest content with what  are his real needs and 
become self- sufficient. If he does not have this c ontrol he cannot save himself. 
After all the world is made up of individuals just as it is the drops that 
constitute the ocean. I have said nothing new. This  is a well-known truth. 
But I do not think I have stated this in  Hind Swaraj. While I admire modern 
science, I find that it is the old looked at in the  true light of modern science 
which should be re-clothed and refashioned aright. You must not imagine that I 
am envisaging our village life as it is today. The village of my dreams is still in 
my mind. After all every man lives in the world of his dreams. My ideal village 
will contain intelligent human beings. They will no t live in dirt and darkness as 
animals. Men and women will be free and able to hol d their own against anyone 
in the world. There will be neither plague, nor cho lera nor small pox; no one 
will be idle, no one will wallow in luxury. Everyon e will have to contribute his 
quota of manual labour. I do not want to draw a lar ge scale picture in detail. It 
is possible to envisage railways, post and telegrap h offices, etc. For me it is 
material to obtain the real article and the rest wi ll fit into the picture 
afterwards. If I let go the real thing, all else go es. 
On the last day of the Working Committee it was dec ided that this matter 
should be fully discussed and the position clarifie d after a two or three days' 
session. I should like this. But whether the Workin g Committee sits or not I 
want our position vis-a-vis each other to be clearl y understood by us for two 
reasons. Firstly, the bond that unites us is not on ly political work. It is 
immeasurably deeper and quite unbreakable. Therefor e it is that I earnestly 
desire that in the political field also we should u nderstand each other clearly. 
Secondly neither of us thinks himself useless. We b oth live for the cause of 
India's freedom and we would both gladly die for it . We are not in need of the 
world's praise. Whether we get praise or blame is i mmaterial to us. There is no 
room for praise in service. I want to live to 125 f or the service of India but I 
must admit that I am now an old man. You are much y ounger in comparison and Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 101  I have therefore named you as my heir. I must, howe ver, understand my heir 
and my heir should understand me. Then alone shall I be content. 
One other thing. I asked you about joining the Kast urba Trust and the 
Hindustani Prachar Sabha. You said you would think over the matter and let me 
know. I find your name is already in the Hindustani  Prachar Sabha. Nanavati 
reminded me that he had been to both you and Maulan a Sahib in regard to this 
matter and obtained your signature in 1942. That, h owever, is past history. You 
know the present position of Hindustani. If you are  still true to your then 
signature I want to take work from you in this Sabh a. There won't be much work 
and you will not have to travel for it. 
The Kasturba Fund work is another matter. If what I  have written above does 
not and will not go down with you I fear you will n ot be happy in the Trust and I 
shall understand. 
The last thing I want to say to you is in regard to  the controversy that has 
flared up between you and Sarat Babu. It has pained  me. I have not really 
grasped it. Is there anything more behind what you have said? If so you must 
tell me. 
If you feel you should meet me to talk over what I have written we must 
arrange a meeting. 
You are working hard. I hope you are well. I trust Indu too is fit. 
Blessings from,  
BAPU 
A Bunch of Old Letters , pp. 505-07 
 
* Original in Hindi 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 102   
40. FROM JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 
Anand Bhavan, Allahabad, 
October 9, 1945  
MY DEAR BAPU , 
I have received today, on return from Lucknow, your  letter of the 5th October. 
I am glad you have written to me fully and I shall try to reply at some length 
but I hope you will forgive me if there is some del ay in this, as I am at present 
tied up with close- fitting engagements. I am only here now for a day and a 
half. It is really better to have informal talks bu t just at present I do not know 
when to fit this in. I shall try. 
Briefly put, my view is that the question before us  is not one of truth versus 
untruth or non-violence versus violence. One assume s as one must that true co-
operation and peaceful methods must be aimed at and  a society which 
encourages these must be our objective. The whole q uestion is how to achieve 
this society and what its content should be. I do n ot understand why a village 
should necessarily embody truth and nonviolence. A village, normally speaking, 
is backward intellectually and culturally and no pr ogress can be made from a 
backward environment. Narrow-minded people are much  more likely to be 
untruthful and violent. 
Then again we have to put down certain objectives l ike a sufficiency of food, 
clothing, housing, education, sanitation, etc. whic h should be the minimum 
requirements for the country and for everyone. It i s with these objectives in 
view that we must find out specifically how to atta in them speedily. Again it 
seems to me inevitable that modern means of transpo rt as well as  many other 
modern developments must continue and be developed.  There is no way out of 
it except to have them. If that is so inevitably a measure of heavy industry 
exists. How far that will fit in with a purely vill age society ? Personally I hope 
that heavy or light industries should all be decent ralized as far as possible and 
this is feasible now because of the development of electric power. If two types Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 103  of economy exist in the country there should be eit her conflict between the 
two or one will overwhelm the other. 
The question of independence and protection from fo reign aggression, both 
political and economic, has also to be considered i n this context. I do not think 
it is possible for India to be really independent u nless she is a technically 
advanced country. I am not thinking for the moment in terms of just armies but 
rather of scientific growth. In the present context  of the world we cannot even 
advance culturally without a strong- background of scientific research in every 
department. There is today in the world a tremendou s acquisitive tendency 
both in individuals and groups and nations, which l eads to conflicts and wars. 
Our entire society is based on this more or less. T hat basis must go and be 
transformed into one of co-operation, not of isolat ion which is impossible. If 
this is admitted and is found feasible then attempt s should be made to realize 
it not in terms of an economy, which is cut off fro m the rest of the world, but 
rather one which co-operates. From the economic or political point of view an 
isolated India may well be a kind of vacuum which i ncreases the acquisitive 
tendencies of others and thus creates conflicts. 
There is no question of palaces for millions of peo ple. But there seems to be no 
reason why millions should not have comfortable up- to-date homes where they 
can lead a cultured existence. Many of the present overgrown cities have 
developed evils which are deplorable. Probably we h ave to discourage this 
overgrowth and at the same time encourage the villa ge to approximate more to 
the culture of the town. 
It is many years ago since I read  Hind Swaraj  and I have only a vague picture in 
my mind. But even when I read it 20 or more years a go it seemed to me 
completely unreal. In your writings and speeches si nce then I have found much 
that seemed to me an advance on that old position a nd an appreciation of 
modern trends. I was therefore surprised when you t old us that the old picture 
still remains intact in your mind. As you know, the  Congress has never 
considered that picture, much less adopted it. You yourself have never asked it 
to adopt it except for certain relatively minor asp ects of it. How far it is Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 104  desirable for the Congress to consider these fundam ental questions, involving 
varying philosophies of life, it is for you to judg e. I should imagine that a body 
like the Congress should not lose itself in argumen ts over such matters which 
can only produce great confusion in people's minds resulting in inability to act 
in the present. This may also result in creating ba rriers between the Congress 
and others in the country. Ultimately of course thi s and other questions will 
have to be decided by representatives of free India . I have a feeling that most 
of these questions are thought of and discussed in terms of long ago, ignoring 
the vast changes that have taken place all over the  world during the last 
generation or more. It is 38 years since Hind Swara j was written. The world has 
completely changed since then, possibly in a wrong direction. In any event any 
consideration of these questions must keep present facts, forces and the human 
material we have today in view, otherwise it will b e divorced from reality. You 
are right in saying that the world, or a large part  of it, appears to be bent on 
committing suicide. That may be an inevitable devel opment of an evil seed in 
civilization that has grown. I think it is so. How to get rid of this evil, and yet 
how to keep the good in the present as in the past is our problem. Obviously 
there is good too in the present. 
These are some random thoughts hurriedly written do wn and I fear they do 
injustice to the grave import of the questions rais ed. You will forgive me, I 
hope, for this jumbled presentation. Later I shall try to write more clearly on 
the subject. 
About Hindustani Prachar Sabha and about Kasturba F und, it is obvious that 
both of them have my sympathy and I think they are doing good work. But I am 
not quite sure about the manner of their working an d I have a feeling that this 
is not always to my liking. I really do not know en ough about them to be 
definite. But at present I have developed distaste for adding to my burden of 
responsibilities when I feel that I cannot probably  undertake them for lack of 
time. These next few months and more are likely to be fevered ones for me and 
others. It seems hardly desirable to me, therefore,  to join any responsible 
committee for form's sake only. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 105  About Sarat Bose, I am completely in the dark; as t o why he should grow so 
angry with me, unless it is some past grievance abo ut my general attitude in 
regard to foreign relations. Whether I was right or  wrong it does seem to me 
that Sarat has acted in a childish and irresponsibl e manner. You will remember 
perhaps that Subhash did not favour in the old days  the Congress attitude 
towards Spain, Czechoslovakia, Munich and China. Pe rhaps this is a reflection of 
that old divergence of views. I know of nothing els e that has happened. 
I see that you are going to Bengal early in Novembe r, Perhaps I may visit 
Calcutta for three or four days just then. If so, I  hope to meet you. 
You may have seen in the papers an invitation by th e President of the newly 
formed Indonesian Republic to me and some others to  visit Java. In view of the 
special circumstances of the case I decided immedia tely to accept this 
invitation subject of course to my getting the nece ssary facilities for going 
there. It is extremely doubtful if I shall get the facilities, and so probably I shall 
not go. Java is just two days by air from India, or  even one day from Calcutta. 
The Vice-President of this Indonesian Republic, Moh ammad Hatta, is a very old 
friend of mine. I suppose you know that the Javanes e population is almost 
entirely Muslim. 
I hope you are keeping well and have completely rec overed from the attack of 
influenza. 
Yours affectionately, 
 JAWAHARLAL  
MAHATMA GANDHI ,  
NATURE CURE CLINIC , 6,  TODIWALA ROAD , POONA  
 
A Bunch of Old Letters,  pp. 507-11 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 106   
41. TO JAWAHARLAL NEHRU * 
Poona,  
November 13, 1945  
MY DEAR JAWAHARLAL , 
Our talk of yesterday's made me glad. I am sorry it  could not be longer. I feel it 
cannot be finished in a single sitting, but will ne cessitate frequent meetings 
between us. I am so constituted that, if only I wer e physically fit to run about, I 
would myself overtake you, wherever you might be, a nd return after a couple 
of days' heart-to-heart talk with you. I have done so before. It is necessary that 
we understand each other well and that others also should clearly understand 
where we stand. It would not matter if ultimately w e might have to agree to 
differ so long as we remained one at heart as we ar e today. The impression 
that I have gathered from our yesterday's talk is t hat there is not much 
difference in our outlook. To test this I put down below the gist of what I have 
understood. Please correct me if there is any discr epancy. 
1 The real question, according to you, is how to brin g about man's highest 
intellectual, economic, political and moral develop ment. I agree entirely. 
2 In this there should be an equal right and opportun ity for all. 
3 In other words, there should be equality between th e town-dwellers and 
the villagers in the standard of food and drink, cl othing and other living 
conditions. In order to achieve this equality today  people should be able to 
produce for themselves the necessaries of life, i.e . clothing, food-stuffs, 
dwelling and lighting and water. 
4 Man is not born to live in isolation but is essenti ally a social animal 
independent and interdependent. No one can or shoul d ride on another's 
back. If we try to work out the necessary condition s for such a life, we are 
forced to the conclusion that the unit of society s hould be a village, or call 
it a small and manageable group of people who would , in the ideal, be Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 107  self-sufficient (in the matter of their vital requi rements) as a unit and 
bound together in bonds of mutual cooperation and i nter-dependence. 
If I find that so far I have understood you correct ly, I shall take up 
consideration of the second part of the question in  my next. 
I had got Rajkumari to translate into English my fi rst letter to you. It is still 
lying with me. I am enclosing for you an English tr anslation of this. It will serve 
a double purpose. An English translation might enab le me to explain myself 
more fully and clearly to you. Further, it will ena ble me to find out precisely if 
I have fully and correctly understood you. 
Blessings for Indu. 
Blessings from,  
BAPU  
A Bunch of Old Letters , pp. 511-12 
 
* Original in Hindi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 108   
42. TO KONDA VENKATAPPAYYA 1 
Satyagraha Ashram,  
Sabarmati,  
March 4, 1922  
MY DEAR FRIEND , 
I have kept your letter of the 19th February in ord er to be able to write to you 
at length. 
Your first question is whether the requisite non-vi olent atmosphere can at all 
be attained and if so when. This is really a questi on as old as non-cooperation. 
It puzzled me to find some of the closest and most esteemed of co-workers 
putting the question as if the requirement was a ne w thing. I have not the 
shadow of a doubt that, if we can secure workers wi th an abiding faith in non-
violence and in themselves we can ensure the non-vi olent atmosphere required 
for the working of civil disobedience. The discover y I have made during these 
few days is that very few understand the nature of non-violence. The meaning 
of the adjective "civil" before "disobedience" is o f course "non-violent". Why 
should the people not be trained to refrain from pa rticipating in activities 
which are likely to throw them off their balance? I  agree that it will be difficult 
to get 30 crores of people to be non-violent, but I  refuse to believe that it is 
difficult, if we can get intelligent and honest wor kers, to make people who are 
not actively participating in the movement remain i ndoors. Now, at Chauri 
Chaura 2 the procession was deliberately formed by voluntee rs. It was wickedly 
taken in the direction of the Thana. In my opinion,  the forming of the 
procession itself was easily avoidable. Having been  formed, it was the easiest 
thing to avoid passing the Thana. Two or three hund red volunteers are reported 
to have been in the procession. I hold that it was equally easy for this large 
number of volunteers to have effectively prevented the atrocious murder of the 
constables or at least for every one of them to hav e perished in the flames lit 
by the mob which they were leading. I must not also  omit to tell you that these Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 109  men knew that trouble was brewing, knew that the Su b-Inspector was there, 
knew that there was collision between him and the p eople on two former 
occasions. Was not the Chauri Chaura tragedy absolu tely capable of being 
avoided? I admit that nobody plotted the murder, bu t the volunteers should 
have foreseen the consequence of what they were doi ng. Of the Bombay 
tragedy I was myself a witness. The workers neglect ed the duty of telling the 
people, whilst they were preparing them about boyco tt, to remain tolerant, as 
also of posting volunteers in areas visited by the labouring population. I myself 
neglected the duty of putting down every insolent l aying of hands upon other 
people's turbans and caps. Finally take Madras. Not  one single incident which 
happened in Madras was unavoidable. I hold the Cong ress Committee 
responsible for all that happened in Madras. With t he experience of Bombay 
fresh in their minds they could, even if they were not fully confident, have 
avoided hartal. The fact is in every case all the w orkers did not understand the 
full purpose of non-violence nor its implications. They liked and loved 
excitement, and underneath these vast demonstration s was an idea 
unconsciously lurking in the breast that it was a k ind of demonstration of force, 
the very negation of non-violence. To follow out no n-violence as a policy surely 
does not require saints for its working, but it doe s require honest workers who 
understand what is expected of them. 
You say that the people work under the spell of one  year's limit. There is much 
truth in what you say, but there again, if the peop le worked slowly under that 
spell, they were certainly not working for Swaraj. I can understand some 
temporary excitement, but excitement must not be th e whole thing, nor the 
main part of a great national activity. Swaraj afte r all is not a mango trick; it is 
a steady evolution, steady growing into strength su ch that a period must arrive 
when our strength has assumed such proportions as t o tell upon the usurpers, 
but every moment of our activity we are gaining Swa raj. 
Certainly a peaceful Tehsil at the foot of the Hima layas will be affected by a 
violent hamlet situated near the Cape Comorin if th ere is a vital connection 
between the two, as there must be if they are both integral parts of India and Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 110  your Swaraj flag is to dominate both. At the same t ime, for mass civil 
disobedience in Bardoli, I would certainly have tho ught nothing of anything 
happening in an out-of-the-way Tehsil which had not  come under the influence 
of the Congress and which had not resorted to viole nce in connection with any 
Congress activity. You cannot predicate any such wa nt of connection about 
Gorakhpur, Bombay or Madras. Violence broke out in connection with a national 
activity. You have the forcible illustration of Mal abar. There it was organized 
and sustained violence offered by the Moplahs, and yet I did not allow Malabar 
to affect any of our plans, nor have I altered my v iews during all these months. 
I can still distinguish between Malabar and Gorakhp ur. The Moplahs themselves 
had not been touched by the non-cooperation spirit.  They are not like the other 
Indians nor even like the other Mussalmans. I am pr epared to admit that the 
movement had an indirect effect upon them. The Mopl ah revolt was so 
different in kind that it did not affect the other parts of India, whereas 
Gorakhpur was typical, and therefore, if we had not  taken energetic steps, the 
infection might easily have spread to the other par ts of India. 
You say that, individual civil disobedience being w ithdrawn, there will be no 
opportunity to test the temper of the people. We do  not want to test the 
temper. On the contrary we want the people to becom e immersed in industries 
and constructive activities so that their temper is  not exposed to the constant 
danger of being ruffled. A man wishing to gain self -control instead of exposing 
himself to temptations avoids them, though, at the same time, he is ready for 
them if they come to him unsought and in spite of h is wanting to avoid them. 
We certainly have not suspended any item of non-coo peration. This you will see 
clearly brought out in  Young India.  I am satisfied that our success depends upon 
our cultivating exemplary self-restraint and not di sobeying even unseen orders 
of prohibition of meetings. We must learn to conduc t our campaign in spite of 
prohibitions and without civil disobedience. If the  people want excitement, we 
must refuse to give it to them even though we have to risk unpopularity and 
find ourselves in a hopeless minority. Even a few h undred chosen workers, 
scattered throughout the length and breadth of the country, solidly following Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 111  the programme will create a far more lasting impres sion than a haphazard mass 
movement undertaken in order to truckle to the mult itude. I would like you 
therefore to become introspective and to find out f or yourself the truth. If you 
still consider that there is a flaw in the reasonin g I have put before you, I would 
like you to combat the position I have taken. I wan t us all to think originally 
and to arrive at independent conclusions. A drastic  overhauling of ourselves and 
of the movement is absolutely necessary. I do not m ind having finally to find 
out that non-violence is an impracticable dream. If  such is our belief, it will be 
at least an honest belief. For me there is but one thing. I would love to 
contemplate the dreamland of non-violence in prefer ence to the practicable 
reality of violence. I have burnt my boats, but tha t has nothing to do with any 
of my co-workers. The majority of them have come in to the movement as a 
purely political movement. They do not share my rel igious beliefs, and I do not 
seek to thrust them upon them. 
You must get better soon and, if necessary, you sho uld come here to further 
discuss the matter. 
Yours sincerely,  
From a photostat:  S. N. 7977 
 
1 President, Andhra Provincial Congress Committee 
2 A village in Gorakhapur district of Uttar Pradesh w here on February 5, 1922, the mob 
set fire to the police station and 22 constables we re burnt alive. Gandhiji was 
profoundly shocked by this and imposed on himself a  five days' fast on February 12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 112   
43. TO T. PRAKASAM 1 
Satyagraha Ashram,  
Sabarmati,  
March  7,  1922  
MY DEAR PRAKASAM , 
You ask me for my future programme. I have just sen t you a telegram as 
follows: 
"IN AHMEDABAD TILL SATURDAY SURAT SUNDAY MONDAY BARDOLI TUESDAY ." 
But that is Government willing, for I have persiste nt rumours being thrust upon 
me that my leave is now more than overdue, and I am  also told that I shall be 
relieved of my burdens inside of 7 days. Subject, t herefore, to that happy 
contingency you have the foregoing programme. If I am arrested, I look to you 
and all who are out to keep absolute peace. It will  be the best honour that the 
country can do me. Nothing could pain me more, in w hatever jail I may find 
myself, than to be informed by my custodians that a  single head has been 
broken by or on behalf of non- co-operators, a sing le man had been insulted or 
a single building damaged. If the people or the wor kers have at all understood 
my message, they will keep exemplary peace. I would  certainly be delighted if 
on the night following my arrest there was througho ut the length and breadth 
of India a bonfire of all foreign cloth voluntarily  surrendered by the people 
without the slightest compulsion having been exerci sed and a fixed 
determination to use nothing but Khaddar and, till then, in the glorious 
weather of India, to wear nothing but a piece of lo in-cloth, and in the case of 
Mussalmans the minimum required by religious obliga tion. I would certainly 
love to be told that there was a phenomenal demand for spinning-wheels and 
that all workers who did not know hand-spinning had  commenced it in right 
earnest. The more I think over our future programme  and the more news I get 
about the spirit of violence that has silently but surely crept into our ranks, the 
more convinced I am that even individual civil diso bedience would be wrong. It Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 113  would be much better to be forsaken by everybody an d to be doing the right 
thing than to be doing the wrong thing for the sake  of boasting a large 
following. Whether we are few or whether we are few  or whether we are 
many, so long as we believe in the programme of non -violence, there is no 
absolution from the full constructive programme. En force it today, and the 
whole country is ready for mass civil disobedience tomorrow. Fail in the effort, 
and you are not ready even for individual civil dis obedience. Nor is the matter 
difficult. If all the members of the All- India Con gress Committee and Provincial 
Congress Committees are convinced of the correctnes s of the premises I have 
laid down, the same can be done. The pity of it is that they are not so 
convinced. A policy is a temporary creed liable to be changed, but while it 
holds good, it has got to be pursued with apostolic  zeal. 
Yours sincerely,  
From a photostat of the typewritten office copy:  S. N. 7973 
 
1 T. Prakasam (1876-1955)—Editor,  Swarajya;  known as "Andhra Kesari"—the Lion of 
Andhra, Chief Minister of Madras and later, of Andh ra Pradesh. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 114   
44. TO HAKIM AJMAL KHAN 1 
Sabarmati Jail, March 12, 1922  
MY DEAR HAKIMJI , 
Since my arrest, this is the first letter I have co mmenced to write after having 
ascertained that under the jail rules I am entitled  to write as many letters as I 
like as an under-trial prisoner. Of course, you kno w that Mr Shankerlal Banker is 
with me. I am happy that he is with me. Everyone kn ows how near he has come 
to me—naturally, therefore, both of us are glad tha t we have been arrested 
together. 
I write this to you in your capacity as Chairman of  the Working Committee and, 
therefore, leader of both Hindus and Mussalmans or,  better still, of all India. 
I write to you also as one of the foremost leaders of Mussalmans, but, above 
all, I write this to you as an esteemed friend. I h ave had the privilege of 
knowing you since 1915. Our daily growing associati on has enabled me to prize 
your friendship as a treasure. A staunch Mussalman,  you have shown in your 
own life what Hindu-Muslim unity means. 
We all now realize as we have never before realized  that without that unity, 
we cannot attain our freedom and I make bold to say  that, without that unity, 
the Mussalmans of India cannot render the Khilafat all the aid they wish. 
Divided, we must ever remain slaves. This unity, th erefore, cannot be a mere 
policy to be discarded when it does not suit us. We  can discard it only when we 
are tired of Swaraj. Hindu-Muslim unity must be our  creed to last for all time 
and under all circumstances. Nor must that unity be  a menace to the 
minorities, the Parsis, the Christians, the Jews or  the powerful Sikhs. If we seek 
to crush any of them, we shall someday want to figh t each other. 
I have been drawn so close to you chiefly because I  know that you believe in 
Hindu-Muslim unity in the full sense of the term. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 115  This unity, in my opinion, is unattainable without our adopting non-violence as 
a firm policy. I call it a policy because it is lim ited to the preservation of that 
unity. But it follows that thirty crores of Hindus and Mussalmans united not for 
a time but for all time can defy all the powers of the world and should consider 
it a cowardly act to resort to violence in their de alings with the English 
administrators. We have hitherto feared them and th eir guns in our simplicity. 
The moment we realize our combined strength, we sha ll consider it unmanly to 
fear them and, therefore, ever to think of striking  them. Hence, am I anxious 
and impatient to persuade my countrymen to feel non -violent not out of our 
weakness but out of our strength. But you and I kno w that we have not yet 
evolved the nonviolence of the strong and we have n ot done so because the 
Hindu-Muslim union has not gone much beyond the sta ge of policy. There is still 
too much mutual distrust and consequent fear. I am not disappointed. The 
progress we have made in that direction is indeed p henomenal. We seem to 
have covered in eighteen months time the work of a generation. But infinitely 
more is necessary. Neither the classes nor the mass es feel instinctively that our 
union is necessary as the breath of our nostrils. 
For this consummation, we must, it seems to me, rel y more upon quality than 
quantity. Given a sufficient number of Hindus and M ussalmans with almost a 
fanatical faith in everlasting friendship between t he Hindus and the Mussalmans 
of India, we shall not be long before the unity per meates the masses. A few of 
us must first clearly understand that we can make n o headway without 
accepting non-violence in thought, word and deed fo r the full realization of our 
political ambition. I would, therefore, beseech you  and the members of the 
Working Committee and the A.I.C.C. to see that our ranks contain no workers 
who do not fully realize the essential truth I have  endeavoured to place before 
you. A living faith cannot be manufactured by the r ule of majority. 
To me the visible symbol of all-India unity and, th erefore, of the acceptance of 
non-violence as an indispensable means for the real ization of our political am-
bition is undoubtedly the Charkha, i.e., khaddar. O nly those who believe in  
cultivating  a non-violent spirit and eternal friendship betwee n Hindus and Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 116  Mussalmans will daily and religiously spin. Univers al hand-spinning and the 
universal manufacture and use of hand-spun and hand -woven khaddar will be a 
substantial, if not absolute, proof of the real uni ty and non-violence, and it will 
be a recognition of a living kinship with the dumb masses. Nothing can possibly 
unify and revivify India as the acceptance by all I ndia of the spinning-wheel as a 
daily sacrament and the khaddar wear as a privilege  and a duty. 
Whilst, therefore, I am anxious that more title- ho lders should give up their 
titles; lawyers, law courts; scholars, the Governme nt schools or colleges; the 
Councilors, the Councils and the soldiers and the c ivilians, their posts, I would 
urge the nation to restrict its activity in this di rection only to the consolidation 
of the results already achieved and to trust its st rength to command further 
abstentions from association with a system we are s eeking to mend or end. 
Moreover, the workers are too few. I would not wast e a single worker today on 
destructive work when we have such an enormous amou nt of constructive work. 
But perhaps the most conclusive argument against de voting further time to 
destructive propaganda is the fact that the spirit of intolerance, which is a 
form of violence, has never been so rampant as now.  Co-operators are 
estranged from us. They fear us. They say that we a re establishing a worse 
bureaucracy than the existing one. We must remove e very cause for such 
anxiety. We must go out of our way to win them to o ur side. We must make 
Englishmen safe from all harm from our side. I shou ld not have to labour the 
point if it was clear to everyone, as it is to you and to me, that our pledge of 
non-violence implies utter humility and towards our  bitterest opponent. This 
necessary spirit will be automatically realized if only India will devote her sole 
attention to the work of construction suggested by me. 
I flatter myself with the belief that my imprisonme nt is quite enough for a long 
time to come. I believe in all humility that I have  no ill will against anyone. 
Some of my friends would not have to be as non-viol ent as I am. But we 
contemplated the imprisonment of the most innocent.  If I may be allowed that 
claim, it is clear that I should not be followed to  prison by anybody at all. We 
do want to paralyse the Government considered as a system—not however by Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 117  intimidation, but by the irresistible pressure of o ur innocence. In my opinion, it 
would be intimidation to fill the goals anyhow, and  why should more innocent 
men seek imprisonment till one considered to be the  most innocent has been 
found inadequate for the purpose? 
My caution against further courting of imprisonment  does not mean that we are 
now to shirk imprisonment. If the Government will t ake away every non-violent 
non-co-operator, I should welcome it. Only, it shou ld not be because of our 
civil disobedience, defensive or aggressive. Nor, I  hope, will the country fret 
over those who are in jail. It will do them and the  country good to serve the 
full term of their imprisonment. They can be fitly discharged before their time 
only by an act of the Swaraj Parliament. And I ente rtain an absolute conviction 
that universal adoption of khaddar is Swaraj. 
I have refrained from mentioning untouchability. I am sure every good Hindu 
believes that it has got to go. Its removal is as n ecessary as the realization of 
Hindu- Muslim unity. 
I have placed before you a programme which is, in m y opinion, the quickest and 
the best. No impatient Khilafatist can devise a bet ter. May God give you health 
and wisdom to guide the country to her destined goa l. 
I am,  
Yours sincerely, 
 M.  K.  GANDHI  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol.  XXIII, pp. 88-91 
 
1 Hakim Ajmal Khan (1865-1927)—Physician and politici an who took a leading part in 
the Khilafat Movement; President, Indian National C ongress, 1921 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 118   
45. TO JAMNALAL BAJAJ 1 
Sabarmati Central Prison,  
Thursday Night, 16th March, 1922  
CHI . JAMNALAL , 
As I proceed in my search for truth it grows upon m e that Truth comprehends 
everything. It is not in Ahimsa, but Ahimsa is in i t. What is perceived by a pure 
heart and intellect is truth for that moment. Cling  to it, and it enables one to 
reach pure truth. There is no question there of div ided duty. But often enough 
it is difficult to decide what is Ahimsa. For insta nce, the use of disinfectants is 
Himsa, and yet we cannot do without it. We have to live a life of Ahimsa in the 
midst of a world of Himsa, and that is possible onl y if we cling to truth. That is 
how I deduce Ahimsa from truth. Out of truth emanat e love, tenderness, 
humility. A votary of truth has to be humble as the  dust. His humility increases 
with his observance of truth. I see this every mome nt of my life. I have a much 
vivider sense of Truth and of my own littleness tha n I had a year ago. The 
wonderful implication of the great truth ' Brahma Satyam Jaganmithya  (Brahma 
is real, all else unreal) grows on me from day to d ay. It teaches us patience. 
This will purge us of harshness and add to our tole rance. It will make us 
magnify the mole-hills of our errors into mountains  and minimize the mountains 
of others' errors into mole-hills. The body persist s because of egoism. The utter 
extinction of the body of egoism is moksha.  He who has achieved this will be 
the very image of Truth, or one may call it Brahman . Therefore the loving name 
of God is  Dasanudasa  (Servant of Servants). 
Wife, children, friends, possessions—all should be held subservient to Truth. 
Each one of these should be sacrificed in the searc h for truth. Only then can 
one be a Satyagrahi. I have thrown myself into this  movement with a view to 
making the observance of this principle comparative ly easy, and it is with the 
same object that I do not hesitate to plunge men li ke you in it. Its outward 
form is Hind Swaraj. This Swaraj is being delayed b ecause there is yet to be Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 119  found a Satyagrahi of that type. This, however, nee d not dismay us. It should 
spur us on to greater effort. 
You have made yourself my fifth son. But I am striv ing to be worthy. It is not an 
ordinary responsibility for an adopter. May God hel p me, and may I be worthy 
of it in this very life. 
Bapuna Ashirvad, 
To A Gandhian Capitalist,  pp. 49-50 
 
1 Jamnalal Bajaj (1889-1942)—A prominent businessman and industrialist; a close 
associate of Gandhiji; identified with many of his activities; social worker and 
philanthropist; treasurer of the Indian National Co ngress for many years. He chose a 
life of simplicity despite his wealth; Gandhiji cal led him his 'fifth son'. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 120   
46. TO MAHOMED ALI 
Sassoon Hospital, Poona,  
February 7, 1924  
MY DEAR FRIEND AND BROTHER , 
I send you as President of the Congress a few words  which I know our 
countrymen expect from me on my sudden release. I a m sorry that the 
Government have prematurely released me on account of my illness. Such a 
release can bring me no joy, for I hold that the il lness of the prisoner affords no 
grounds for his release. 
I would be guilty of ungratefulness if I did not te ll you, and through you the 
whole public, that both the jail and the hospital a uthorities have been all 
attention during my illness. Col. Murray, the Super intendent of the Yeravda 
Prison, as soon as he suspected that my illness was  at all serious, invited Col. 
Maddock to assist him and I am sure that the prompt est measures were taken 
by him to secure for me the best treatment possible . I could not have been 
removed to the David and Sassoon Hospitals a moment  earlier. Col. Maddock 
and his staff have treated me with the utmost atten tion and kindness. I may 
not omit the nurses who have surrounded me with sis terly care. Though it is 
now open to me to leave this hospital, knowing that  I can get no better 
treatment anywhere else, with Col. Maddock's kind p ermission I have decided 
to remain under his care till the wound is healed a nd no further medical 
treatment is necessary. 
The public will easily understand that for some tim e to come I shall be quite 
unfit for active work, and those who are interested  in my speedy return to 
active life will hasten it by postponing their natu ral desire to see me. I am unfit 
and shall be so for some weeks perhaps to see a num ber of visitors. I shall 
better appreciate the affection of friends if they will devote greater time and 
attention to such national work as they may be enga ged in and especially to 
hand-spinning. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 121  My release has brought me no relief. Whereas before  release I was free from 
responsibility save that of conforming, to jail dis cipline and trying to qualify 
myself for more efficient service, I am now overwhe lmed with a sense of 
responsibility I am ill-fitted to discharge. Telegr ams of congratulations have 
been pouring in upon me. They have but added to the  many proofs I have 
received of the affection of our countrymen for me.  It naturally pleases and 
comforts me. Many telegrams, however, betray hopes of results from my 
service which stagger me. The thought of my utter i ncapacity to cope with the 
work before me humbles my pride. 
Though I know very little of the present situation in the country, I know 
sufficient to enable me to see that, perplexing as the national problems were 
at the time of the Bardoli resolutions, they are fa r more perplexing today. It is 
clear that, without unity between Hindus, Mahomedan s, Sikhs, Parsis and 
Christians and other Indians, all talk of Swaraj is  idle. This unity which I fondly 
believed, in 1922, had been nearly achieved has, so  far as Hindus and 
Mussalmans are concerned, I observe, suffered a sev ere check. Mutual trust has 
given place to distrust. An indissoluble bond betwe en the various communities 
must be established if we are to win freedom. Will the thanksgiving of the 
nation over my release be turned into a solid unity  between the communities? 
That will restore me to health far quicker than any  medical treatment or rest-
cure. When I heard in the jail of the tension betwe en Hindus and Mussalmans in 
certain places, my heart sank within me. The rest I  am advised to have will be 
no rest with the burden of disunion preying upon me . I ask all those who cherish 
love towards me to utilize it in furtherance of the  union we all desire. I know 
that the task is difficult. But nothing is difficul t if we have a living faith in God. 
Let us realize our own weakness and approach Him an d He will surely help. It is 
weakness which breeds fear and fear breeds distrust . Let us both shed our fear, 
but I know that even if  one  of us will cease to fear, we shall cease to quarre l. 
Nay, I say that your tenure of office will be judje d solely by what you can do in 
the cause of union. I know that we love each other as brothers. I ask you, 
therefore, to share my anxiety and help me to go th rough the period of illness 
with a lighter heart. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 122  If we could but visualize the growing pauperism of the land and realize that the 
spinning-wheel is the only remedy for the disease, the wheel will leave us little 
leisure for fighting. I had during the last two yea rs ample time and solitude for 
hard thinking. It made me a firmer believer than ev er in. the efficacy of the 
Bardoli programme and, therefore, in the unity betw een the races, the 
Charkha, the removal of untouchability and the appl ication of non-violence in 
thought, word and deed to our methods as indispensa ble for Swaraj. If we 
faithfully and fully carry out this programme, we n eed never resort to civil 
disobedience and I should hope that it will never b e necessary. But I must state 
that my thinking prayerfully and in solitude has no t weakened my belief in the 
efficiency and righteousness of civil disobedience.  I hold it, as never before, to 
be a man's or a nation's right and duty when its vi tal being is in jeopardy. I am 
convinced that it is attended with less danger than  war and, whilst the former, 
when successful, benefits both the resister and the  wrong-doer, the latter 
harms both the victor and the vanquished. 
You will not expect me to express any opinion on th e vexed question of return 
by Congressmen to the Legislative Councils and Asse mbly Though I have not in 
any way altered my opinion about the boycott of Cou ncils, Law Courts and 
Government Schools, I have no data for coming to a judgment upon the 
alterations made at Delhi, and I do not propose to express any opinion until I 
have had the opportunity of discussing the question  with our illustrious 
countrymen who have felt called upon, in the intere st of the country, to advise 
removal of the boycott of legislative bodies. 
In conclusion, may I, through you thank all the ver y numerous senders of 
congratulatory messages. It is not possible for me personally to acknowledge 
each message. It has gladdened my heart to see amon g the messages many 
from our Moderate friends. I have, and non-co- oper ators can have, no quarrel 
with them. They too are well-wishers of their count ry and serve to tjie best of 
their lights. If we consider them to be in the wron g we can hope to win them 
over only by friendliness and patient reasoning, ne ver by abusing. Indeed, we 
want to regard Englishmen too as our friends and no t misunderstand them by Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 123  treating them as our enemies. And if we are today e ngaged in a struggle against 
the British Government, it is against the system fo r which it stands and not 
against Englishmen who are administering the system . I know that many of us 
have failed to understand and always bear in mind t he distinction and, in so far 
as we have failed, we have harmed our cause. 
I am,  
Your sincere friend and brother, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Young India , 14-2-'24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 124   
47. 10 MOTILAL NEHRU 1 
Bombay, September 2, [1924]  
DEAR MOTILALJI , 
This is again early morning after prayer. I hope yo u received my long letter. I 
expect a wire from you. I was unable to revise it. I cannot now recall the exact 
wording of the personal part. After all, Mrs Naidu did not read it as the letter 
was posted before she could read it. But the busine ss part, of which I have a 
copy, she and many others have read. 
This letter like the former is meant to be a plea f or Jawaharlal. He is one of 
the loneliest young men of my acquaintance in India . The idea of your mental 
desertion of him hurts me. Physical desertion I hol d to be impossible. Needless 
to say Manzar Ali and I often talked of the Nehrus whilst we were together at 
Yeravda. He said once that if there was one thing f or which you lived more than 
any other, it was for Jawahar. His remark seemed to  be so true. I don't want to 
be the cause direct or indirect of the slightest br each in that wonderful 
affection. 
Yours sincerely,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXV p. 65 
 
1 Pandit Motilal Nehru (1863-1931)—Lawyer and Swaraji st leader, twice President of 
Indian National Congress. 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 125   
48. TO MOTILAL NEHRU 
The Ashram, Sabarmati, 20-4-'28  
DEAR MOTILALJI , 
I have your letter. I am daily making fresh discove ries which go to show that we 
may expect nothing from .the mill-owners at the pre sent stage. They will yield 
only to pressure and the pressure of the Government  is more felt than that of 
the Congress. But we may not be impatient. We need not put boycott of Indian 
mill- made cloth in the same category as that of fo reign cloth. A negative 
attitude about mill cloth will be quite enough to k eep the mills under 
wholesome check. A positive boycott will only stir up bad blood without 
bringing us any nearer boycott of foreign cloth. We  shall never, unless a sudden 
manifestation of mass energy comes into being, succ eed in reaching the 
millions. In spite of all we may do, for the time b eing the latter will therefore 
be buying Indian mill cloth and, further, there wil l be keen competition 
between Lancashire mills and Japanese on the one ha nd and Indian mills on the 
other. We have therefore to concentrate our effort on changing the mentality 
of the townspeople and those few villagers whom we are controlling and 
bringing them round to the adoption of Khadi. If we  set about doing this, the 
message of Khadi will percolate the masses. Then bo th our and foreign mills 
will feel the brunt. That will be the time for our mills to come in a line with us. 
The moment they do so we can complete boycott of fo reign cloth inside of six 
months. The programme definitely therefore has to b e this: 
We leave Indian mills severely alone. We carry on a  whirlwind campaign for 
boycott of foreign cloth through Khadi, asking peop le to count no sacrifice too 
great in adopting Khadi. We must have faith in ours elves and in our people and 
believe that they can make this which appears to me  to be small sacrifice. But I 
confess that at the present moment I do not visuali ze the organization that is 
needed to carry on the boycott. The political who a re in a possession of the 
platform do not mean to do any serious business. Th ey will not concentrate on 
any constructive work. Jawahar in a letter truly de scribes the atmosphere, Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 126  when he says: "There is violence in the air." We re ad and hear so much about 
the boycott of British cloth in Bengal, but the let ters I receive almost every 
week show that there is no real boycott. There is n o organization behind it, 
there is no will working behind it. All things cons idered what will you advise me 
to do. 
The expected letter from Romain Rolland is due next  Tuesday at the latest. I 
must after that come to a decision quickly. Supposi ng that Romain Rolland 
predisposes me in favour of the European visit, wha t would you have me to do 
in view of the talk of the boycott. Would you want me for the sake of the 
boycott not to go to Europe? I shall accept your de cision whatever it may be. I 
am not personally keen on the European visit, but i f all is plain sailing in India 
and if Romain Rolland wants me to visit Europe, I s hould feel bound to accept 
the European invitations. Will you please wire your  decision? Jawahar will be 
with you and probably you will know Doctor Ansari's  mind. 
Yours sincerely,  
From a photostat:  S.N. 13197 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 127   
49. TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI 1 
Sabarmati, August 24, 1924  
MY DEAR RAJGOPALACHARI , 
Mahadev has shown me your letter to him. You must n ot despond. For Mrs 
Naidu to say that I am despondent is a libel. It is  true that I am groping. There 
are things about which I give no clear-cut decision s. But that is to admit that 
we are voyaging in uncertain waters. 
Remember we are Satyagrahis. Let me apply to the si tuation the law of the 
family. Assume that two brothers are quarrelling ov er the inheritance. Both 
want to use it for the good of the family. One at l east knows he does not need 
it to serve the family. The majority of the clan wo uld have him to cling to the 
inheritance. But is it not the duty of the Satyagra hi brother to forgo the 
inheritance and avoid a quarrel and consequent wast e of time and energy? Is 
the case any different here? However, I am acting c autiously. All I am trying to 
do is to avoid an unseemly wrangle. I will take up the Presidentship, 2 if I find 
that it will serve the country. There is plenty of time to decide. The returns of 
spinning are proving most instructive. Is it much u se my presiding if the returns 
remain as poor as they are? Will it not then be bet ter to retire from the 
Congress and have a rigid programme and a membershi p that is honest and 
willing? Is it any use having a vote for the wheel from persons clad in foreign 
stuff? And think of the exploitation of the simple folk for capturing the 
Congress! Will the so-called No-changers remain str ictly honest? Picture to 
yourself the whole working. If we cannot retain the  Congress without this tug of 
war, we must willingly surrender it. I have thought  deeply over your letters but 
feel sure that I must retire from any such contest.  But for the present I am 
simply watching. Am waiting for Motilalji's answer.  
Now for Malabar. I have applications from many sour ces. What would you have 
me to do? I was thinking of sending someone to make  special report in 
collaboration with you. But as nothing has yet been  done I would like your Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 128  suggestions. Plenty of clothing has been collected.  Please guide me about its 
disposal too. 
I have not been able to make much headway in Delhi.  There is still some 
prospect of a settlement. But the thing is very del icate. 
Yes, your guess is correct. The fair friend is Sarl adevi. 3 She wants to bombard 
me with more stuff but I have refused to give furth er accommodation. There 
are some beautiful letters from Brahmins in repudia tion. I have published one. 
Yours,  
M. K. G. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol.  XXV,  pp. 36-37 
 
1 C. Rajagopalachari (1879-1972)—Lawyer, journalist, author and statesman; Governor-
General of India—1948-50. 
2 Of Belgam Congress 
3 Niece of Rabindranath Tagore, married to Rambhuj Du tt Chowdhari. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 129   
50. TO C. RAJAGOPALACHARI  
July 16, 1925  
MY DEAR  C. R., 
Somehow or other I need your letter to feel that al l is well with you. My 
position is this. My body and mind are living in a world by which I remain 
unaffected, but in which I am being tried. My soul is living in a world physically 
away from me and yet a world by which I am and want  to be affected. You are 
a part of that world and perhaps the nearest to me.  My innermost being wants 
your approbation of what I am doing and thinking. I  may not always succeed in 
getting it, but it craves for your verdict. 
Now you understand exactly why I want to hear from you apart from many 
other reasons. You must let me have if it is only a  postcard every week. 
Mahadev, Devdas, Pyarelal 1 should keep you posted with what is going on. 
And you must keep well. 
Your  sadhana 2 is the development of the place where you are and a scientific 
test of our theory of the value of hand-spinning. E ven if it proves untrue in the 
end, neither we nor the world will have lost anythi ng, for I know that we are 
true in the sense that we have full faith in the pr ogramme and, if it is 
intrinsically not immoral, our theory can be claime d to be true, when a fairly 
large number of villages sustain hand-spinning and Khadi without protection as 
the whole of India sustain home cookery without pro tection. Surely this is a 
long introduction to what I want to say. Here is Pi tt's letter and the letters from 
Kelappan. I am simply saying that we must keep nomi nally a Satyagrahi at the 
Eastern gate unless the local men think otherwise. But you may come to other 
conclusion. You should write to Kelappan. He seems to be a nice, useful man. 
With love, 
Yours, BAPU  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XXVII, pp. 384-85 
 
1 Pyarelal Nayyar, Gandhiji's Secretary 1920-48, and biographer. 
2 A persistent effort. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 130   
51. TO 1 KAKASAHEB KALELKAR 2 
Kartik Vad 3 [November 14, 1924]  
BHAISHRI KARA , 
After writing an article for the  Kelvani  issue I have started thinking more about 
children's education. Can't we try it on the Ashram  children? That is, if the 
ideas stated their appeal to you. A child calls a p ot a pot, but he does not draw 
a picture of it. Similarly he may read the alphabet  but may not draw pictures of 
the letters. A child hears a new word before he rea ds it and he pronounces it or 
rather repeats it as he hears it. Why should't we s top Lakshmi, Rasik and the 
other children from writing and teach them first to  draw? Could we not give 
them a good many things orally? Just now they shoul d use the hand for drawing 
only. For this the teacher should know the rudiment s of drawing. I am going 
deeper into the subject and hence stop here. For th e present just think over it. 
More when we meet. 
Blessings from, 
 BAPU  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXV p. 324 
 
1 Original in Gujarati 
2 Dattatreya Balkrishna Kalelkar (1885-1981)—Educatio nist, writer and constructive 
worker; a close associate of Tagore and Gandhiji; a warded Padma Vibhushan in 1964. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 131   
52. TO A FRIEND 1 
148, Russa Road, Calcutta, August 1, 1925  
DEAR FRIEND , 
I have your letter. A man who owns land which is ha unted by wild beasts will be 
able to excuse himself for shooting them. It would be classed as inevitable 
Himsa. It will be justified on the ground of necess ity, but there is no doubt 
that, if one has a full perception of Ahimsa, it wo uld be well for him to let his 
land be overrun by wild beasts or be himself killed  by them. Ahimsa is not a 
mechanical matter, it is personal to everyone. More over, possession of property 
against the whole world is inconsistent with Ahimsa . A man who will follow the 
principle of non-violence to its uttermost limit ha s nothing in this world he can 
call his own. He must merge himself into the whole,  which includes snakes, 
scorpions, tigers, wolves, etc. There are instances  on record of innocent men 
whose innocence even wild beasts have recognized. W e must all strive to reach 
that Stage. 
The same remark applies to your second question. It  is Himsa to kill the germs 
and the insects, but even as we commit Himsa by tak ing vegetable food (for 
vegetables have life) but regard it as inevitable, so must we treat the germ 
life. You will recognize that the doctrine of neces sity can be stretched so as to 
justify even man-eating. 
A man who believes in Ahimsa carefully refrains fro m every act that leads to 
injury. [My] argument only applies to those who bel ieve in Ahimsa. The 
necessity that I have in mind is a universal necess ity, hence it is not permissible 
to take Ahimsa beyond a limit. That is why the Shas tras of custom only permit 
Himsa in certain cases. It is not only lawful but o bligatory upon everyone to 
make the least use possible of the permission and r elaxation. It is unlawful to 
go beyond the limitation. 
Yours sincerely,  
M. K. G ANDHI  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXVIII, pp. 3-4 
 
1 The identity of the addressee is not ascertainable.  Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 132   
53. FROM MADELEINE SLADE OR MIRABEN 1 
63, Bedford Gardens, 
Campden Hill, 
London, W. 8, Paris,  
May 29, 1925  
MOST DEAR MASTER , 
I thank you profoundly for having answered my first  letter to you—I had never 
dared to hope such a thing! I have eagerly taken to  heart all you said, and I now 
venture to write to you again, my year of self- imp osed trial being more than 
half over. 
The first impulse has never faded, but on the contr ary my desire to serve you 
has grown ever more and more fervent. It is impossi ble to express in words the 
greatness of the inspiration which impels me but I pray God with all my heart 
that I may be able to give expression to my love in  work—in acts. However 
humble they may be they will at least be utterly si ncere. 
And now I want to put before you my  most earnest request:  
May I come to your Ashram to study spinning and wea ving, to learn to live your 
ideals and principles in daily life, and indeed to learn in what way I may hope 
to serve you in the future? In order to become a fi t servant of your cause I feel 
the absolute necessity of that training and I will do my very best to be a not too 
unworthy pupil if you will accept me! 
In the meantime I continue my preparations as best I can. I spin and weave 
(only with wool, nobody seeming to know about the m anagement of cotton in 
France or England). With the aid of many kind India n friends I perplex my head 
over long Hindustani exercises I read. What a revel ation is that reading! The 
more I enter into Indian thought, the more I feel a s if I were reaching at last, a 
long lost home. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 133  In matters of daily life I simplify as much as is p ossible under present 
circumstances. I have given up the drinking of all wines, beers or spirits, and I 
no longer eat meat of any kind. 
My being is filled with a great joy and a great ang uish. The joy of giving all I 
have to you and to your people and the anguish of b eing able to give so little. 
I pine for the day when I shall come to India. Alas , there are still five months to 
wait! I reach Bombay on November 6th, and if I am p ermitted to join the 
Ashram I will take the train that evening arriving at Ahmedabad the next 
morning. 
Dear Master, may I come? 
Please do not think of troubling to reply to this l etter yourself, but perhaps you 
could send me a word of answer through someone else . 
Ever your humble and most devoted servant, 
MEDELEINE SLADE  
PS. Enclosed are two little samples of wool which I  have spun. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXVII, pp. 474-75 
 
1 Smt. Miraben, Miss Madeleine Slade (1892-1982) — Da ughter of admiral Sir Edmond 
Slade. Her interest in music and devotion to Beetho ven's works led her to Romain 
Rolland, which contact led her in turn to Gandhiji.  Left Europe for India, and joined 
Gandhiji at Sabarmati in November 1925; accompanied  Gandhiji to London in 1931; 
imprisoned 1932-33, 1942-44; established a small As hram and Cattle Development 
Centre in the Rishikesh forest area in 1947, now kn own as Pashulok. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 134   
53A. TO MADELEINE SLADE 
148, Russa Road, Calcutta, July 24, 1925  
DEAR FRIEND , 
I was pleased to receive your letter which has touc hed me deeply. The samples 
of wool you have sent are excellent. 
You are welcome whenever you choose to come. If I h ave advice of the steamer 
that brings you, there will be someone receiving yo u at the steamer, and 
guiding you to the train that will take you to Saba rmati. Only please remember 
that the life at the Ashram is not all rosy. It is strenuous. Bodily labour is given 
by every inmate. The climate of this country is als o not a small consideration. I 
mention these things not to frighten you, but merel y to warn you. 
Yours sincerely, 
 M.  K.  GANDHI  
PS. As my right hand requires rest, I am dictating my correspondence. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXVII, pp. 414-15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 135   
54. TO ROMAIN ROLLAND 1 
November 13, 1924 2 
DEAR FRIEND , 
I received your kind letter. Miss Slade arrived a l ittle later. What a treasure you 
have sent me. I shall try to be worthy of such a gr eat confidence. I shall do 
everything to help Miss Slade to become a little br idge between West and East. 
I am too imperfect to have a disciple. She will be my companion in my research 
(for truth) and as I am older and consequently more  advanced in spiritual 
experience, I propose to share with you the honour of your paternity. Miss Slade 
shows a marvellous capacity for adaptation and we a re already quite at ease 
with her. I leave Miss Slade to tell you the rest b y asking her to speak to you of 
a French sister who has arrived at the Ashram just a few days before her. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXV, p. 320 
 
1 Romain Rolland (1866-1944)—Celebrated French writer , thinker and pacifist. 
2 Date is wrongly mentioned as November 13, 1924, beca use this letter was written after Miss 
Slade's arrival at Sabarmati on 7th November, 1925. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 136   
55. TO ROMAIN ROLLAND 
The Ashram, Sabarmati, February 15, 1928  
DEAR FRIEND , 
Mira has translated your latest letter for me. My w hole soul goes out to you in 
your grief especially because it comes over a lette r which makes you suspect 
me of hardness of heart. I appreciate your desire t o find me correct in all I do 
and think. I do indeed want to stand well with you,  but I must be true to myself 
if I am to continue to deserve your warm friendship . 
Let me first tell you that Mira's letter reflected her own views though they were 
found to coincide with mine. Neither Mira, so far a s I know her, nor I had the 
remotest idea of judging those two good peasants. 1 Their action was 
undoubtedly one of heroism. What we had in our mind s was the heroism of a 
war resister, and from the record sent by you and a s it was interpreted to me 
by Mira, I missed that particular type of heroism w hich a war resister 
demonstrates in his own life. Joan of Arc was a her oine. So were Leonidas and 
Horatius. But the heroism in each case was of a dif ferent type, each noble and 
admirable in its sphere. 
In the answers given by the peasants, I do not noti ce any definite repugnance 
to war as war and a determination to suffer to the uttermost in their resistance 
to war. These peasant friends, if my recollection s erves me right, are heroes 
representing and defending the simple rustic life. These heroes are no less 
precious than those of a militant war resister type . We want to treasure all this 
heroism, but what I feel is that we will serve the heroes and the cause of truth 
better if we treated each type separately. 
You have curiously raised the question of my partic ipation in the late War. 2 It is 
a legitimate question. I had answered it in the las t autobiographical chapter as 
if in anticipation of your question. Please read it  carefully and tell me at your 
leisure what you think of the argument. 3 I shall treasure your opinion. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 137  Lastly, I do want to reach perfection, but I recogn ize my limitations, and the 
recognition is becoming clearer day after day. Who knows in how many places I 
must be guilty of hardness of heart, and I should n ot be surprised if you have 
noticed want of charity in my writings in more plac es than one. I can only tell 
you that the lapses are there in spite of my prayer ful effort to the contrary. I 
suppose it was not without reason that the early Ch ristians considered Satan to 
be not merely an evil principle but evil incarnate.  He seems to dominate us in 
every walk of life and man's mission is to overthro w him from power. 
This letter of yours to Mira makes me more and more  anxious to see you in the 
flesh, and there is just a distant hope of my being  able to do so this year if I 
keep good health and if otherwise the inner voice g uides me towards Europe. I 
am seriously considering two invitations, and the d esire to meet you may 
precipitate my decision in favour of accepting thos e invitations. 
Yours sincerely,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
ROMAIN ROLLAND  
From a photostat:  S.N. 14942 
 
1 1 Romain Rolland in his reply dated March 7 wrote: " ... I understand what you say 
regarding those two devout peasants of Savoi. I bow  before your reasons, though at 
the same time I believe that there are very few men  and women— (at least in 
Europe)—with whom 'War-resistance' is not always mi xed with other elements of 
thought, because almost every thought, be it ever s o intense, is not in man, 
completely pure...." 
2 Vide An Autobiography , Pt.  IV,  Ch. XXXVIII. 
3 To this Romain Rolland replied: "Pardon me if I say  to you that, in spite of all my 
desire to enter into your thoughts and to approve o f them, I simply cannot do so...." 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 138   
56. TO SHRI SHANKARAN 
Nandi Hills, 28-4-'27  
MY DEAR SHANKARAN , 
Your letter is a tonic for me. You are realizing al l my expectations. I am 
delighted that the kitchen is in a perfect state no w. Who is your right-hand 
man? How is Giriraj doing? Are you keeping perfect health? Your kitchen must 
become a treasure store of health of mind, body and  spirit. There must be all 
about it and for all times a sweetness, restfulness  and peacefulness which 
should be capable of being detected by any passerby . Everything in its place, 
everything clean, no foreign smells of a multiplici ty of condiments, only the 
natural smell of simple edibles and workers working  harmoniously, contentedly 
and smilingly in their own persons showing perfect health. Do you know that 
the Rishis of old were poets, philosophers, cooks, scavengers all rolled into one? 
Nalaraja was a wise ruler, an ideal husband, and a finished cook. Every 
occupation may become disgraced by bad associations  and every occupation 
can become a stepping-stone to salvation when it is  undertaken by a wise man. 
Yours, BAPU  
From a photostat:  S.N. 14120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 139   
57. TO HERMANN KALLENBACH 1 
Nandi Hills, (Near Bangalore) 13th May, 1927  
As I lie in bed and look up old undisposed of corre spondence and revive old and 
sacred memories, I chance upon your letter of 27th February sent with Andrews' 
letter from your home at Inanda, and I revive so ma ny pleasant and sacred 
memories. Every letter that you have written during  the last two years—and 
you have not written many, has been a despondent le tter, distressful of 
yourself; but as long as I live I am not going to l ose faith in you. I am hoping 
that some day as before you will have a fatigue of the exciting things that gives 
you momentary pleasure and that you will at least c ome to India to meet an old 
friend and renew many old acquaintances. You have m ade a provisional promise 
to do so next September or October. Do come if you can and then stay as long 
as you like or as little as you like. 
I am glad you are having short spells of Andrews' c ompany. I have not come 
across a humbler or more god-fearing man throughout  my varied experience. 
You don't want me to say anything about my illness;  because I see you do get  
Young India  and read it. I am at the present moment taking my cure on a little 
hill in the State of Mysore where an army of devote d volunteers and many of 
my closest co-workers are looking after me. Mrs. Ga ndhi and Devdas are with 
me. The names of others would mean nothing to you. So I do not give them. But 
when you do come, you will see them all and recogni ze them as having been 
with me on this hill. 
This loss of strength came in the twinkling of an e ye. Latterly I had put such 
terrific strain upon the brain that I was afraid of  a crisis and it came just when I 
was arranging to have a lighter programme. But God seemed to say 'I shall 
demolish your pride before you recognize your mad m ethod and show you that 
you were utterly wrong in rushing as you have been doing thinking that it was 
all well because it was for a good cause. You fool you thought that you would 
work wonders. Have your lesson now and learn whilst  there is yet time that God Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 140  alone is to wonder work and He uses whom He pleases  as His instrument.' I am 
taking the chastisement I hope in due humility and if He raises me from this 
sick bed, I am making Him promises that I shall ref orm my ways and shall seek 
still more strenuously to know His will unto it. 
I hope you are keeping in touch with Manilal. He ha s got a girl with a strong 
character as his wife. She is the best girl I could  possibly have found for him. 
Chance put her my way. She belongs to godly family.  Remember you are one of 
the trustees for Phoenix and I look to you to disch arge your trust. 
Sastri will be in South Africa probably within a mo nth of your receipt of this. I 
have had long chats with him about you and your ass ociations with Gokhale. Do 
try to be closely to him and bring all our old comp anions in touch with him. 
Yours sincerely, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
From a photostat:  S.N. 12350 
 
1 Hermann Kallenbach—A German associate of Gandhiji i n South Africa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 141   
58. TO GULZARILAL NANDA 
Nandi Hills, 28th May, 1927  
MY DEAR GULZARILAL , 
I was delighted to hear from you. Whilst lying on m y bed, I have constantly 
thought of so many like you in whom I am deeply int erested and from whom, I 
expect many large and big things if only God will g ive them the requisite health 
for the task before them. 
Your description of a truly religious life is accur ate. I have not a shadow of a 
doubt that this blessed state of inward joy and fre edom from anxiety should 
last in the midst of the greatest trials conceivabl e. It admits of no exception 
whatsoever. Naturally, it is unattainable except by  the very fewest. But that it 
is attainable by human beings, I have also no doubt . That we do not find in 
history evidence regarding the existence of any suc h person merely proves to 
me all the record that we have has been prepared by  imperfect beings, and it is 
impossible for imperfect beings to give us a faithf ul record of perfect ones. The 
same may be said of our own experiences. We have to  be very nearly perfect in 
order to meet perfect souls such as you have descri bed. Nor need you think 
that I have laid down an absurd proposition inasmuc h as it is incapable of being 
recorded, or being experienced by the average man. To raise such a doubt 
would be begging the question, for we are here pict uring to ourselves 
extraordinary mortals, though mortals nevertheless,  and surely extraordinary 
powers are required to find out these extraordinary  mortals. This statement is 
true even of much lesser things, things almost ridi culous. And yet very difficult 
of accomplishment, such, for instance, as, the disc overies of Sir J. C. Bose or 
the finest paintings. Both these, we average beings  will have to take on trust. It 
is only the privileged few who have got the special  faculty for understanding 
and appreciating either those discoveries, or those  paintings. These do not 
appear to us to be incredible and we are able to ac cept them on faith only 
because in favour of these we have the testimony of  a larger number of 
witnesses than we can possibly have for the things of permanent value, such as 
human perfection of the utmost type. Therefore the limitation that you have Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 142  accepted is quite a workable thing for the time bei ng. For, even inside the 
limitation, there is ample scope for widening the f ield for the progress of the 
state of being and remaining unruffled in the face of the onslaught of sorrows 
and trials, which before regeneration would have pa ralyzed us. 
I am glad you have intensified your devotions. I do  not know what you are 
reading at present. And I do not know whether I tol d you that we must arrive at 
a time when we do not need the solace of many books  but that we make one 
book yield us all we want. In the last stage, of co urse, when life becomes one 
of perfect surrender and complete self-effacement, the support of even one 
book becomes unnecessary. At the present moment, th ough I am reading many 
things, Bhagavad Gita is becoming more and more the  only infallible guide, the 
only dictionary of reference, in which I find all t he sorrows, all the troubles, all 
the trials arranged in the alphabetical order with exquisite solutions. I think I 
did tell you that the  Song Celestial  was the best rendering I had come across of 
the Bhagavad Gita. But if you do not know Sanskrit,  I know that a knowledge of 
Sanskrit to enable you to understand Bhagavad Gita is easily within your power. 
You can almost in a month's time know enough Sanskr it to understand the 
original text. For, though the English rendering is  grand and though you might 
be able to get some Hindi or Urdu translation also,  of course there is nothing 
like the original. The original will enable you to give your own meaning and 
gloss to the text. That book is not a historical re cord, but it is a record of the 
concrete experience of its author, whether it was r eally Vyas or not I am not 
concerned. And if it is a record of anybody's exper ience, it must not be beyond 
us to be able to test the truth of it by repeating the experience. I am testing 
the truth almost everyday in my life and find it ne ver failing. This of course 
does not mean that I have reached the state describ ed, for instance, at the end 
of the Second Chapter. But I know that the more we carry out the prescription 
given in it, the nearer do we answer the descriptio n given of the perfect state. 
I hope you are keeping good health. I am of course making steady progress. 
Yours sincerely,  
From a photostat:  S.N. 14130 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 143   
59. TO DR. KAILAS NATH KATJU 1 
Gudiatham (South India), 
 September 1, 1927  
DEAR FRIEND , 
My weakness of body is my excuse for dictating this  letter. But for that 
weakness I would have gladly written myself. I than k you for your letter and the 
first instalment of your contribution to Khadi. You r letter is so good and is 
likely to influence others. If you have no objectio n, I would like to publish that 
part of it which relates to Khadi. But please do no t hesitate to refuse 
permission, if you would on any account not like th e publication of the letter, 
whether with or without your name. 
As for the black alpaca  chapkan  concerned, give me an order and I can have for 
you one made of very fine black Khadi. It looks as good as alpaca. You may not 
know that in Madras many advocates and Vakils wear Khaddar  chapkans  even 
when they do not use Khadi for other articles of dr ess and as it so happens, the 
Khaddar  chapkans , the poor practitioners find to be suitable becaus e of their 
comparative cheapness. In your case I may not think  of cheapness at all. If you 
give the order, I am not going to secure for you th e cheapest but the most 
expensive and the most elegant. 
Now a word about personal spinning. I quite agree w ith you that love of 
Khaddar need not include personal spinning. But lov e of the starving millions 
does, for two reasons: First, because, personal spi nning renews our daily bond 
with them. Secondly, by personally spinning each kn own member of society 
creates a spinning atmosphere which makes it easier  for workers to induce the 
unwilling, because unbelieving, villagers to take t o hand-spinning. I would like 
to add a third reason which I know you would not de spise. Every yard of well-
spun yarn adds to the wealth of the country, be the  addition ever so 
infinitesimal. You know what the lawyers do, so oft en whilst awaiting their turn 
in the law courts. They either play with their penc ils or with their paper-tape Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 144  or worse still open out their little penknives and fidget with the edges of the 
desks at which they are sitting. I wonder if I coul d induce you to take up the 
little takli  which could be made of silver, gold or ivory if yo u like, and put in a 
delicate little cylinder.  Takli - spinning is easily learnt. Will you take to it? It 
will be, I know, laughed at in the beginning; then it will cease to attract notice 
one way or the other and if you could go through th e two stages and persist, it 
will be copied by others. I hope you do not resent my saying all this to you. You 
have given me an inch with hearty goodwill and you must not be surprised if I 
now ask for more. 
Yes, indeed, I demanded great sacrifices from lawye rs. But looking back to 
1920 and 21, I feel that I asked for nothing very e xtraordinary and I feel that I 
had a right to demand the largest measure of sacrif ice from those to whose 
profession I once belonged. 
The little ones now consider themselves, to be too big to sit in my lap. Please, 
however, tell them that whenever I meet them again,  I am going to make them 
pay for still remembering me. 
I am passing your cheque for Rs. 100/- to the Treas urer of the All-India 
Spinners' Association. 
Yours sincerely,  
DR. KAILAS NATH KATJU ,  
9,  EDMUNTON RD.,  ALLAHABAD  
From a photostat:  S.N. 13275 
 
1 Kailas Nath Katju—was Eminent Jurist and Congress L eader; Governor of Orissa, 
August 1947 to June 1948; Governor of West Bengal, 1948. Later on Chief Minister of 
Madhya Pradesh. 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 145   
60. TO DHAN GOPAL MUKHERJEE 
Satyagrahashram, Sabarmati, Dated 7-9-'28  
DEAR FRIEND , 
I have your letter. I have never quoted Tolstoy or any other author without 
acknowledgment in any of my writings. And I do not remember having often 
quoted authors in my writings; not because I would not but because my reading 
is so poor and capacity for reproducing what I have  read is still less. 
The vow of celibacy was undoubtedly taken after I h ad acquired considerable 
acquaintance with Tolstoy's teachings. And, whilst it is as a general statement 
quite true that my life is based upon the teachings  of the Gita, I would not be 
able to swear that Tolstoy's writings and teachings  did not influence my 
decision about celibacy. 
So much for your satisfaction. I hope at some date to deal with your vital 
question in the pages of  Young India.  
Yours sincerely, M.  K.  GANDHI  
From a photostat:  S.N. 14378 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 146   
61. TO HENRY S. SALT 
Camp Hardoi, October 12th, 1929  
HENRY S.  SALT , ESQ .,  21,  CLEVELAND ROAD , BRIGHTON (E NGLAND ) DEAR FRIEND , 
I was agreeably surprised to receive your letter. Y es, indeed your book which 
was the first English book I came across on vegetar ianism was of immense help 
to me in steadying my faith in vegetarianism. My fi rst introduction to Thoreau's 
writings was I think in 1907 or late when I was in the thick of passive resistance 
struggle. A friend sent me Thoreau's essay on civil  disobedience. It left a deep 
impression upon me. I translated a portion of that essay for the readers of 
Indian Opinion  in South Africa which I was then editing and I mad e copious 
extracts from that essay for that paper. That essay  seemed to be so convincing 
and truthful that I felt the need of knowing more o f Thoreau and I came across 
your life of him. His 'Walden' and other short essa ys all of which I read with 
great pleasure and equal profit. 
Yours sincerely, M.  K.  GANDHI  
From a photostat:  S.N. 15663 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 147   
62. TO THE VICEROY 1 
Satyagraha Ashram, Sabarmati, March 2, 1930  
DEAR FRIEND , 
Before embarking on civil disobedience, and taking the risk I have dreaded to 
take all these years, I would fain approach you and  find a way out. 
My personal faith is absolutely clear. I cannot int entionally hurt anything that 
lives, much less fellow human beings, even though t hey may do the greatest 
wrong to me and mine. Whilst, therefore, I hold the  British rule to be a curse, I 
do not intend any harm to a single Englishman, or t o any legitimate interest, he 
may have in India. 
I must not be misunderstood. Though I hold the Brit ish rule in India to be a 
curse, I do not, therefore, consider Englishmen in general, to be worse than any 
other people on earth. I have the privilege of clai ming many Englishmen as 
dearest friends. Indeed much that I have learnt of the evil of the British rule is 
due to the writings of frank and courageous English men, who have not 
hesitated to tell the unpalatable truth about that rule. 
And why do I regard the British rule as a curse? 
It has impoverished the dumb millions by a system o f progressive exploitation, 
and by a ruinously expensive military and civil adm inistration which the country 
can never afford. 
It has reduced us politically to serfdom. It has sa pped the foundations of our 
culture. And, by the policy of cruel disarmament, i t has degraded us spiritually. 
Lacking the inward strength, we have been reduced, by all but universal 
disarmament, to a state bordering on cowardly helpl essness. 
In common with many of my countrymen, I had hugged the fond hope that the 
proposed Round Table Conference might furnish a sol ution. But when you said 
plainly that you could not give any assurance that you or the British Cabinet 
would pledge yourselves to support a scheme of full  dominion status, the Round Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 148  Table Conference could not possibly furnish the sol ution for which vocal India is 
consciously, and the dumb millions are unconsciousl y, thirsting. Needless to 
say, there never was any question of Parliament's v erdict being anticipated. 
Instances are not wanting of the British Cabinet, i n anticipation of the 
parliamentary verdict, having itself pledged to a p articular policy. 
The Delhi interview having miscarried, there was no  option for Pandit Motilal 
Nehru and me, but to take steps, to carry out the s olemn resolution of the 
Congress arrived at in Calcutta at its session in 1 928. 
But the resolution of independence should cause no alarm, if the word 
dominion status mentioned in your announcement had been used in its 
accepted sense. For, has it not been admitted by th e responsible British 
statesmen, that dominion status is virtual independ ence? What, however, I fear 
is that there never has been any intention of grant ing such dominion status to 
India, in the immediate future. 
But this is past history. Since the announcement ma ny events have happened 
which show unmistakably the trend of British policy . 
It seems as clear as daylight that responsible Brit ish statesmen do not 
contemplate any alteration in British policy, that might adversely affect 
Britain's commerce with India, or require a close a nd impartial scrutiny of 
Britain's transactions with India. If nothing- is d one to end the process of 
exploitation, India must be bled with an ever incre asing speed. The Finance 
Member regards as a settled fact the ratio which by  a stroke of the pen drains 
India of a few crores. And when a serious attempt i s being made through a civil 
form of direct action, to unsettle this fact, among  many others, even you 
cannot help appealing to the wealthy landed classes , to help you to crush that 
attempt, in the name of an order that grinds India to atoms. 
Unless those who work in the name of the nation und erstand and keep before 
all concerned, the motive that lies behind this cra ving for independence, there 
is every danger of independence itself coming to us  so charged as to be of no 
value to those toiling voiceless millions, for whom  it is sought, and for whom it Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 149  is worth taking. It is for that reason, that I have  been recently telling the public 
what independence should really mean. 
Let me put before you some of the salient points. 
The terrific pressure of land revenue, which furnis hes a large part of the total, 
must undergo a considerable modification, in an ind ependent India. Even the 
much vaunted permanent settlement benefits few rich  zamindars, not the 
ryots. The ryot has remained as helpless as ever. H e is a mere tenant at will. 
Not only, then, has land revenue to be considerably  reduced, but the whole 
revenue system has to be so revised, as to make the  ryot's good its primary 
concern. But the British system seems to be designe d to crush the very life out 
of him. Even the salt he must use to live is so tax ed as to make the burden fall 
heaviest on him, if only because of the heartless i mpartiality of its incidence. 
The tax shows itself more burdensome on the poor ma n; when it is remembered 
that salt is the one thing he must eat more than th e rich, both individually and 
collectively. The drink and drug revenue, too, is d erived from the poor. It saps 
the foundations both of their health and morals. It  is defended under the false 
plea of individual freedom, but, in reality, is mai ntained for its own sake. The 
ingenuity of the authors of the reforms of 1919 tra nsferred this revenue to the 
so-called responsible part of dyarchy, so as to thr ow the burden of prohibition 
on it, thus, from the very beginning, rendering it powerless for good. If the 
unhappy Minister wipes out this revenue he must sta rve education, since in the 
existing circumstances he has no new source of repl acing that revenue. If the 
weight of taxation has crushed the poor from above,  the destruction of the 
central supplementary industry, that is, hand-spinn ing, has undermined their 
capacity for producing wealth. The tale of India's ruination is not complete 
without reference to the liabilities incurred in he r name. Sufficient has been 
recently said about these in the public press. It m ust be the duty of a free India 
to subject all the liabilities to the strictest inv estigation, and repudiate those 
that may be adjudged by an impartial tribunal to be  unjust and unfair. 
The iniquities sampled above are maintained in orde r to carry on a foreign 
administration, demonstrably the most expensive in the world. Take your own Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 150  salary. It is over Rs. 21,000 per month besides man y other indirect additions. 
The British Prime Minister gets £ 5,000 per year, t hat is, Rs. 5,400/- per month, 
at the present rate of exchange. You are getting ov er Rs. 700 per day, against 
India's average income of less than two annas per d ay. The Prime Minister gets 
Rs. 180 per day, against Great Britain's average in come of nearly Rs. 2 per day. 
Thus you are getting much over five thousand times India's average income. The 
British Prime Minister is getting only ninety times  Britain's average income. On 
bended knee I ask you to ponder over this phenomeno n. I have taken a personal 
illustration to drive home a painful truth. I have too great a regard for you as a 
man to wish to hurt your feelings. I know that you do not need the salary you 
get. But a system that provides for such an arrange ment deserves to be 
summarily scrapped. What is true of the Viceregal s alary is true generally of the 
whole administration. 
A radical cutting down of the revenue, therefore, d epends upon an equally 
radical reduction in the expenses of the administra tion. This means a 
transformation of the scheme of government. This tr ansformation is impossible 
without independence. And hence the spontaneous dem onstration of 26th 
January, in which hundreds of thousands of villager s instinctively participated. 
To them independence means deliverance from the kil ling weight. 
Not one of the great British political parties, it seems to me, is prepared to give 
up the Indian spoils to which Great Britain helps h erself from day to day, often, 
in spite of the unanimous opposition of Indian opin ion. 
Nevertheless, if India is to live as a nation, if t he slow death by starvation of 
her people is to stop, some remedy must be found fo r immediate relief. The 
proposed conference is certainly not the remedy. It  is not a matter of carrying 
conviction by argument. The matter resolves itself into one of matching forces. 
Conviction or no conviction, Great Britain would de fend her Indian commerce 
and interests by all the forces at her command. Ind ia must consequently evolve 
force enough to free herself from that embrace of d eath. 
It is common cause that, however disorganized, and,  for the time being, 
insignificant, it may be, the party of violence is gaining ground and making Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 151  itself felt. Its end is the same as mine. But I am convinced that it cannot bring 
the desired relief to the dumb millions. The convic tion is growing deeper and 
deeper in me that nothing but unadulterated non-vio lence can check the 
organized violence of the British Government. Many think that non-violence is 
not an active force. My experience, limited though it surely is, shows that non-
violence can be an intensely active force. It is my  purpose to set in motion that 
force as well against the organized violent force o f the British rule, as the 
unorganized violent force of the growing party of v iolence. To sit still would be 
to give rein to both the forces above-mentioned. Ha ving an unquestioning and 
immovable faith in the efficacy of non-violence, as  I know it, it would be sinful 
on my part to wait any longer. 
This non-violence will be expressed through civil d isobedience, for the moment 
confined to the inmates of the Satyagraha Ashram, b ut ultimately designed to 
cover all those who choose to join the movement wit h its obvious limitations. 
I know that in embarking on non-violence, I shall b e running what might fairly 
be termed a mad risk. But the victories of truth ha ve never been won without 
risks, often of the gravest character. Conversion o f a nation that has 
consciously or unconsciously preyed upon another, f ar more numerous, far more 
ancient, and no less cultured than itself, is worth  any amount of risk. 
I have deliberately used the word conversion. For m y ambition is no less than to 
convert the British people through non-violence, an d thus to make them see 
the wrong they have done to India. I do not seek to  harm your people. I want to 
serve them even as I want to serve my own. I believ e that I have always served 
them. 
I served them up to 1919, blindly. But when my eyes  were opened and I 
conceived non-co-operation, the object still was to  serve them. I employed the 
same weapon that I have, in all humility, successfu lly used against the dearest 
members of my family. If I have equal love for your  people with mine, it will 
not long remain hidden. It will be acknowledged by them, even as the members 
of my family acknowledged, after they had tried me for several years. If the 
people join me, as I expect they will, the sufferin gs they will undergo, unless Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 152  the British nation sooner retraces its steps, will be enough to melt the stoniest 
hearts. 
The plan through civil disobedience will be to comb at such evils as I have 
sampled out. If we want to sever the British connec tion it is because of such 
evils. When they are removed, the path becomes easy . Then the way to 
friendly negotiation will be open. If the British c ommerce with India is purified 
of greed, you will have no difficulty in recognizin g our independence. I invite 
you then to pave the way for immediate removal of t hose evils, and thus open a 
way for a real conference between equals, intereste d only in promoting the 
common good of mankind through voluntary fellowship  and in arranging terms 
of mutual help and commerce equally suited to both.  You have unnecessarily 
laid stress upon communal problems that unhappily a ffect this land. Important 
though they undoubtedly are for the consideration o f any scheme of 
Government they have little bearing on the greater problems which are above 
communities and which affect them all equally. But if you cannot see your way 
to deal with these evils and my letter makes no app eal to your heart, on the 
eleventh day of this month, I shall proceed with su ch co-workers of the Ashram 
as I can take, to disregard the provisions of the s alt laws. I regard this tax to be 
the most iniquitous of all from the poor man's stan dpoint. As the independence 
movement is essentially for the poorest in the land , the beginning will be made 
with this evil. The wonder is that we have submitte d to the cruel monopoly for 
so long. It is, I know, open to you to frustrate my  design by arresting me. I hope 
that there will be tens of thousands ready, in a di sciplined manner, to take up 
the work after me, and, in the act of disobeying th e Salt Act, to lay themselves 
open to the penalties of a law that should never ha ve disfigured the statute 
book. 
I have no desire to cause you unnecessary embarrass ment, or any at all, so far 
as I can help. If you think that there is any subst ance in my letter, and if you 
will care to discuss matters with me, and if to tha t end you would like me to 
postpone publication of this letter, I shall gladly  refrain on receipt of a 
telegram to that effect soon after this reaches you . You will, however, do me Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 153  the favour not to deflect me from my course, unless  you can see your way to 
conform to the substance of this letter. 
This letter is not in any way intended as a threat,  but is a simple and sacred 
duty, peremptory on a civil resister. Therefore, I am having it specially 
delivered by a young English friend who believes in  the Indian cause and is a 
full believer in non-violence and whom Providence s eems to have sent to me, 
as it were, for the very purpose. 
I remain, Your sincere friend, M.  K.  GANDHI  
Mahatma,  Vol. Ill, pp. 18-23 
 
1 Lord Irwin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 154   
63. TO LORD IRWIN 1 
DEAR FRIEND , 
God willing, it is my intention ... to set out for Dharasana and reach there with 
my companions . . . and demand possession of the Sa lt Works. The public have 
been told that Dharasana is a private property. Thi s is mere camouflage. It is as 
effectively under Government control as the Viceroy 's house. Not a pinch of salt 
can be removed without the previous sanction of the  authorities. 
It is possible for you to prevent this raid, as it has been playfully and 
mischievously called, in three ways: 
By removing the Salt Tax; 
By arresting me and my party, unless the country ca n, as I hope it will, replace 
every one taken away; 
By sheer  goondaism  unless every head broken is replaced, as I hope it  will. 
It is not without hesitation .that the step has bee n decided upon. I had hoped 
that the Government would fight the civil resisters  in a civilized manner. I 
could have had nothing to say if, in dealing with t he civil resisters, the 
Government has satisfied itself with applying the o rdinary processes of law. 
Instead, whilst the known leaders have been dealt w ith more or less according 
to the legal formality, the rank and file has been often savagely and in some 
cases even indecently assaulted. Had there been iso lated cases, they might 
have been overlooked. But accounts have come to me from Bengal, Bihar, 
Utkal, U.E, Delhi and Bombay confirming the experie nces of Gujarat of which I 
have ample evidence at my disposal. In Karachi, Pes hawar and Madras the firing 
would appear to have been unprovoked and unnecessar y. Bones have been 
broken, private parts have been squeezed for the pu rpose of making volunteers 
give up, to the Government valueless, to the volunt eers precious salt. At 
Muthra an Assistant Magistrate is said to have snat ched the National Flag from a 
ten-year-old boy. The crowd demanding restoration o f the Flag thus illegally 
seized is reported to have been mercilessly beaten back. That the Flag was Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 155  subsequently restored betrayed a guilty conscience.  In Bengal there seem to 
have been only a few prosecutions and assaults abou t salt, but unthinkable 
cruelties are said to have been practised in the ac t of snatching flags from 
volunteers. Paddy fields are reported to have been burnt, eatables forcibly 
taken. A vegetable market in Gujarat has been raide d, because the dealers 
would not sell vegetables to officials. These acts have taken place in front of 
crowds who, for the sake of Congress mandate, have submitted without 
retaliation. I ask you to believe the accounts give n by men pledged to truth. 
Repudiation even by high officials has, as in the B ardoli case, often proved 
false. The officials I regret to have to say, have not hesitated to publish 
falsehoods to the people even during the last five weeks. I take the following 
samples from Government notices issued from Collect ors' offices in Gujarat: 
"1. Adults use five pounds of salt per year, theref ore pay three annas per year 
as tax. If Government removed the monopoly, people will have to pay higher 
prices and in addition make good to the Government the loss sustained by the 
removal of the monopoly. The salt you take from the  sea-shore is not eatable, 
therefore the Government destroys it." 
"2. Mr. Gandhi says that Government has destroyed h and-spinning in this 
country, whereas everybody knows that this is not t rue, because throughout the 
country there is not a village where hand-spinning of cotton is not going on. 
Moreover in every province cotton spinners are show n superior methods and are 
provided with better instruments at less prices and  are thus helped by 
Government." 
"3. Out of every five rupees of the debt that the G overnment has incurred, 
rupees four have been beneficially spent." 
I have taken these three sets of statements from th ree different leaflets. I 
venture to suggest that everyone of these statement s is demonstrably false. 
The daily consumption of salt by an adult is three times the amount stated and 
therefore the poll tax and the salt tax undoubtedly  is at least 9 as. per head 
per year. And this tax is levied from man, woman, c hild and domestic cattle 
irrespective of age and health. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 156  It is a wicked falsehood to say that every village has a spinning wheel and that 
the spinning movement is in any shape or form encou raged or supported by the 
Government. Financiers can better dispose of the fa lsehood that four out of 
every five rupees of the public debt is used for be nefit of the public. But those 
falsehoods are mere samples of what people know is going on in every day 
contact with the Government. Only the other day a G ujarati poet, a brave man, 
was convicted on prejudged official evidence in spi te of his emphatic statement 
that at the time mentioned he was sleeping soundly in another Place. 
Now for instances of official inactivities. Liquor dealers have assaulted pickets 
admitted by officials to have been peaceful and sol d liquor in contravention of 
regulations. The officials have taken no notice eit her of the assaults or the 
illegal sales of liquor. As to the assaults, though  they are known to everybody, 
they may take shelter under the plea that they have  received no complaints. 
And now you have sprung upon the country a Press Or dinance surpassing any 
hitherto known in India. You have found a short cut  through the law's delay in 
the matter of the trial of Bhagat Singh and others by doing away with the 
ordinary procedure. Is it any wonder if I call all these official activities and 
inactivities a veiled form of Martial Law? Yet this  is only the fifth week of the 
struggle. 
Before then the reign of terrorism that has just be gun overwhelms India, I feel 
that I must take a bolder step and if possible dive rt your wrath in a cleaner if 
more drastic channel. You may not know the things t hat I have described. You 
may not even now believe in them. I can but invite your serious attention to 
them. 
Anyway I feel that it would be cowardly on my part not to invite you to disclose 
to the full the leonine paws of authority, so that the people who are suffering 
tortures and destruction of their property may not feel that I, who had perhaps 
been the chief party inspiring them to action that has brought to right light the 
Government in its true colours, had left any stone unturned to work out the 
Satyagraha programme as fully as it was possible un der given circumstances. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 157  According to the science of Satyagraha, the greater  the repression and 
lawlessness on the part of authority, the greater s hould be the suffering 
courted by the victims.  Success is the certain result of suffering of the 
extremest character voluntarily undergone.  
I know the dangers attendant upon the methods adopt ed by me. But the 
country is not likely to mistake my meaning. I say what I mean and think. And I 
have been saying for the last fifteen years in Indi a, and outside for twenty 
years more, and repeat now that the only way to con quer violence is through 
non-violence pure and undefiled. I have said also t hat every violent act, word 
and even thought interferes with the progress of no nviolent action. If in spite of 
such repeated warnings, people will resort to viole nce, I must own 
responsibility save such as inevitably attaches to every human being for the 
acts of every other human being. But the question o f responsibility apart, I dare 
not postpone action on any cause whatsoever if non- violence is the force the 
seers of the world have claimed .it to be and if I am not to belie my own 
extensive experience of its working. 
But I would fain avoid the further steps. I would t herefore ask you to remove 
the tax which many of your illustrious countrymen h ave condemned in 
unmeasured terms and which, as you could not have f ailed to observe, has 
evoked universal protest and resentment expressed i n civil disobedience. You 
may condemn civil disobedience as much as you like.  Will you prefer violent 
revolt to civil disobedience? If you say, as you ha ve said, that the civil 
disobedience must end in violence, history will pro nounce the verdict that the 
British Government not bearing because not understa nding non-violence, 
goaded human nature to violence, which it could und erstand and deal with. But 
in spite of the goading, I shall hope that God will  give the people of India 
wisdom and strength to withstand every temptation a nd provocation to 
violence. 
If, therefore, you cannot see your way to remove th e Salt Tax and remove the 
prohibitions on private salt- making I must relucta ntly commence the march 
adumbrated in the opening paragraph of my letter. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 158  I am,  
Your sincere friend,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi,  pp. 68-75 
 
1 Gandhiji had drafted this letter on the eve of hi s arrest on May 4, 1930. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 159   
64. TO REGINALD REYNOLDS 
Camp Delhi, February 23, 1931  
MY DEAR REGINALD , 
I honour you for your long, frank and emphatic lett er. It will help me to remain 
firm where firmness is required. Having said this l et me tell you that I do not at 
all agree with you that I was wrong in suspending j udgment or action pending 
the arrival of the three friends. Satyagraha can af ford to wait. It can be gentle 
and should be gentle where gentleness is a duty. Ho wever mistaken their 
judgment may be found to be I regard these friends as equal lovers of their 
country with me. I have no business to judge them a s I would not have them 
judge me and by waiting I assure you that the cause  has not suffered a bit. It 
may be that the friends there who are whole hoggers  may feel embarrassed to 
find me acting contrary to their expectation. But a s time goes by you and they 
may discover many such shocks. I regard myself as a  seasoned soldier in 
Satyagraha. I have acted before as I have acted now  at similar critical junctures 
and I cannot recall a single occasion when the caus e espoused had lost by 
waiting. On the contrary I can recall many an occas ion when the waiting had 
proved fruitful. Let my assurance therefore be suff icient for you that so far as I 
am concerned there will be absolutely no surrender on principle, i.e., on the 
substantial part of the demand and I doubt not that  there will be none on the 
part of the Congress. Remember too that Satyagraha is a method of carrying 
conviction and of converting by an appeal to reason  and to the sympathetic 
chord in human beings. It relies upon the ultimate good in every human being, 
no matter how debased he may be for the time being.  If this does not satisfy 
you do by all means strive with me. You are entitle d to do so and demand 
satisfaction from me. I need not say a word about t he brave manner in which 
you are fighting there. May God bless you and give you strength. Of the doing in 
Delhi I need say nothing because the talks are stil l going on and I have no doubt 
that the cablegrams are keeping you informed of the  doings from day to day. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 160  Anything therefore that I can say today would be ou t of date when this letter 
reaches you. What about your marriage? 
With love, 
Your sincerely, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
REGINALD REYNOLDS , ESQ ., 
8,  FAIRDENE ROAD , BOULSDON , SURREY  
From a Photostat:  S.N. 16948 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 161   
65. TO RICHARD B. GREGG 1 
Sabarmati, April 29, 1931  
MY DEAR GOVIND , 
I have your letter and I read your letter to Mira. I quite understand and 
appreciate all the anxiety shown by you in your let ter to me. I do not know that 
I shall be going to London at all and I shall certa inly not go if the way is not 
clear for me to deliver my message. That it is not likely to be accepted just 
now I have realized all along. But had the Congress  not accepted the offer to 
discuss terms, the Congress would have put itself i n the wrong. As it is we are 
safe either way. It will be great, good and grand i f peace can be made 
permanent through negotiation. I shall therefore le ave no stone unturned to 
reach that state but it will be equally good and gr and if the negotiation proved 
fruitless. Then India will be put upon her mettle a nd will have to show her 
capacity for further suffering. There is no questio n of my being invited to 
parties, feted and lionized. I can eat nothing and thank God my loin cloth will 
protect me from being exhibited as a specimen ' in barmen's show. If therefore I 
go to London I go for solid business and to drinkin g the deep affection of chosen 
friends there. I refuse to speculate. I would go wh ere the light leads me in the 
fullest faith that all will be well if I follow it.  
Do not believe the rumours about my intended visit to America. Much as I 
should like to visit that great country I know that  my time is not yet and I do 
not want to come as a nine days' wonder. 
Yours sincerely, 
 M.  K.  GANDHI  
R.  B.  GREGG , ESQ .,   
543,  BOYLSTON ST.,  BOSTON , MASS . 
From a photostat:  S.N. 17023 
 
1 Richard B. Gregg—American friend and co-worker of  Gandhiji. Stayed in India in 1925-27. 
Again visited in 1930 and afterwards. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 162   
66. TO SIR SAMUEL HOARE 
(Yeravda Central Prison) March 11, 1932  
DEAR SIR SAMUEL , 
You will perhaps recollect that at the end of my sp eech at the Round Table 
Conference when the Minorities' claim was presented , I had said that I should 
resist with my life the grant of separate electorat e to the depressed classes. 
This was not said in the heat of the moment nor by way of rhetoric. It was 
meant to be a religious statement. 
In pursuance of that statement, I had hoped on my r eturn to India to mobilize 
public opinion against separate electorate at any r ate for the depressed 
classes. But it was not to be. 
From the newspapers I am permitted to read, I obser ve that any moment His 
Majesty's Government may declare their decision. At  first I had thought, if the 
decision was bound to create separate electorates f or the depressed classes, I 
should take such steps as I might then consider nec essary to give effect to my 
vow. But I feel it would be unfair to the British G overnment for me to act 
without giving previous notice. Naturally they coul d not attach the significance 
I gave to my statement. 
I need hardly reiterate all the objections I have t o the creation of separate 
electorates for the depressed classes. I feel as if  I was one of them. Their case 
stands on a wholly different footing from that of o thers. I am not against their 
representation in the legislatures. I should favour  every one of their adults, 
male and female, being registered as voters irrespe ctive of education or 
property qualification, even though the franchise t est may be stricter for 
others. But I hold that separate electorate is harm ful for them and for 
Hinduism, whatever it may be from a purely politica l standpoint. To appreciate 
the harm that separate electorates would do them, o ne has to know how they 
are distributed amongst the so-called caste Hindus and how dependent they are 
on the latter. So far as Hinduism is concerned sepa rate electorate would simply 
vivisect and disrupt it. For me the question of the se classes is predominantly Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 163  moral and religious. The political aspect, importan t though it is, dwindles into 
insignificance compared with the moral and religiou s issue. 
You will have to appreciate my feelings in this mat ter by remembering that I 
have been interested in the condition of these clas ses from my boyhood and 
have more than once staked my all for their sake. I  say this not to pride myself 
in any way. I feel that no penance that the Hindus may do can in any way 
compensate for the calculated degradation to which they have consigned the 
depressed classes for centuries. But I know that se parate electorate is neither a 
penance nor any remedy for the crushing degradation  they have groaned under. 
I, therefore, respectfully inform His Majesty's Gov ernment that in the event of 
their decision creating separate electorate for the  depressed classes, I MUST 
FAST UNTO DEATH. 
I am painfully conscious of the fact that such a st ep whilst I am a prisoner, must 
cause grave embarrassment to His Majesty's Governme nt and that it will be 
regarded by many as highly improper on the part of one holding my position to 
introduce into the political field methods which th ey would describe as 
hysterical, if not much worse. All I can urge in de fence is that for me the 
contemplated step is not a method, it is part of my  being. It is the call of 
conscious which I dare not disobey even though it m ay cost whatever reputation 
for sanity I may possess. So far as I can see now, my discharge from 
imprisonment would not make the duty of fasting any  the less imperative. I am 
hoping, however, that all my fears are wholly unjus tified and the British 
Government have no intention whatever of creating s eparate electorate for the 
depressed classes. 
It is, perhaps, as well for me to refer to another matter that is agitating me 
and which may also enforce a similar fast. It is th e way that repression is going. 
I have no notion when I may receive a shock that wo uld compel the sacrifice. 
Repression appears to me to be crossing what might be called legitimate 
bounds. A governmental terrorism is spreading throu gh the land. English and 
Indian officials are being brutalized. The latter, high and low, are becoming 
demoralized by reason of Government regarding as me ritorious, disloyalty to Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 164  the people and inhuman conduct towards their own ki th and kin. The latter are 
becoming cowed down. Free speech has been stifled.  Goondaism  (hooliganism) 
is being practised in the name of law and order. Wo men, who have come out 
for public service, stand in fear of their honour b eing insulted. 
And all this, as it seems to me, is being done in o rder to crush the spirit of 
freedom which the Congress represents. Repression i s not confined to punishing 
civil breaches of common law. It goads people to br eak newly made orders of 
autocracy designed for the most part to humiliate t hem. 
In all these doings, as I read them, I see no spiri t of democracy. Indeed, my 
recent visit to England has confirmed my opinion th at your democracy is a 
superficial circumscribed, thing. In the weightiest  matters decisions are taken 
by individuals or groups without any reference to P arliament, and these have 
been ratified by Members having but a vague notion of what they were doing. 
Such was the case with Egypt, the War of 1914, and such is the case with India. 
My whole being rebels against the idea that in a sy stem called democratic one 
man should have unfettered power of affecting the d estiny of an ancient 
people numbering over three hundred millions and th at his decisions can be 
enforced by mobilizing the most terrible forces of destruction. To me this is a 
negation of democracy. 
And this repression cannot be prolonged without fur ther embittering the 
already bitter relations between the two peoples. I n so far as I am responsible 
and can help it, how am I to arrest the process ? N ot by stopping Civil 
Disobedience. For me it is an article of faith. I r egard myself by nature a 
democrat. The democracy of my conception is wholly inconsistent with the use 
of physical force for enforcing its will. Civil res istance, therefore, has been 
conceived to be a proper substitute for physical fo rce to be used wherever 
generally the latter is held to be necessary or jus tifiable. It is a process of self-
suffering, and part of the plan is that in given ci rcumstances a civil resister 
must sacrifice himself even by fasting to a finish.  That moment has not yet 
arrived for me. I have no undeniable call from with in for such a step. But 
events happening outside are alarming enough to agi tate my fundamental Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 165  being. Therefore, in writing to you about the possi bility of a fast regarding the 
depressed classes, I felt I would be untrue to you if I did not tell you also that 
there was another possibility, not remote, of such a fast. 
Needless to say, from my side absolute secrecy has been maintained about all 
the correspondence I have carried on with you. Of c ourse Sardar Vallabhbhai 
Patel and Mahadev Desai, who have just been sent to  join us, know all about it. 
But you will no doubt make whatever use you wish of  this letter. 
Yours sincerely, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
The Diary of Mahadev Desai-I,  pp. 323-26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 166   
67. TO RAMSAY MACDONALD 1 
Yeravda Prison, August 18, 1932  
DEAR FRIEND , 
There can be no doubt that Sir Samuel Hoare has sho wed you and the Cabinet 
my letter to him of 11th March on the question of t he representation of the 
depressed classes. That letter should be treated as  part of this letter and be 
read together with this. 
I have read the British Government's decision on th e representation of the 
Minorities and have slept over it. In pursuance of my letter to Sir Samuel Hoare 
and my declaration at the meeting of the Minorities  Committee of the Round 
Table Conference on the 13th November 1931, at St. James' Palace, I have to 
resist your decision with my life. The only way I c an do so is by declaring a 
perpetual fast unto death from food of any kind, sa ve water with or without 
salt and soda. This fast will cease if during its p rogress the British Government 
of its own motion or under the pressure of public o pinion revise their decision 
and their schemes of communal electorates for the d epressed classes, whose 
representatives should be elected by general electo rate under common 
franchise no matter how wide it is. 
The proposed fast will come into operation in the o rdinary course from the 
noon of 20th September next unless the said decisio n is meanwhile revised in 
the manner suggested above. 
I am asking the authorities here to cable the text of this letter to you so as to 
give you ample notice. But in any case I am leaving  sufficient time for this 
letter to reach you in time by the slowest route. 
I also ask that this letter and my letter to Sir Sa muel Hoare, already referred 
to, be published, at the earliest possible moment. On my part I have 
scrupulously observed the rule of the jail and have  communicated my desire or 
the contents of the two letters to no one save my t wo companions, Sardar 
Vallabhbhai Patel and Sjt. Mahadev Desai. But I wan t, if you make it possible Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 167  public opinion to be affected by my letters. Hence my request for their early 
publication. 
I regret the decision that I have taken. But as a m an of religion that I hold 
myseif to be, I have no other course left open to m e. As I have said in my letter 
to Sir Samuel Hoare, even if His Majesty's Governme nt decided to release me in 
order to save themselves embarrassment, my fast wil l have to continue. For, I 
cannot now hope to resist the decision by any other  means. And I have no 
desire whatsoever to compass my release by any mean s other than honourable. 
It may be that my judgment is warped and that I am wholly in error in 
regarding separate electorates for the depressed cl asses as harmful to them or 
Hinduism. If so, I am not likely to be in the right  with reference to other parts 
of my philosophy of life. In that case, my death by  fasting will be at once a 
penance for my error and a lifting of a weight from  off those numberless men 
and women who have a child-like faith in my wisdom.  Whereas if my judgment 
is right, as I have little doubt it is, the contemp lated step is but a due 
fulfilment of the scheme of life which I have tried  for more than a quarter of a 
century apparently not without considerable success . 
Yours sincerely,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi,  pp. 104-06 
 
1 Macdonald, James Ramsay: (1866-1937)—British Poli tician; a leading Member of I.L.E 
(1893-1930); Secretary (1900-11) and leader (1911-1 4, 1922-30) of the Labour Party; 
Member of Parliament from 1906; Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary of the first Labour 
Government in Britain (Nov. 1924); In 1935-37 he wa s a Lord President under Mr. Baldwin. 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 168   
68. TO PANDIT MALAVIYAJI 
Yeravda Central Prison, 24th February, 1933  
I had your telegram asking me whether you could rel ease the correspondence 
for publication. As I had done so 48 hours before t he receipt of your telegram I 
did not send a wire in reply, thinking that you mus t already have seen the 
notice of the publication. 
Since then I had no time to dictate a reply to you,  as  Harijan  takes up 
practically all my time up to Thursday evening. 
I hope you are getting regularly your copy of the Harijan.  I do not know 
whether you at all get the time to look at it. Now that the world knows the 
difference of outlook between you and me as to thes e Bills, I would like you to 
review the whole position in the light of what you yourself have suggested. 
You say that it is possible by discussion between S anatanists and reformers to 
arrive at a compromise without the aid of legislati on. I taxed myself as to how 
this could be, even assuming that there was complet e agreement between 
Sanatanists and reformers that public temples shoul d be thrown open to 
Harijans. Even that agreement cannot supersede the law which lays down that 
Harijans cannot enter public temples. 
I therefore cannot get away from the very real mora l difficulty that unless we 
get the law altered, we are not in a position to ke ep the pledge given in the 
Bombay resolution. We cannot plead helplessness und er cover of this law, of 
which I knew nothing at the time I drew up the reso lution about temples. I 
suppose that you do know that the original draft wa s prepared by me. True, 
several changes were made after, but no change was made so as to alter the 
substance of my draft. 
I wish therefore that for the sake of the very reli gion which you and I hold 
dearer than life itself, you will examine the moral  difficulties I have presented 
here. And let me repeat, if it is at all necessary,  what I have said in my article Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 169  in  Harijan  that this latest difference in viewpoint between y ou and me does 
not, in the slightest degree, diminish my regard or  affection for you, 
Yours sincerely,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
To 
PANDIT MALAVIYAJI  
From a photostat:  S.N. 20348 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 170   
69. TO THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY, 
(HOME DEPARTMENT), POONA 
DEAR  SIR , 
My first constructive act on returning to India in 1915 was to found the 
Satyagraha Ashram for the purpose of serving Truth.  The inmates are under the 
vows of truth, Ahimsa, celibacy, control of palate,  poverty, fearlessness, 
removal of untouchability, Swadeshi with Khadi as t he centre, equal respect for 
all religions and bread labour. The present site fo r the Ashram was bought in 
1916. It conducts today certain activities mostly t hrough the labour of inmates. 
But it does need to supplement that labour with ord inary paid labour. Its 
principal activities are:—Khadi production as a vil lage industry without the aid 
of power-driven machinery, dairy, agriculture, scie ntific scavenging and literary 
education. The Ashram has 107 inmates at present (m en 42, women 31, boys 12 
and girls 22). This number excludes those who are i n prison and those who are 
otherwise engaged outside. Up to now it has trained  nearly 1,000 persons in the 
manufacture of Khadi. Most of these, so far as my k nowledge goes, are doing 
useful constructive work and earning an honest live lihood. 
The Ashram is a registered trust. The funds at its disposal are earmarked. 
Whilst the aim has been to make every department se lf-supporting, it has 
hitherto been obliged to receive donations from fri ends to meet all the 
obligations. Experience has shown that so long as i t remains a predominantly 
educational service (using the term in the widest s ense) and not only charges 
no fees but actually feeds and clothes the learners , it cannot be wholly self-
supporting. 
The Ashram owns immovable property estimated at abo ut Rs. 3,60,000 and 
movables including cash estimated at over Rs. 3,00, 000. The Ashram takes no 
part in politics so-called. But it does believe in non-co- operation and civil 
disobedience as indispensable, under certain circum stances, for the observance Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 171  of truth and non-violence. Hence, the Civil Disobed ience campaign of 1930 was 
started by the march to Dandi of nearly eighty inma tes of the Ashram. 
Time has now arrived for the Ashram to make a great er sacrifice in the face of 
the existing situation— on the one hand the growing  terrorism by the Govern-
ment and on the other the equally growing demoraliz ation among the people. 
The statements that have come under my observation since the breaking of my 
fast show that; 
1. Methods of torture have been adopted by the police in various parts of 
India in order to cow down individual civil resiste rs, 
2. Women have been insulted, 
3. Free movement of people has become almost impossibl e, 
4. In many parts of India, village work by Congressmen  has become all but 
impossible, 
5. Civil Resistance prisoners have been subjected to h umiliations and bodily 
injury in many lock-ups and prisons, 
6. Unconscionably heavy fines have been imposed and gr oss irregularities 
committed for their recovery, 
7. Peasants withholding revenue or rent have been puni shed in a manner out 
of all proportion to their offence, obviously with a view to terrifying them 
and their neighbours, 
8. The public press has been gagged, 
9. In short freedom with self-respect has become impos sible throughout the 
length and breadth of the land. 
I have no doubt that these statements will be denie d or explained away in 
official circles. It may be that they are not free from exaggerations. But in 
common with many Congressmen I believe in them and therefore they are able 
to arouse us to action. 
Hence, mere incarceration can bring a little satisf action. Moreover, I quite 
clearly see that the vast constructive programme of  the Ashram cannot be 
carried on with safety, unless the Ashram ceases en tirely to have anything to do 
with the campaign. To accept such a position will b e to deny the creed. Up to Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 172  now I have hoped that the existence of the Ashram s ide by side with the Civil 
Resistance of its individual members was possible a nd that there was bound to 
be an honourable peace between Government and the C ongress in the near 
future even though the Congress goal might not be i mmediately realized. The 
unfortunate rejection by His Excellency the Viceroy  of the honest advance of 
the Congress through me, in the interest of peace, shows clearly that the Gov-
ernment do not seek or desire peace, they want an a bject surrender by the 
largest and the admittedly most, if not the only po pular, political organization 
in the country. This is impossible so long as the C ongress continues to repose 
confidence in its present advisers. The struggle th erefore is bound to be 
prolonged and calls for much greater sacrifice than  the people have hitherto 
undergone. It follows that the greatest measure of sacrifice is to be expected 
of me as the author of the movement. I can therefor e only offer that which is 
nearest and dearest to me and for the building of w hich I and many other mem-
bers of the Ashram have laboured with infinite pati ence and care all these 
eighteen years. Every head of cattle and every tree  has its history and sacred 
associations. They are all members of a big family.  What was once a barren plot 
of land has been turned by human endeavour into a f air-sized model garden 
colony. It will not be without a tear that we shall  break up the family and its 
activities. I have had many and prayerful conversat ions with the inmates and 
they have, men and women, unanimously approved of t he proposal to give up 
the present activities. Those who are at all able h ave decided to offer 
individual Civil Disobedience after the suspension period is over. 
It may not be superfluous to mention that the Ashra m has for the past two 
years refused to pay revenue dues and consequently goods of considerable 
value have been seized and sold in respect of them.  I make no complaint of the 
procedure. But it cannot be a matter of pleasure or  profit to carry on a great 
institution in such precarious circumstances. I ful ly realize that whether a State 
is just or unjust and whether it is under popular o r foreign control, the citizen's 
possessions may at any time be forcibly taken away from him by the State if he 
comes in conflict with it. In the circumstances, it  seems to me to be simple Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 173  prudence to anticipate the inevitable in a conflict  which promises to be 
indefinitely prolonged. 
But whilst it has been decided to break up the Ashr am we want everything to 
be used for public purpose. Therefore, unless the G overnment for any reason 
desire to take charge of any or all of the movables  including cash, I propose to 
hand them over to those friends who will take them and use them for public 
benefit and in accordance with the earmarking. Thus  the Khadi stock and 
contents of the workshop and the weaving sheds will  be handed over to the All-
India Spinners' Association on whose behalf that ac tivity has been carried on. 
The cows and other cattle will be handed to a repre sentative of the Goseva 
Sangh on whose behalf the dairy has been conducted.  The library will be 
handed, probably to an institution that will take c are of it. The moneys and 
articles belonging to various parties will be retur ned to them or kept for them 
by friends who will care to take charge of them. 
Then there remain the land, the buildings and the c rops. I suggest that the 
Government take possession of these and do what the y like with them. I would 
gladly have handed these also to friends but I cann ot be party to their paying 
the revenue dues. And naturally I may not hand them  to fellow resisters. All, 
therefore, I wish is that beneficial use be made of  the land, buildings and the 
valuable trees and crops instead of being allowed t o run to waste as I see has 
been done in many cases. 
There is a plot of land with building occupied by H arijan families. They have 
hitherto paid no rent. I have no desire to invite t hem to take part in Civil 
Resistance. They will now pay the nominal rent of o ne rupee per year to the 
trustees of the Ashram and be responsible for the r evenue due on that portion. 
If for any reason, the Government decline to take p ossession of the property 
mentioned, the Ashram will still be vacated by the inmates as soon as may be 
after the expiry of the suspension period, viz., 31 st instant unless the date is 
anticipated by the Government. I request a telegrap hic reply to this letter, at 
least, in so far as the Government's wishes regardi ng the movables are Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 174  concerned so as to enable me to remove them in due time if I am to remove 
them at all. 
I am,  
Yours faithfully, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
AHMEDABAD , JULY 26,  1933   
To 
THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF BOMBAY , (H OME DEPARTMENT ),  POONA  
From a photostat:  S.N.  21535 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 175   
70. TO SIR TEJ BAHADUR SAPRU 1 
Satyagraha Ashram, Wardha, Sept. 30, 1933  
DEAR DR. SAPRU , 
I was delighted to receive your letter. Of course, I knew why you were not 
writing to me. I could never be guilty of thinking that the absence of any letter 
from you was due to want of affection or courtesy. 
I am still trying to regain my lost strength. It is  slowly coming to me. 
I am trying all I can to overtake the orthodox prej udices against Harijans. I 
quite agree with you that "our attitude towards the m is the darkest blot on our 
character". I know that in this matter I can rely u pon your wholehearted 
assistance, but in writing to me I don't like your confining yourself merely to 
the Harijan question. You may not take any active p art in politics or political 
discussions, but, surely you will not debar friends  from the benefit of your 
advice, guidance and ripe experience. Whatever may be the differences 
between us in our outlook, you know that I have ver y high regard for you and 
your opinions. I would, therefore, like you to give  me briefly your London 
experiences and the opinion you have formed upon th em. 
Seth Jamnalalji joins me in sending you regards, 
Yours sincerely,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
SIR TEJ BAHADUR SAPRU , 19  ALBERT ROAD , ALLAHABAD  
From a photostat:  S.N. 29503 
 
1 Sir Tej Bhadur Sapru (1875-1949)—Eminent lawyer; constitutionalist and politician; Law 
Member in Viceroy's Council, 1920-22; President of Liberal Federation in 1923 and 1927. 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 176   
71. TO CARL HEATH 1 
Wardha (C.P.)  
10th December, 1934  
DEAR FRIEND , 
I have your letter of 19th November. I have not bee n able to understand it, in 
spite of the help I sought from Charlie Andrews. 
I have no hesitation in agreeing with you that any solution of the present 
deadlock should be just and creative, and that it s hould be neither imposed nor 
extorted; in other words, it should be an agreed so lution honourable to both 
the countries. I know too the suffering of India an d the suffering of Lancashire. 
But if the juxtaposition of the two is meant to imp ly that the cause of the 
suffering of either is identical I would dissent fr om any such view. The suffering 
of India is imposed upon her; the suffering of Lanc ashire is due partly to world 
causes and partly to its own shortsightedness and s elfishness. So far as it was 
possible for me to suggest an alleviation of the su ffering of Lancashire through 
India's help I had made a definite offer when I was  in England in 1931. But my 
offer proved to be of no avail. The offer was this:  If there was a free 
settlement between England and India, a favoured-na tion clause was quite 
possible, in so far as India might need any foreign  cloth in order to supplement 
her output of cloth, whether through the village sp inning wheel or through her 
mills. I do not know how far such treatment is poss ible today for, even during 
the short period that has elapsed since the meeting  of the Round Table 
Conference, India has become better organized for t he manufacture of all her 
clothing requirements, in spite of the fact that sh e is importing fine-count 
calico both from England and Japan. The chief point , however, is not how 
Lancashire can send its calico to India, but how th e whole of England can 
benefit in every way by the benefit that India must  derive from attainment of 
complete freedom, political and economic. The more I study the villages of 
India the more intensely do I realize that India ha s no need to be a pauper Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 177  country if she can get the chance to grow without t he fetters that today 
prevent her natural growth. 
Your last paragraph seems to imply that there is no  longer any repression in 
India. I can only tell you that repression is there  to be seen by anyone with the 
naked eye. I do not know of any single repressive l aw that has been repealed. 
The Press is effectively gagged, there is no such t hing as freedom of movement 
in Bengal as also in the Frontier Province. If you hear nothing of imprisonments 
and lathi charges it is because civil disobedience is suspended and the Congress 
has resolved, in furtherance of the spirit of non-v iolence, to submit to 
repressive laws in so far as it is humanly possible  to do so. On the top of all this 
comes the Parliamentary Committee's proposals for a  new constitution. It is, as 
I read it, a bare-faced denial of freedom. I see in  it no scope for expansion. I 
would any day prefer the existing state to the crus hing burden that threatens 
to overwhelm India and tighten the British hold upo n her. My own power of 
endurance is being tested beyond my capacity my way  to the Frontier Province 
is blocked. 
But, in spite of the blackness of the horizon, I ha ve no sense of despair in me. I 
believe in the existence of a beneficent Power that  overrides and upsets all 
human plans. It ever produces order out of chaos, a nd redresses wrongs in spite 
of the tyranny of tyrants. 
India must come to her own one day. But she will do  so chiefly if her own sons 
and daughters behave themselves and prove worthy of  her freedom. We must 
exert our utmost to prove our worth, and you, frien ds of Conciliation Group, 
will, I know, do your level best according to your lights to help a just solution. 
Yours sincerely,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
CARL HEATH , ESQ .,   
INDIAN CONCILIATION GROUP , 
FRIENDS HOUSE , EUSTON ROAD ,  Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 178  LONDON , N.W.I  
From a photostat:  S.N. 22641 
 
1 Carl Heath (1869- )—One of the best-known Quakers , nationally and internationally; 
Secretary, Friends' Service Council, 1919-35; Chair man, Indian Conciliation Group. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 179   
72. TO CARL HEATH 
As at Wardha, 3rd January 1935  
DEAR FRIEND , 
I thank you for your letter on 21st ultimo. Your pr evious letter was read by 
Miraben, Mahadev and later by Andrews. All of them put, independently of me, 
the same construction that I had. Of course, I unre servedly accept your 
correction. I simply want to say that it was after carefully reading your letter 
more than three times that I sent you the reply I d id. Andrews also read my 
reply to you, and he had nothing to suggest by way of alteration. 
Of course, you knew the existence of the repressive  laws. But you did not 
know, nor do you know now, what their continuance m eant or means to us 
here. A strange confirmation of this comes from Dr Maude Royden who is 
reported to have said at Karachi that the people in  England knew nothing, 
through the daily press or otherwise, of the amazin g things which she heard 
during the two or three days she found herself amon gst the very sober women 
of India. Andrews will be able to give you first-ha nd testimony of what he saw 
and learnt in Bengal. 
You seem to regard the possibility of withdrawal of  the forthcoming Bill as a 
calamity. In my opinion, if the withdrawal comes ev en at the last moment, it 
will be a blessing both for England and India, for the simple reason that 
persistence in the measure in the face of an almost  unanimous Indian 
opposition to it would mean an unbending attitude o n the part of the British 
Parliament and utter contempt for Indian public opi nion. I hope you have seen 
the bitter comment made by Rt. Hon. Sastri, who was  at one time a  persona 
grata at the India office whose complete confidence he en joyed, and the 
equally bitter comment of Hon. C. Y. Chintamani, wh o has been regarded as a 
moderate among moderates and who has, in season and  out of season, 
condemned the Congress attitude in unmeasured langu age. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 180  Now for the briefest summary of my own personal obj ections to the J.PG. 
Report. I read that Report and the White Paper as o ne document. Whatever 
new there is in the former is not regarded at this end as an improvement, but 
quite the contrary, and it is the last straw which has broken the back of the 
Liberals. They had cherished the fond hope that the  Joint Memorandum signed 
under the leadership of the Aga Khan would receive the favourable 
consideration of the Joint Parliamentary Committee and that some, if not all, 
of its recommendations would be accepted by it. The  contemptuous dismissal 
of that Memorandum, beyond a mere courteous referen ce to it, has extorted 
the following remark from Sastri: "No, Sir, it is i mpossible for the Liberal Party 
to give an atom of co-operation. Co-operation with friends that wish well of us 
will be worthwhile, but co-operation with those who  have displayed the utmost 
distrust of us, who do not care for our views and d emands, and who enact a 
constitution in utter disregard of our wishes, what  is co-operation with them, I 
ask? I should call it a suicide." 
SUMMARY  
1. There is no suggestion in the J.PC. Report that the re should be a clause in 
the constitution providing for automatic advance to  complete 
independence or whatever the selected representativ es of India may 
decide to have. 
2. The contemplated constitution saddles India with a greater financial 
burden than she is bearing today without any prospe ct of economic or 
political betterment. 
3. At the centre, 80 per cent of the revenue is reserv ed out of any popular 
control. 
4. There is no popular control over the military, whet her as to policy or as to 
expenditure. 
5. There is no popular control over the currency or th e exchange of the 
country. 
6. Even the control over the 20 per cent proposed to b e left in the hands of 
the Finance Minister is subject to suspension by th e Governor-General. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 181  7. The provincial autonomy adumbrated in the Report is  purely nominal, as 
the Governors of the provinces have such wide power s that they can, 
whenever they choose, make an end of responsibility . It would be utterly 
wrong for any Britisher to infer from Colonial prec edents that these 
powers will be rarely, if ever, exercised. Indian p ast experience is quite 
the contrary. 
8. Responsible Ministers have no right even to transfe r any member, either of 
the All-India service or of the provincial service.  
9. The so-called autonomous legislatures will have no right to amend the 
Police Acts or even Police Regulations. 
10. British exploitation is made firmer than ever. 
The overwhelming effect of all the foregoing object ions considered together 
leaves an indelible impression upon the mind that, bad as the existing 
constitution is, the threatened new one will be inf initely worse. And what is 
more, if the threatened new constitution is passed,  it would be most difficult 
for years to come to undo the mischief that will be  done under it. 
To clinch the whole of the objections it is well to  remember that the 
constitution is sought to be imposed upon the peopl e who are already groaning 
under repression, such as, perhaps, has not been eq ualled in British Indian 
history. I am making this statement with the full s ense of my responsibility. I 
have a vivid memory of Jallianwala Bagh. I have rea d Kaye and Malleson's 
volumes on the Sepoy Revolt, as it has been called,  of 1857. Both make 
gruesome reading. Then, it was the naked sword. The  repression represents the 
gloved fist, but deadlier on that account. 
You may make whatever private use you wish of this letter. Nobody else is 
responsible for the opinion I have expressed in thi s. It has been shown to no 
friend beyond Mahadev, Mira and the typist. 
My writing may seem bitter; but I would like to war n you against putting any 
such interpretation upon it. The language represent s the truth and nothing but 
the truth as I have seen and felt it. It does not r epresent the whole truth. If I Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 182  had the time and the capacity to give you the whole  truth, the version would 
be even worse than it is. 
In spite, however, of the black picture that I see in it, I have no bitterness in 
me against a single Englishman. I believe that the English Ministers are pursuing 
what they believe to be an honest policy to be adop ted in the interest of India. 
It is their honest belief that British rule in Indi a has been, on the whole, for her 
good. They honestly believe that under it India has  advanced in economic 
progress and in political capacity, and that if Ind ia received the constitution 
that the vast number of the intelligentsia wish for , it would be bad day for her. 
It is difficult to combat an honest belief, however  erroneous it may be, as, in 
my opinion, it is in this case. But it would also b e wrong to be angry over an 
honest belief of any person. Whilst, therefore, I h old the strong opinion that I 
have expressed in the foregoing summary I would ask  you to believe me 
implicitly when I give you my assurance that, God h elping, I shall take no step 
in haste or in anger. 
I have retired from the Congress because, among oth er reasons, I want to 
impose silence upon myself, so far as it is humanly  possible, about the political 
measures of the Government. I want, in my voluntary  isolation, to explore the 
yet hidden possibilities of nonviolence. Every acti on I am taking, no matter in 
what department of life, is being taken with that e nd in view. The only axe 
that I have to grind on this earth is to try to und erstand the ultimate truth of 
things which, at present, I seem to see only dimly.  And after a laborious search 
I have come to the conclusion that if I am to see i t in any fulness I can only do 
so by non-violence in thought, word and deed. What this search will lead me 
to, I really do not know myself, nor have I the sli ghtest desire to see it before 
its time. For me, therefore, it is an incessant wai ting upon God to show me the 
next step, and I shall be grateful if any of you, f riends, can, with your full 
hearts, help me in that search. 
Yours sincerely, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
CARL HEATH , ESQ .,  LONDON From a photostat:  S.N.  22642 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 183   
73. TO CARL HEATH 
Sevagram, Wardha, 25-1-41  
DEAR  FRIEND , 
I have your very kind letter. In it there is no ack nowledgement of my cable 
reply to your cable referred to in your letter. My reply cabled on 27th October, 
1940 was as follows: 
"ALL EFFORT FAILED . INDIAN CONDITION WHOLLY DIFFERENT AND UNIQUE . PRESS GAGGED . HAVE 
STOPPED HARIJAN WEEKLIES , RESTRICTING CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS  OF 
NON -VIOLENCE ." 
Since then I have sent you the following cable in r eply to yours of the last week 
of December: 
"M.P.S. LETTER IGNORES FACTS , FRANK OPEN COMMUNICATION MADE IMPOSSIBLE . GOD 
BETWEEN US ALL ." 
I understand your argument. The Quaker attitude is individual. The Congress 
attitude has reference to a big organization. The C ongress as an institution 
based on non-violence cannot distinguish between on e species of violence and 
another. I do not think that the world will be any better if British arms are 
victorious over the German through the means employ ed by the latter. In the 
ultimate the question before the Congress is how to  do away with the use of 
arms as between man and man or nation and nation fo r the vindication of 
justice. The universal proposition is implicit in I ndia's fight for freedom through 
non-violence. 
You have rightly detected the flaw in the Congress attitude as reflected in the 
Poona resolution. That was when and why I had cease d to guide the Congress or 
take part in its deliberations. I withdrew my oppos ition when the Congress 
retraced its steps through the later resolution at Bombay. In my opinion it 
reflects no discredit on the Congress that it could  not abide by nonviolence in 
all circumstances. Its policy is truth and nonviole nce. Above all else, therefore, 
it must be honest. When, therefore, it found the Po ona demand flouted it came Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 184  round to its original position and invited me to le ad the battle of Civil 
Disobedience. I had no hesitation in responding as I knew that the mass mind in 
India was by instinct non-violent. You seem also to  have missed the fact that 
the Poona resolution would not have been passed at all but for my weakness of 
which I made ample confession in the pages of  Harijan.  
My experience is that the Congress has grown progre ssively, though slowly, in 
non-violence. And I would have proved an unworthy e xponent of nonviolence, if 
I had failed at the right moment to express it thro ugh the Congress. 
The Congress is as much anti-Nazism as anti- Imperi alism. If the Government 
had not thoughtlessly forbidden the anti-war activi ty of the Congress and had 
not proclaimed it as pro-Nazi, they could easily ha ve claimed the whole of India 
as anti-Nazi—both that part which followed the Cong ress non-violence and the 
other which believed in the use of violence. Had it  not done so, much 
bitterness would have been avoided and the world wo uld have profited by the 
lesson of tolerance and its moral opinion would hav e been on the side of 
Britain. It is never too late to mend one's error. 
Whether, however, the error is admitted and mended or not, the course of the 
Congress is clear. The conviction being purely mora l it should be pursued 
irrespective of the immediate result. A moral means  is almost an end in itself. 
Is not virtue its own reward? 
Yours sincerely, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
To 
FRIEND CARL HEATH ,  
WHITEWINGS , MANOR WAY ,  
GUILDFORD -SURREY  
From a photostat:  S.N. 22663 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 185   
74. TO M. A. JINNAH 
Segaon, February 3, 1938  
DEAR MR. JINNAH , 
Pandit Nehru told me yesterday that you were compla ining to Maulana Sahib 
about the absence of any reply from me to your lett er of the 5th November in 
reply to mine of the 19th October. The letter was r eceived by me when I was 
pronounced by the Doctors to be seriously ill at Ca lcutta. 
The letter was shown to me three days after its rec eipt. Had I thought it 
necessarily called for a reply even though I was il l I would have sent one. I read 
the letter and I still think there was nothing usef ul that I could have said in 
reply. But in a way I am glad you awaited a reply a nd here it is. Mr Kher told 
me definitely he had a private message from you. He  delivered it to me when I 
was alone. I could have sent you a verbal message i n reply but in order to give 
you a true picture of my mental state I sent you a short note. There was 
nothing to hide in it. But I did feel, as I still d o, that the way in which you used 
it came upon me as a painful surprise. 
Your complain of my silence. The reason for my sile nce is literally and truly in 
my note. Believe me, the moment I can do something that can bring the two 
communities together nothing in the world can preve nt me from so doing. You 
seem to deny that your speech was declaration of wa r, but your later 
pronouncements too confirmed my first impression. H ow can I prove what is a 
matter of feeling? In your speech I miss the old Na tionalist when in 1915 I 
returned from my self- imposed exile in South Afric a. Everybody spoke of you as 
one of the staunchest nationalists and the hope of both the Hindus and 
Mussalmans. Are you still the same Mr Jinnah? 
If you say you are, in spite of your speeches, I sh all accept your word. 
Lastly, you want me to come forward with some propo sal. What proposal can I 
make except to ask you on bended knees to be what I  thought you were ? But Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 186  the proposals to form the basis of unity between th e two communities surely 
have got to come from you. 
This again is not for publication but for your eyes ; it is the one of a friend, not 
of an opponent. 
Yours sincerely,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi,  pp. 108-09 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 187   
75. TO M. A. JINNAH 
September 22, 1944  
DEAR  QAID -I-AZAM , 
Your letter of yesterday (21st inst.) so disturbed me that I thought I would 
postpone my reply till after we had met at the usua l time. Though I made no 
advance at our meeting, I think I see somewhat clea rly what you are driving at. 
The more I think about the two nations theory the m ore alarming it appears to 
be. The book recommended by you gives me no help. I t contains half- truths 
and its conclusions or inferences are unwarranted. I am unable to accept the 
proposition that the Muslims of India are a nation distinct from the rest of the 
inhabitants of India. Mere assertion is no proof. T he consequences of accepting 
such a proposition are dangerous in the extreme. On ce the principle is admitted 
there would be no limit to claims for cutting up In dia into numerous divisions 
which would spell India's ruin. I have therefore su ggested a way out. Let it be a 
partition as between two brothers, if a division th ere must be. 
You seem to be averse to a plebiscite. In spite of the admitted importance of 
the League, there must be clear proof that the peop le affected desire 
partition. In my opinion, all the people inhabiting  the area ought to express 
their opinion specifically on this single issue of division. Adult suffrage is the 
best method, but I would accept any other equivalen t. 
You summarily reject the idea of common interest be tween the two arms. I can 
be no willing party to a division which does not pr ovide for the simultaneous 
safeguarding of common interests such as defence, f oreign affairs and the like. 
There will be no feeling of security by the people of India without a recognition 
of the natural and mutual obligations arising out o f physical contiguity. 
Your letter shows a wide divergence of opinion and outlook between us. Thus 
you adhere to the opinion often expressed by you th at the August 1942 
resolution is "inimical to the ideals and demands o f Muslim India". There is no 
proof for this sweeping statement. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 188  We seem to be moving in a circle. I have made a sug gestion. If we are bent on 
agreeing, as I hope we are, let us call in a third party or parties to guide or 
even arbitrate between us. 
Yours sincerely, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Gandhi-Jinnah Talks,  p. 22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 189   
76. TO M. A. JINNAH 
September 23, 1944  
DEAR QAID -I-AZAM , 
Last evening's talk has left a bad taste in the mou th. Our talks and our 
correspondence seem to run in parallel lines and ne ver touch one another. We 
reached the breaking point last evening but, thank God, we were unwilling to 
part. We resumed discussion and suspended it in ord er to allow me to keep my 
time for the evening public prayer. 
In order that all possible chance of making any mis take in a matter of this great 
importance may be removed, I would like you to give  me in writing what 
precisely on your part you would want me to put my signature to. 
I adhere to my suggestion that we may call in some outside assistance to help 
us at this stage. 
Yours sincerely,  
M. K.  GANDHI  
Gandhi-Jinnah Talks,  p. 25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 190   
76A. FROM M. A. JINNAH 
September 23, 1944  
DEAR MR. GANDHI , 
I am in receipt of your letter of September 23. May  I refer you to my letter to 
today's date which I sent to you in reply to yours of September 22? I have 
nothing new or fresh to add, but I may say that it is not a case of your being 
asked to put your signature as representing anybody  till you clothe yourself 
with representing capacity and are vested with auth ority. We stand by, as I 
have already said, the basic and fundamental princi ples embodied in the Lahore 
resolution of March 1940. I appeal to you once more  to revise your policy and 
programme, as the future of this subcontinent and t he welfare of the peoples 
of India demand that you should face realities. 
Yours sincerely,  
M. A. JLNNAH  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 191   
77. TO M. A. JINNAH 
September 24, 1944  
DEAR QAID -I-AZAM , 
I have your two letters of September 23 in reply to  my letters of the 22nd and 
23rd. 
With your assistance, I am exploring the possibilit ies of reaching an agreement, 
so that the claim embodied in the Muslim League res olution of Lahore may be 
reasonably satisfied. You must therefore have no ap prehensions that the August 
resolution will stand in the way of our reaching an  agreement. That resolution 
dealt with the question of India as against Britain  and it cannot stand in the 
way of our settlement. 
I proceed on the assumption that India is not to be  regarded as two or more 
nations but as one family consisting of many member s of whom the Muslims 
living in the north-west zones, i.e. Baluchistan, S ind, North- West Frontier 
Province and that part of the Punjab where they are  in absolute majority over 
all the other elements and in parts of Bengal and A ssam where they are in 
absolute majority, desire to live in separation fro m the rest of India. 
Differing from you on the general basis, I can yet recommend to the Congress 
and the country the acceptance of the claim for sep aration contained in the 
Muslim League resolution of Lahore of 1940, on my b asis and on the following 
terms: 
The areas should be demarcated by a Commission appr oved by the Congress 
and the League. The wishes of the inhabitants of th e areas demarcated should 
be ascertained through the votes of the adult popul ation of the areas or 
through some equivalent method. 
If the vote is in favour of separation it shall be agreed that these areas shall 
form a separate State as soon as possible after Ind ia is free from foreign Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 192  domination and can therefore be constituted into tw o sovereign independent 
States. 
There shall be a treaty of separation which should also provide for the efficient 
and satisfactory administration of foreign affairs,  defence, internal 
communications, customs, commerce and the like, whi ch must necessarily 
continue to be matters of common interest between t he contracting parties. 
The treaty shall also contain terms for safeguardin g the rights of minorities in 
the two States. 
Immediately on the acceptance of this agreement by the Congress and the 
League the two shall decide upon a common course of  action for the 
attainment of independence of India. 
The League will however be free to remain out of an y direct action to which 
the Congress may resort and in which the League may  not be willing to 
participate. 
If you do not agree to these terms, could you let m e know in precise terms 
what you would have me to accept in terms of the La hore resolution and bind 
myself to recommend to the Congress? If you could k indly do this, I shall be 
able to see, apart from the difference in approach,  what definite terms I can 
agree to. In your letter of September 23, you refer  to "the basic and 
fundamental principles embodied in the Lahore resol ution" and ask me to 
accept them. 
Surely this is unnecessary when, as I feel, I have accepted the concrete 
consequence that should follow from such acceptance . 
Yours sincerely, 
M. K.  GANDHI  
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 193   
78. FROM SUBHASH CHANDRA BOSE 
Jealgora, March 31, 1939  
MY DEAR MAHATMAJI , 
... I shall be grateful if you could let me know yo ur reaction to Pant's 
resolution. You are in this advantageous position t hat you can take a 
dispassionate view of things—provided, of course, y ou get to know the whole 
story of Tripuri. Judging from the papers most of t he people who have seen you 
so far seem to belong to one school—namely, those w ho supported Pant's 
resolution. But that does not matter. You can easil y assess things at their 
proper value, regardless of the persons who visit y ou. 
You can easily imagine my own view of Pant's resolu tion. But my personal 
feelings do not matter so much. In public life we h ave often to subordinate 
personal feelings to public considerations. As I ha ve said in a previous letter, 
whatever one may think of Pant's resolution from th e purely constitutional 
point of view, since it has been passed by the Cong ress, I feel bound by it. Now 
do you regard that resolution as one of no- confide nce in me and do you feel 
that I should resign in consequence thereof? Your v iew in this matter will 
influence me considerably. 
* * * 
There is one other matter to which I shall refer in  this letter—that is the 
question of our programme..... For months I have be en telling friends that 
there would be a crisis in Europe in spring which w ould continue till summer. 
The international situation as well as our own posi tion at home convinced me 
nearly 8 months ago that the time had come for us t o force the issue of Purna 
Swaraj..... For these and other reasons we should l ose no time in placing our 
National Demand before the British Government in th e form of an 
ultimatum..... If you do so and prepare for the com ing struggle simultaneously I 
am sure that we shall be able to win Purna Swaraj v ery soon. The British 
Government will either respond to our demand withou t a fight—or, if the Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 194  struggle does take place in our present circumstanc es it cannot be a long drawn 
one. I am so confident and so optimistic on this po int that I feel that if we take 
courage in both hands and go ahead we shall have Sw araj inside of 18 months 
at the most. 
I feel so strongly on this point that I am prepared  to make any sacrifice in this 
connection. If you take up the struggle, I shall mo st gladly help you to the best 
of my ability. If you feel that the Congress will b e able to fight better with 
another President I shall gladly step aside. If you  feel that the Congress will be 
able to fight more effectively with a Working Commi ttee of your choice, I shall 
gladly fall in line with your wishes. All that I wa nt is that you and the Congress 
should in this critical hour stand up and resume th e struggle for Swaraj. If self-
effacement will further the national cause, I assur e you most solemnly that I 
am prepared to efface myself completely. I think I love my country sufficiently 
to be able to do this. 
Pardon me for saying that the way you have been rec ently conducting the 
States People's struggle does not appeal to me. 
* * * 
I may say that many people like myself cannot enthu se over the terms of the 
Rajkot settlement. We, as well as the Nationalist P ress have called it a great 
victory—but how much have we gained ? Sir Maurice G wyer is neither our man 
nor is he an independent agent. He is a Government man. What point is there 
in making him the umpire? We are hoping that, his v erdict will be in our favour. 
But supposing he declares against us, what will be our position? My letter has 
become too long, so I must stop here. If I have sai d anything which appears to 
you to be erroneous, I hope you will pardon me. I k now you always like people 
to speak frankly and openly. That is what has embol dened me in writing this 
frank and long letter. 
With respectful Pranams, 
Yours affectionately, 
 SUBHASH  
Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose,  pp. 60-62 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 195   
78A. TO SUBHASH CHANDRA BOSE 
Birla House, New Delhi, 2-4-1939  
MY DEAR  SUBHASH , 
I have yours of 31st March as also the previous one . You are quite frank and I 
like your letters for the clear enunciation of your  views. 
The views you express seem to me to be so diametric ally opposed to those of 
the others and my own that I do not see any possibi lity of bridging them. I think 
that such school of thought should be able to put f orth its views before the 
country without any mixture. And if this is honestl y done, I do not see why 
there should be any bitterness ending in civil war.  
What is wrong is not the differences between us but  loss of mutual respect and 
trust. This will be remedied by time which is the b est healer. If there is real 
non-violence in us, there can be no civil war much less bitterness. 
Taking all things into consideration, I am of opini on that you should at once 
form your own Cabinet fully representing your views . Formulate your 
programme definitely and put it before the forthcom ing A.I.C.C. If the 
Committee accepts the programme all will be plain- sailing and you should be 
enabled to prosecute it unhampered by the minority.  If on the other hand your 
programme is not accepted you should resign and let  the Committee choose its 
President. And you will be free to educate the coun try along your own lines. I 
tender this advice irrespective of Pandit Pant's re solution. 
My prestige does not count. It has an independent v alue of its own. When my 
motive is suspected or my policy or programme rejec ted by the country, the 
prestige must go. India will rise and fall by the q uality of the sum-total of her 
many millions. Individuals, however high they may b e, are of no account except 
in so far as they represent the many millions. Ther efore let us rule it out of 
consideration. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 196  I wholly dissent from your view that the country ha s been never so non-violent 
as now. I smell violence in the air I breath. But t he violence has put on a subtle 
form. Our mutual distrust is a bad form of violence . The widening gulf between 
Hindus and Mussalmans points to the same thing. I c an give further illustrations. 
We seem to differ as to the amount of corruption in  the Congress. My 
impression is that it is on the increase. I have be en pleading for the past many 
months for a thorough scrutiny. 
In these circumstances I see no atmosphere of nonvi olent mass action. An 
ultimatum without effective sanction is worse than useless. 
But as I have told you I am an old man perhaps grow ing timid and over-cautious 
and you have youth before you and reckless optimism  born of youth. I hope you 
are right. I am wrong. I have the firm belief that the Congress as it is today 
cannot deliver the goods, cannot offer civil disobe dience worth the name. 
Therefore if your prognosis is right, I am a back n umber and played out as the 
generalissimo of Satyagraha. 
I am glad you have mentioned the little Rajkot affa ir. It brings into prominent 
relief the different angles from which we look at t hings. I have nothing to 
repent of in the steps I have taken in connection w ith it. I feel that it has great 
national importance. I have not stopped civil disob edience in the other States 
for the sake of Rajkot. But Rajkot opened my eyes. It showed me the way. I am 
not in Delhi for my health. I am reluctantly in Del hi awaiting the Chief Justice's 
decision. I hold it to be my duty to be in Delhi ti ll the steps to be taken in due 
fulfilment of the Viceroy's declaration in his last  wire to me are finally taken. I 
may not run any risk. If I invited the Paramount Po wer to do its duty, I was 
bound to be in Delhi to see that the duty was fully  performed. I saw nothing 
wrong in the Chief Justice being appointed the inte rpreter of the document 
whose meaning was put in doubt by the Thakor Sahib.  By the way, Sir Maurice 
will examine the document not in his capacity as Ch ief Justice but as a trained 
jurist trusted by the Viceroy. By accepting the Vic eroy's nominee as Judge, I 
fancy I have shown both wisdom and grace and what i s more important I have 
increased the Viceregal responsibility in the matte r. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 197  Though we have discussed sharp differences of opini on between us, I-am quite 
sure that our private relations will not suffer in the least. If they are from the 
heart, as I believe they are, they will bear the st rain of these differences. 
Love, BAPU  
Netaji Subhash Chandra Rose , pp. 62-65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 198   
79. T0 HERR HITLER 
As  at Wardha, C.P., India, 23-7-'39  
DEAR  FRIEND , 
Friends have been urging me to write to you for the  sake of humanity. But I 
have resisted their request, because of the feeling  that any letter from me 
would be an impertinence. Something tells me that I  must not calculate and 
that I must make my appeal for whatever it may be w orth. 
It is quite clear that you are today the one person  in the world who can prevent 
a war which may reduce humanity to the savage state . Must you pay that price 
for an object however worthy it may appear to you t o be? Will you listen to the 
appeal of one who has deliberately shunned the meth od of war not without 
considerable success? Any way I anticipate your for giveness, if I have erred in 
writing to you. 
I remain,  
Your sincere friend,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
HERR HITLER , 
BERLIN , 
GERMANY  
From a photostat:  S.N.  23126 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 199   
80. TO EVERY BRITON 
(On July 3, 1940, Gandhiji issued his famous appeal ) 
 To  EVERY BRITON , 
In 1896, I addressed an appeal to every Briton in S outh Africa on behalf of my 
countrymen who had gone there as labourers or trade rs and their assistants. It 
had its effect. However important it was from my vi ewpoint, the cause which I 
pleaded then was insignificant compared with the ca use which prompts this 
appeal. I appeal to every Briton, wherever he may b e now, to accept the 
method of non-violence instead of that of war for t he adjustment of the 
relations between nations and other matters. Your s tatesmen have declared 
that this is a war on behalf of democracy. There ar e many other reasons given 
in justification. You know them all by heart. I sug gest that at the end of the 
war, whichever way it ends, there will be no democr acy left to represent 
democracy. This war has descended upon mankind as a  curse and as a warning. 
It is a curse, inasmuch as it is brutalizing man on  a scale hitherto unknown. All 
distinctions between combatants and non-combatants have been abolished. No 
one and nothing is to be spared. Lying has been red uced to an art. Britain was 
to defend small nationalities. One by one they have  vanished, at least for the 
time being. It also is a warning. It is a warning t hat, if nobody reads the writing 
on the wall, man will be reduced to the state of th e beast, whom he is shaming 
by his manners. I read the writing, when the hostil ities broke out. But I had not 
the courage to say the word. God has given me the c ourage to say it before it is 
too late. 
I appeal for the cessation of hostilities, not beca use you are too exhausted to 
fight, but because war is bad in essence. You want to kill Nazism. You will 
never kill it by its indifferent adoption. Your sol diers are doing the same work 
of destruction as the Germans. The only difference is that perhaps yours are 
not as thorough as that of the Germans. And if that  be so, yours will soon 
acquire the same thoroughness as theirs, if not muc h greater. On no other 
condition can you win this war. In other words, you  will have to be more Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 200  ruthless than the Nazis. No cause, however just, ca n warrant the indiscriminate 
slaughter that is going on minute by minute. I sugg est that a cause that 
demands the inhumanities that are being perpetrated  today cannot be called 
just. 
I do not want Britain to be defeated, nor do I want  her to be victorious in a trial 
of brute strength, whether expressed through the mu scle or brain. Your 
muscular bravery is an established fact. Need you d emonstrate that your brain 
is also as unrivalled in destructive power as your muscle ? I hope you do not 
wish to enter into such an undignified competition with the Nazis. I venture to 
present you with a nobler and braver way, worthy of  the bravest soldier. I want 
you to fight Nazism without arms, or, if I am to re tain the military terminology, 
with non-violent arms. I would like you to lay down  the arms you have, as being 
useless for saving you or humanity. You will invite  Herr Hitler and Signor 
Mussolini to take what they want of the countries y ou call your possessions. Let 
them take possession of your beautiful island, with  your many beautiful 
buildings. You will give all these, but neither you r souls, nor your minds. If 
these gentlemen choose to occupy your homes, you wi ll vacate them. If they do 
not give you free passage out, you will allow yours elf, man, woman and child, 
to be slaughtered, but you will refuse to owe alleg iance to them. 
This process or this method, which I have called no n-violent non-co-operation, 
is not without considerable success in its use in I ndia. Your representatives in 
India may deny my claim. If they do, I shall feel s orry for them. They may tell 
you that our non-co-operation was not wholly non-vi olent, that it was born of 
hatred. If they give that testimony, I will not den y it. Had it been wholly non-
violent, if all non-co-operators had been filled wi th goodwill towards you, I 
make bold to say that you who are India's masters w ould have become her 
pupils and, with much greater skill than we have, p erfected this matchless 
weapons and met the German and Italian friends' men ace with it. Indeed the 
history of Europe during the past few months would then have been written 
differently and Europe would have been spared seas of innocent blood, the 
rape of so many small nations, and the orgy of hatr ed. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 201  This is no appeal made by a man who does not know h is business. I have been 
practising with scientific precision non-violence a nd its possibilities for an 
unbroken period of over fifty years. I have applied  it in every walk of life, 
domestic and institutional, economic and political.  I know of no single case in 
which it has failed. Where it has seemed sometimes to have failed, I have 
ascribed it to my imperfections. I claim no perfect ion for myself. But I do claim 
to be a passionate seeker after Truth, which is but  another name for God. In 
the course of that search, discovery of non-violenc e came to me. Its spread is 
my life mission. I have no interest in living excep t for the prosecution of that 
mission. 
I claim to have been a life-long and wholly disinte rested friend of the British 
people. At one time I used to be also a lover of yo ur empire. I thought that it 
was doing good to India. When I saw that in the nat ure of things it could do no 
good, I used, and am still using, the non-violent m ethod to fight imperialism. 
Whatever the ultimate fate of my country, my love f or you remains, and will 
remain, undiminished. My nonviolence demands univer sal love, and you are not 
a small part of it. It is that love which has promp ted my appeal to you. 
May God give power to every word of mine. In His na me, I began to write this, 
and in His name I close it. May your statesmen have  the wisdom and the 
courage to respond to my appeal. I am telling His E xcellency the Viceroy that 
my services are at the disposal of His Majesty's Go vernment should they 
consider them of any practical use in advancing the  object of my appeal. 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Mahatma , Vol. V PP- 364-66 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 202   
81. TO EVERY BRITON 
When I had just begun my public career in South Afr ica, I wrote "An Open Letter 
to Every Briton in South Africa". It had its effect . I feel that I should repeat the 
example at this critical juncture in the history of  the world. This time my 
appeal must be to every Briton in the world. He may  be nobody in the counsels 
of his nation. But in the empire of non-violence ev ery true thought counts, 
every true voice has its full value.  Vox populi vox dei  is not a copy-book maxim. 
It is an expression of the solid experience of mank ind. But it has one 
qualification. Its truth is confined to the field o f non-violence. Violence can for 
the moment completely frustrate a people's voice. B ut since I work on the field 
of non-violence only, every true thought expressed or unexpressed counts for 
me. 
I ask every Briton to support me in my appeal to th e British at this very hour to 
retire from every Asiatic and African possession an d at least from India. That 
step is essential for the safety of the world and f or the destruction of Nazism 
and Fascism. In this I include Japan's 'ism' also. It is a good copy of the two. 
Acceptance of my appeal will confound all the milit ary plans of all the Axis 
Powers and even of the military advisers of Great B ritain. 
If my appeal goes home, I am sure the cost of Briti sh interests in India and 
Africa would be nothing compared to the present eve r-growing cost of the war 
to Britain. And when one puts morals in the scales,  there is nothing but gain to 
Britain, India and the world. 
Though I ask for their withdrawal from Asia and Afr ica, let me confine myself 
for the moment to India. British statesmen talk gli bly of India's participation in 
the war. Now India was never even formally consulte d on the declaration of 
war. Why should it be? India does not belong to Ind ians. It belongs to the 
British. It has been even called a British possessi on. The British practically do 
with it as they like. They make me—an all- war resi ster—pay a war tax in a 
variety of ways. Thus I pay two pice as war tax on every letter I post, one pice 
on every postcard, and two annas on every wire I se nd. This is the lightest side Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 203  of the dismal picture. But it shows British ingenui ty If I was a student of 
economics, I could produce startling figures as to what India has been made to 
pay towards the war apart from what are miscalled v oluntary contributions. No 
contribution made to a conqueror can be truly descr ibed as voluntary. What a 
conqueror the Briton makes! He is well saddled in h is seat. I do not exaggerate 
when I say that a whisper of his wish is promptly a nswered in India. Britain 
may, therefore, be said to be at perpetual war with  India which she holds by 
right of conquest and through an army of occupation . How does India profit by 
this enforced participation in Britain's war? The b ravery of Indian soldiers 
profits India nothing. 
Before the Japanese menace overtakes India, India's  homesteads are being 
occupied by British troops—Indian and non-Indian. T he dwellers are summarily 
ejected and expected to shift for themselves. They are paid a paltry vacating 
expense which carries them nowhere. Their occupatio n is gone. They have to 
build their cottages and search for their livelihoo d. These people do not vacate 
out of a spirit of patriotism. When this incident w as referred to me a few days 
ago, I wrote in these columns that the dispossessed  people should be asked to 
bear their lot with resignation. But my co-workers protested and invited me to 
go to the evacuees and console them myself or send someone to perform the 
impossible task. They were right. These poor people  should never have been 
treated as they were. They should have been lodged suitably at the same time 
that they were asked to vacate. 
People in East Bengal may almost be regarded as amp hibious. They live partly 
on land and partly on the waters of the rivers. The y have light canoes which 
enable them to go from place to place. For fear of the Japanese using the 
canoes the people have been called upon to surrende r them. For a Bengali to 
part with his canoe, is almost like parting with hi s life. So those who take away 
his canoe he regards as his enemy. 
Great Britain has to win the war. Need she do so at  India's expense? Should she 
do so? Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 204  But I have something more to add to this sad chapte r. The falsity that envelops 
Indian life is suffocating. Almost every Indian you  meet is discontented. But he 
will not" own it publicly. The Government employees  high and low are no 
exception. I am not giving hearsay evidence. Many B ritish officials know this. 
But they have evolved the art of taking work from s uch elements. This all- 
pervading distrust and falsity make life worthless unless one resists it with one's 
whole soul. 
You may refuse to believe all I say. Of course I sh all be contradicted. I shall 
survive the contradictions. 
I have stated what I believe to be the truth, the w hole truth and nothing but 
the truth. 
My people may or may not approve of this loud think ing. I have consulted 
nobody. This appeal is being written during my sile nce day. I am just now 
concerned with Britain's action. When slavery was a bolished in America many 
slaves protested, some even wept. But protests and tears notwithstanding, 
slavery was abolished in law. But the abolition was  the result of a bloody war 
between the South and the North; and so though the Negro's lot is considerably 
better than before, he still remains the outcaste o f high society. I am asking for 
something much higher. I ask for a bloodless end of  an unnatural domination 
and for a new era, even though there may be protest s and wailing from some of 
us. 
M. K.  GANDHI  
BOMBAY , 11-5-'42  
Harijan,  17-5-1942 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 205   
82. TO GENERALISSIMO CHIANG KAI-SHEK. 
 Sevagram, June, 14, 1942  
DEAR GENERALISSIMO  
I can never forget the five hours' close contact I had with you and your noble 
wife in Calcutta. I had always felt drawn towards y ou in your fight for freedom, 
and that contact and our conversation brought China  and her problems still 
nearer to me. Long ago, between 1905 and 1913, when  I was in South Africa, I 
was in constant touch with the small Chinese colony  in Johannesburg. I knew 
them first as clients and then as comrades in the I ndian passive resistance 
struggle in South Africa. I came in touch with them  in Mauritius also. I learnt 
then to admire their thrift, industry, resourcefuln ess and internal unity. Later 
in India I had a very fine Chinese friend living wi th me for a few years and we 
all learnt to like him. 
I have thus felt greatly attracted towards your gre at country and, in common 
with my countrymen, our sympathy has gone out to yo u in your terrible 
struggle. Our mutual friend, Jawaharlal Nehru, whos e love of China is only 
excelled, if at all by his love of his own country,  has kept us in intimate touch 
with the developments of the Chinese struggle. 
Because of this feeling I have towards China and my  earnest desire that our two 
great countries should come closer to one another a nd co-operate to their 
mutual advantage, I am anxious to explain to you th at my appeal to the British 
power to withdraw from India is not meant in any sh ape or form to weaken 
India's defence against the Japanese or embarrass y ou in your struggle. India 
must not submit to any aggressor or invader and mus t resist him. I would not be 
guilty of purchasing the freedom of my country at t he cost of your country's 
freedom. That problem does not arise before me as I  am cleaar that India 
cannot gain her freedom in this way, and a Japanese  domination of either India 
or China would be equally injurious to the other co untry and to world peace. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 206  That domination must therefore be prevented and I s hould like India to play her 
natural and rightful part in this. 
I feel India cannot do so while she is in bondage. India has been a helpless 
witness of the withdrawals from Malaya, Singapore a nd Burma. We must learn 
the lesson from these tragic events and prevent by all means at our disposal a 
repetition of what befell these unfortunate countri es. But unless we are free 
we can do nothing to prevent it, and the same proce ss might well occur again, 
crippling India and China disastrously. I do not wa nt a repetition of this tragic 
tale of woe. 
Our proferred help has repeatedly been rejected by the British Government and 
the recent failure of the Cripps Mission has left a  deep wound which is still 
running. Out of that anguish has come the cry for i mmediate withdrawal of 
British power so that India can look after herself and help China to the best of 
her ability. 
I have told you of my faith in non-violence and of my belief in the effectiveness 
of this method if the whole nation could turn to it . That faith in it is as firm as 
ever. But I realize that India today as a whole has  not that faith and belief, and 
the Government in free India would be formed from t he various elements 
composing the nation. 
Today the whole of India is impotent and feels frus trated. The Indian Army 
consists largely of people who have joined up becau se of economic pressure. 
They have no feeling of a cause to fight for, and i n no sense are they a national 
army. Those of us who would fight for a cause, for India and China, with armed 
forces or with non-violence, cannot under the forei gn heel, function as they 
want to. And yet our people know for certain that I ndia free can play even a 
decisive part not only on her own behalf, but also on behalf of China and world 
peace. Many like me feel that it is not proper or m anly to remain in this 
helpless state and allow events to overwhelm us whe n a way to effective action 
can be opened to us. They feel, therefore, that eve ry possible effort should be 
made to ensure independence and that freedom of act ion which is so urgently Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 207  needed. This is the origin of my appeal to the Brit ish power to end immediately 
the unnatural connection between Britain and India.  
Unless we make the effort there is grave danger of public feeling in India going 
into wrong and harmful channels. There is every lik elihood of subterranean 
sympathy for Japan growing simply in order to weake n and oust British 
authority in India. This feeling may take the place  of robust confidence in our 
ability never to look to outsiders for help in winn ing our freedom. We have to 
learn self-reliance and develop the strength to wor k out our own salvation. This 
is only possible if we make a determined effort to free ourselves from bondage. 
That freedom has become a present necessity to enab le us to take our due 
place among the free nations of the world. 
To make it perfectly clear that we want to prevent in every way Japanese 
aggression, I would personally agree that the Allie d Powers might, under treaty 
with us, keep their armed forces in India and use t he country as a base for 
operations against the threatened Japanese attack. 
I need hardly give you my assurance that, as the au thor of the new move in 
India, I shall take no hasty action. And whatever a ction I may recommend will 
be governed by the consideration that it should not  injure China, or encourage 
Japanese aggression in India or China. I am trying to enlist world opinion in 
favour of a proposition which to me appears self-pr oved and which must lead to 
the strengthening of India's and China's defence. I  am also educating public 
opinion in India and conferring with my colleagues.  Needless to say, any move-
ment against the British Government with which I ma y be connected will be 
essentially non-violent. I am straining every nerve  to avoid a conflict with 
British authority. But if in the vindication of the  freedom which has become an 
immediate desideratum, this becomes inevitable, I s hall not hesitate to run any 
risk however great. 
Very soon you will have completed five years of war  against Japanese 
aggression and invasion and all the sorrow and mise ry that these have brought 
to China. My heart goes out to the people of China in deep sympathy and in 
admiration for their heroic struggle and endless sa crifices in the cause of their Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 208  country's freedom and integrity against tremendous odds. I am convinced that 
this heroism and sacrifice cannot be in vain; they must bear fruit. To you, the 
Madame Chiang and to the great people of China, I s end my earnest and sincere 
wishes for your success. I look forward to the day when a free India and free 
China will co-operate together in friendship and br otherhood for their own good 
and for the good of Asia and the world. 
In anticipation of your permission, I am taking lib erty of publishing 1 this letter 
in  Harijan.  
Yours sincerely, M.  K.  GANDHI  
Non-Violence in Peace &War, Vol. I,  pp. 424-27 
 
1 Its publication v/m withheld at that lime. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 209   
83. TO EVERY JAPANESE 
I must confess at the outset that, though I have no  ill-will against you, I 
intensely dislike your attack upon China. From your  lofty height you have 
descended to imperial ambition. You will fail to re alize that ambition and may 
become the authors of the dismemberment of Asia, th us unwittingly preventing 
world federation and brotherhood without which ther e can be no hope for 
humanity. 
Ever since I was a lad of eighteen studying in Lond on over fifty years ago, I 
learnt, through the writings of the late Sir Edwin Arnold, to prize the many 
excellent qualities of your nation. I was thrilled when in South Africa I learnt of 
your brilliant victory over Russian arms. After my return to India from South 
Africa in 1915, I came in close touch with Japanese  monks who lived as 
members of our Ashram from time to time. One of the m became a valuable 
member of the Ashram in Sevagram, and his applicati on to duty, his dignified 
bearing, his unfailing devotion to daily worship, a ffability, unruffledness under 
varying circumstances, and his natural smile which was positive evidence of his 
inner peace had endeared him to all of us. And now that owing to your 
declaration of war against Great Britain he has bee n taken away from us, we 
miss him as a dear coworker. He has left behind him  as a memory his daily 
prayer and his little drum, to the accompaniment of  which we open our 
morning and evening prayers. 
In the background of these pleasant recollections I  grieve deeply as I 
contemplate what appears to me to be your unprovoke d attack against China 
and, if reports are to be believed, your merciless devastation of that great and 
ancient land. 
It was a worthy ambition of yours to take equal ran k with the Great Powers of 
the world. Your aggression against China and your a lliance with the Axis Powers 
was surely an unwarranted excess of that ambition. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 210  I should have thought that you would be proud of th e fact that that great and 
ancient people, whose old classical literature you have adopted as your own, 
are your neighbours. Your understanding of one anot her's history, tradition, 
literature should bind you as friends rather than m ake you the enemies you are 
today. 
If I was a free man, and if you allowed me to come to your country, frail though 
I am, I would not mind risking my health, may be my  life, to come to your 
country to plead with you to desist from the wrong you are doing to China and 
the world and therefore to yourself. 
But I enjoy no such freedom. And we are in the uniq ue position of having to 
resist imperialism that we detest no less than your s and Nazism. Our resistance 
to it does not mean harm to the British people. We seek to convert them. Ours 
is an unarmed revolt against British rule. An impor tant party in the country is 
engaged in a deadly but friendly quarrel with the f oreign rulers. 
But in this they need no aid from foreign Powers. Y ou have been gravely 
misinformed, as I know you are, that we have chosen  this particular moment to 
embarrass the Allies when your attack against India  is imminent. If we wanted 
to turn Britain's difficulty into our opportunity w e should have done it as soon 
as the war broke out nearly three years ago. 
Our movement demanding the withdrawal of the Britis h Power from India 
should in no way be misunderstood. In fact, if we a re to believe your reported 
anxiety for the independence of India, a recognitio n of that independence by 
Britain should leave you no excuse for any attack o n India. Moreover, the 
reported profession sorts ill with your ruthless ag gression against China. 
I would ask you to make no mistake about the fact t hat you will be sadly 
disillusioned if you believe that you will receive a willing welcome from India. 
The end and aim of the movement for British withdra wal is to prepare India, by 
making her free for resisting all militarist and im perialist ambition, whether it 
is called British Imperialism, German Nazism, or yo ur pattern. If we do not, we 
shall have been ignoble spectators of the militariz ation of the world in spite of 
your belief that in non-violence we have the only s olvent of the militarist spirit Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 211  and ambition. Personally I fear that without declar ing the independence of 
India the Allied Powers will not be able to beat th e Axis combination which has 
raised violence to the dignity of a religion. The A llies cannot beat you and your 
partners unless they beat you in your ruthless and skilled warfare. If they copy 
it their declaration that they will save the world for democracy and individual 
freedom must come to naught. I feel that they can o nly gain strength to avoid 
copying your ruthlessness by declaring and recogniz ing now the freedom of 
India, and turning sullen India's forced cooperatio n into freed India's voluntary 
co-operation. 
To Britain and the Allies we have appealed in the n ame of justice, in proof of 
their professions, and in their own self-interest. To you I appeal in the name of 
humanity. It is a marvel to me that you do not see that ruthless warfare is 
nobody's monopoly. If not the Allies some other Pow er will certainly improve 
upon your method and beat you with your own weapon.  Even if you win you will 
leave no legacy to your people of which they would feel proud. They cannot 
take pride in a recital of cruel deeds however skil lfully achieved. 
Even if you win it will not prove that you were in the right, it will only prove 
that your power of destruction was greater. This ap plies obviously to the Allies 
too, unless they perform now the just and righteous  act of freeing India as an 
earnest and promise of similarly freeing all other subject peoples in Asia and 
Africa. 
Our appeal to Britain is coupled with the offer of Free India's willingness to let 
the Allies retain their troops in India. The offer is made in order to prove that 
we do not in any way mean to harm the Allied cause,  and in order to prevent 
you from being misled into feeling that you have bu t to step into the country 
that Britain has vacated. Needless to repeat that i f you cherish any such idea 
and will carry it out, we will not fail in resistin g you with all the might that our 
country can muster. I address this appeal to you in  the hope that our movement 
may even influence you and your partners in the rig ht direction and deflect you 
and them from the course which is bound to end in y our moral ruin and the 
reduction of human beings to robots. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 212  The hope of your response to my appeal is much fain ter than that of response 
from Britain. I know that the British are not devoi d of a sense of justice and 
they know me. I do not know you enough to be able t o judge. All I have read 
tells me that you listen to no appeal but to the sw ord. How I wish that you are 
cruelly misrepresented and that I shall touch the r ight chord in your heart! Any 
way I have an undying faith in the responsiveness o f human nature. On the 
strength of that faith I have conceived the impendi ng movement in India, and it 
is that faith which has prompted this appeal to you . 
Sevagram,              I am,  
18-7-1942       Your friend and well-wisher,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Harijan,  26-7-1942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 213   
84. TO AMERICAN FRIENDS 
DEAR  FRIENDS , 
As I am supposed to be the spirit behind the much d iscussed and equally well 
abused resolution of the Working Committee of the I ndian National Congress on 
Independence, it has become necessary for me to exp lain my position. For I am 
not unknown to you. I have in America perhaps the l argest number of friends in 
the West—not even excepting Great Britain. British friends knowing me 
personally are more discerning than the American. I n America I suffer from the 
well-known malady called hero worship. Good Dr Holm es, until recently of the 
Unity Church of New York, without knowing me person ally became my 
advertising agent. Some of the nice things he said about me I never knew 
myself. So I receive often embarrassing letters fro m America expecting me to 
perform miracles. Dr Holmes was followed much later  by the late Bishop Fisher 
who knew me personally in India. He very nearly dra gged me to America but 
fate had ordained otherwise and I could not visit y our vast and great country 
with its wonderful people. 
Moreover, you have given me a teacher in Thoreau, w ho furnished me through 
his essay on the "Duty of Civil Disobedience" scien tific confirmation of what I 
was doing in South Africa. Great Britain gave me Ru skin, whose  Unto This Last  
transformed me overnight from a lawyer and city-dwe ller into a rustic living 
away from Durban on a farm, three miles from the ne arest railway station; and 
Russia gave me in Tolstoy a teacher who furnished a  reasoned basis for my non-
violence. He blessed my movement in South Africa wh en it was still in its 
infancy and of whose wonderful possibilities I had yet to learn. It was he who 
had prophesied in his letter to me that I was leadi ng a movement which was 
destined to bring a message of hope to the down-tro dden people of the earth. 
So you will see that I have not approached the pres ent task in any spirit of 
enmity to Great Britain and the West. After having imbibed and assimilated the 
message of  Unto This Last,  I could not be guilty of approving of Fascism or 
Nazism, whose cult is suppression of the individual  and his liberty. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 214  I invite you to read my formula of withdrawal or as  it has been popularly called 
'Quit India' with this background. You may not read  into it more than the 
context warrants. 
I claim to be a votary of truth from my childhood. It was the most natural thing 
to me. My prayerful search gave me the revealing ma xim 'Truth is God' instead 
of the usual one 'God is Truth'. That maxim enables  me to see God face to face 
as it were. I feel Him pervade every fibre of my be ing. With this Truth as 
witness between you and me, I assert that I would n ot have asked my country 
to invite Great Britain to withdraw her rule over I ndia, irrespective of any 
demand to the contrary, if I had not seen at once t hat, for the sake of Great 
Britain and the Allied cause, it was necessary for Britain boldly to perform the 
duty of freeing India from bondage. Without this es sential act of tardy justice, 
Britain could not justify her position before the u nmurmuring World 
Conscience, which is their nevertheless. Singapore,  Malaya and Burma taught 
me that the disaster must not be repeated in India.  I make bold to say that it 
cannot be averted unless Britain trusts the people of India to use their liberty in 
favour of the Allied cause. By that supreme act of justice Britain would have 
taken away all cause for the seething discontent of  India. She will turn the 
growing ill-will into active goodwill. I submit tha t it is worth all the battleships 
and airships that your wonderworking engineers and financial resources can 
produce. 
I know that interested propaganda has filled your e ars and eyes with distorted 
versions of the Congress position. I have been pain ted as a hypocrite and enemy 
of Britain under disguise. My demonstrable spirit o f accommodation has been 
described as my inconsistency, proving me to be an utterly unreliable man. I 
am not going to burden this letter with proof in su pport of my assertions. If the 
credit I have enjoyed in America will not stand me in good stead, nothing I may 
argue in self-defence will carry conviction against  the formidable but false 
propaganda that has poisoned American ears. 
You have made common cause with Great Britain. You cannot therefore disown 
responsibility for anything that her representative s do in India. You will do a Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 215  grievous wrong to the Allied cause, if you do not s ift the truth from the chaff 
whilst there is yet time. Just think of it. Is ther e anything wrong in the 
Congress demanding unconditional recognition of Ind ia's independence? It is 
being said, 'But this is not the time.' We say, 'Th is is the psychological moment 
for that recognition.' For them and then only can t here be irresistible 
opposition to Japanese aggression. It is of immense  value to the Allied cause if 
it is also of equal value to India. The Congress ha s anticipated and provided for 
every possible difficulty in the way of recognition . I want you to look upon the 
immediate recognition of India's independence as a war measure of first class 
magnitude. 
I am,  
Your friend,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
On the way to Bombay, 3-8-'42 Harijan,  9-8-1942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 216   
85. TO LORD LINLITHGOW 1 
The Aga Khan’s Palace, Yeravda, 14-8-1942  
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW , 
The Government of India were wrong in precipitating  the crisis. The 
Government resolution justifying the step is full o f distortions and 
misrepresentations. That you have the approval of y our Indian 'colleagues' can 
have no significance, except this that in India you  can always command such 
services. That co-operation is an additional justif ication for the demand of 
withdrawal irrespective of what people and parties may say. 
The Government of India should have waited at least  till the time I inaugurated 
mass action. I have publicly stated that I fully co ntemplated sending you a 
letter before taking concrete action. It was to be an appeal to you for an 
impartial examination of the Congress case. As you know the Congress has 
readily filled in every omission that has been disc overed in the conception of its 
demand. So would I have dealt with every deficiency  if you had given me the 
opportunity. The precipitate action of the Governme nt leads one to think that 
they were afraid that the extreme caution and gradu alness with which the 
Congress was moving towards direct action, might ma ke world opinion ever 
round to the Congress as it had already begun doing , and expose the hollowness 
of the grounds for the Government's rejection of th e Congress demand. They 
should surely have waited for an authentic report o f my speeches on Friday and 
on Saturday night after the passing of the resoluti on by the All-India Congress 
Committee. You would have found in them that I woul d not hastily begin 
action. You would have taken advantage of the inter val foreshadowed in them 
and explored every possibility of satisfying the Co ngress demand. 
The resolution says, "The Government of India have waited patiently in the 
hope that wiser counsels might prevail. They have b een disappointed in that 
hope." I suppose 'wiser counsels' here means abando nment of its demand by the 
Congress. Why should the abandonment of a demand le gitimate at all times be 
hoped for by a Government pledged to guarantee inde pendence to India? Is it a Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 217  challenge that could only be met by immediate repre ssion instead of patient 
reasoning with the demanding party? I venture to su ggest that it is a long draft 
upon the credulity of mankind to say that the accep tance of the demand "would 
plunge India into confusion". Any way the summary r ejection of the demand has 
plunged the nation and the Government into confusio n. The Congress was 
making every effort to identify India with the Alli ed cause. 
The Government resolution says: "The Governor- Gene ral in Council has been 
aware, too, for some time past, of dangerous prepar ations by the Congress 
party for unlawful and in some cases violent activi ties, directed among other 
things to the interruption of communications and pu blic utility services, the 
organization of strikes, tampering with the loyalty  of Government servants and 
interference with defence measures including recrui tment." This is a gross 
distortion of the reality. Violence was never conte mplated at any stage. A defi-
nition of what could be included in non-violent act ion has been interpreted in a 
sinister and subtle manner as if the Congress was p reparing for violent action. 
Everything was openly discussed among Congress circ les, for nothing was to be 
done secretly. And why is it tampering with your lo yalty if I ask you to give up a 
job that is harming the British people? Instead of publishing behind the backs of 
principal Congressmen the misleading paragraph, the  Government of India, 
immediately they came to know of the 'preparations' , should have brought to 
book the parties concerned with the preparations. T hat would have been the 
appropriate course. By their unsupported allegation s in the resolution, they 
have laid themselves open to the charge of unfair d ealing. 
The whole Congress movement was intended to evoke i n the people the 
measure of sacrifice sufficient to compel attention . It was intended to 
demonstrate what measure of popular support it had.  Was it wise at this time 
of the day to seek to suppress a popular Government  avowedly non-violent? 
The Government resolution further says: "The Congre ss is not India's 
mouthpiece. Yet in the interest of securing their o wn dominance and in pursuit 
of their own totalitarian policy its leaders have c onsistently impeded the 
efforts made to bring India to full nationhood." It  is a gross libel thus to accuse Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 218  the oldest national organization of India. This lan guage lies ill in the mouth of a 
Government which has, as can be proved from public records, consistently 
thwarted every national effort for attaining freedo m, and sought to suppress 
the Congress by hook or by crook. 
The Government of India have not condescended to co nsider the Congress offer 
that if simultaneously with the declaration of Inde pendence of India, they could 
not trust the Congress to form a stable provisional  Government, they should ask 
the Muslim League to do so and that any National Go vernment formed by the 
League would be loyally accepted by the Congress. S uch an offer is hardly 
consistent with the charge of totalitarianism again st the Congress. 
Let me examine the Government offer. "It is that, a s soon as hostilities cease, 
India shall devise for herself, with full freedom o f decision and on a basis 
embracing all and not only a single party, the form  of Government which she 
regards as most suited to her conditions." Has this  offer any reality about it? All 
parties have not agreed now. Will it be any more po ssible after the war? And if 
the parties have to act before Independence is in t heir hands ? Parties grow up 
like mushrooms, for without proving their represent ative character, the Gov-
ernment will welcome them as they have done in the past, if the parties oppose 
the Congress and its activities, though they may do  lip-homage to 
Independence, frustration is inherent in the Govern ment offer. Hence the 
logical cry of withdrawal first. Only after the end  of British power and 
fundamental change in the political status of India  from bondage to freedom, 
will the formation of a truly representative govern ment, whether provisional or 
permanent, be possible. The living burial of the au thors of the demand has not 
resolved the deadlock. It has aggravated. 
Then the resolution proceeds: "The suggestion put f orward by the Congress 
party that the millions of India, uncertain as to t he future are ready, despite 
the sad lessons of so many martyr countries, to thr ow themselves into the arms 
of the invaders is one that the Government of India  cannot accept as a true 
representation of the feeling of the people of this  great country." I do not know 
about the millions. But I can give my own evidence in support of the Congress Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 219  statement. It is open to the Government not to beli eve the Congress evidence. 
No imperial power likes to be told that it is in pe ril. It is because the Congress 
is anxious for Great Britain to avoid the fate that  has overtaken other imperial 
powers that it asks her to shed imperialism volunta rily by declaring India 
independent. The Congress has not approached the mo vement with any but the 
friendliest motive. The Congress seeks to kill impe rialism as much for the sake 
of the British people and humanity as for India. No twithstanding assertions to 
the contrary, I maintain that the Congress has no i nterests of its own apart 
from that of the whole of India and the world. 
The following passage from the peroration in the re solution is interesting. "But 
on them (the Government) there lies the task of def ending India, of maintaining 
India's capacity to wage war, of safeguarding India 's interests, of holding the 
balance between the different sections of her peopl e without fear or favour." 
All I can say is that it is a mockery of truth afte r the experience in Malaya, 
Singapore and Burma. It is sad to find the Governme nt of India claiming to hold 
the 'balance' between the parties for whose creatio n and existence it is itself 
demonstrably responsible. 
One thing more. The declared cause is common betwee n the Government of 
India and us. To put it in the most concrete terms,  it is the protection of the 
freedom of China and Russia. The Government of Indi a think that freedom of 
India is not necessary for winning the cause. I thi nk exactly the opposite. I have 
taken Jawaharlal Nehru as my measuring rod. His per sonal contacts make him 
feel much more the misery of the impending ruin of China and Russia than I 
can, and may I say than even you can. In that miser y he tried to forget his old 
quarrel with Imperialism. He dreads much more than I do the success of 
Fascism and Nazism. I argued with him for days toge ther. He fought against my 
position with a passion which I have no words to de scribe. But the logic of facts 
overwhelmed him. He yielded when he saw clearly tha t without the freedom of 
India that of the other two was in great jeopardy. Surely you are wrong in 
having imprisoned such a powerful friend and ally. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 220  If not withstanding the common cause, the Governmen t's answer to the 
Congress demand is hasty repression, they will not wonder if I draw the 
inference that it was not so much the Allied cause that weighed with the British 
Government, as the unexpressed determination to cli ng to the possession of 
India as an indispensable part of imperial policy. The determination led to the 
rejection of the Congress demand and precipitated r epression. 
The present mutual slaughter on a scale never befor e known to history is 
suffocating enough. But the slaughter of truth acco mpanying the butchery and 
enforced by the falsity of which the resolution is reeking adds strength to the 
Congress position. 
It causes me deep pain to have to send you this lon g letter. But however much I 
dislike your action, I remain the same friend you h ave known me. I would still 
plead for reconsideration of the Government of Indi a's whole policy. Do not 
disregard the pleading of one who claims to be a si ncere friend of the British 
people. Heaven guide you! 
I am, 
Yours sincerely,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government—1942- '44, pp. 12-16 
 
1 During the course of the political upheavals of A ugust, 1942 in India, Mahatma Gandhi 
wrote some letters to the then Viceroy of India, Lo rd Linlithgow. The Government in their 
propaganda campaigns within as well as outside the country laid the entire responsibility 
for August Disturbances upon Congress Leaders, wher eas the National circles were unani-
mous in declaring that the crisis was precipitated by the repressive policy of the 
Government. The entire country from one end to the other was aflame with 
unprecedented mob fury, and it appeared as if the I ndian action had once for all decided 
to 'do or die'. The Government on their part were b ent upon crushing the movement by 
hook or by crook. It was in such a sorry state of a ffairs that Gandhiji addressed the above 
letter to Lord Linlithgow, wherein he criticized th e Government resolution on Congress 
struggle point by point. While the disturbances wer e deplored as an unfortunate lapse 
from the tradition of non-violence set for the coun try by the Congress there was no 
disposition to regard them as having been planned b y the Congress Leaders. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 221   
86. TO LORD LINLITHGOW 
Detention Camp, New Year's Eve 1942  
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW , 
This is a very personal letter. Contrary to the bib lical injunction I have allowed 
many suns to set on a quarrel I have harboured agai nst you. But I must not 
allow the old year to expire without disburdening m yself of what is rankling in 
my breast against you. I have thought we were frien ds and should still love to 
think so. However what has happened since August 9 last makes me wonder 
whether you still regard me as a friend. I have per haps not come in such close 
touch with any occupant of your  gadi  as with you. 
Your arrest of me, the communique you issued therea fter, your reply to Rajaji 
and the reasons given therefore, Mr. Amery's attack  on me, and much else I can 
catalogue go to show that at some stage or other yo u must have suspected my 
bona fides. Mention of other Congressmen in the sam e connection is by the 
way. I seem to be the  fons et origo  of all the evil imputed to the Congress. If I 
have not ceased to be your friend why did you not, before taking drastic action, 
send for me, tell me of your suspicions and make yo urself sure of your facts ? I 
am quite capable of seeing myself as others see me.  But in this case I have 
failed hopelessly. I find that all the statements m ade about me in Government 
quarters in this connection contain palpable depart ures from truth. I have so 
much fallen from grace that I could not establish c ontact with a dying friend. I 
mean Prof. Bhansali who is fasting in regard to the  Chimur affair ! ! ! 
And I am expected to condemn the so-called violence  of some people reputed 
to be Congressmen, although I have no data for such  condemnation save the 
heavily censored reports of newspapers. I must own that I thoroughly distrust 
those reports. I could write much more, but I must not lengthen my tale of 
woe. I am sure, what I have said is enough to enabl e you to fill in details. 
You know I returned to India from South Africa at t he end of 1914 with a 
mission which came to me in 1906, namely, to spread  truth and non-violence Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 222  among mankind in the place of violence and falsehoo d in all walks of life. The 
law of Satyagraha knows no defeat. Prison is one of  the many ways of spreading 
the message. But it has its limits. You have placed  me in a palace where every 
reasonable creature comfort is ensured. I have free ly partaken of the latter 
purely as a matter of duty, never as a pleasure, in  the hope that someday those 
who have the power will realize that they have wron ged innocent men. I had 
given myself six months. The period is drawing to a  close. So is my patience. 
The law of Satyagraha as I know it prescribes a rem edy in such moments of 
trial. In a sentence, it is, 'Crucify the flesh by fasting'. That same law forbids its 
use except as a last resort. I do not want to use i t if I can avoid it. 
This is the way to avoid it, convince me of my erro r or errors, and I shall make 
ample amends. You can send for me or send someone w ho knows your mind and 
can carry conviction. There are many other ways if you have the will. May I 
expect an early reply ? May the New Year bring peac e to us all ! 
I am, Your sincere friend,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government—1942- '44, pp. 18-19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 223   
86A. FROM LORD LINLITHGOW 
The Viceroy's House, New Delhi, 13th Jan., 1943 
DEAR MR. GANDHI , 
Thank you for your personal letter of December 31st , which I have just 
received. I fully accept its personal character, an d I welcome its frankness. And 
my reply will be, as you would wish it to be, as fr ank and as entirety personal 
as your letter itself. 
I was glad to have your letter, for, to be as open with you as our previous 
relations justify, I have been profoundly depressed  during recent months first 
by the policy that was adopted by the Congress in A ugust; secondly, because 
while that policy gave rise, as it was obvious it m ust, throughout the country to 
violence and crime (I say nothing of the risks to I ndia from outside aggression) 
no word of condemnation for that violence and crime  should have come from 
you, or from the Working Committee. When you were f irst at Poona I knew that 
you were not receiving newspapers, and I accepted t hat as explaining your 
silence. When arrangements were made that you and t he Working Committee 
should have such newspapers as you desired I felt c ertain that the details those 
newspapers contained of what was happening would sh ock and distress you as 
much as it has us all, and that you would be anxiou s to make your 
condemnation of it categorical and widely known. Bu t that was not the case; 
and it has been a real disappointment to me, all th e more when I think of these 
murders, the burning alive of police officials, the  wrecking of trains, the 
destruction of property, the misleading of these yo ung students, which has 
done so much harm to India's good name, and to the Congress Party. You may 
take it from me that the newspaper accounts you men tion are well founded—I 
only wish they were not, for the story is a bad one . I well know the immense 
weight of your great authority in the Congress move ment and with the Party 
and those who follow its lead, and I wish I could f eel, again speaking very 
frankly, that a heavy responsibility did not rest o n you. (And unhappily, while 
the initial responsibility rests with the leaders, others have to bear the Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 224  consequences, whether as law breakers, with the res ults that that involves, or 
as the victims.) 
But if I am right in reading your letter to mean th at in the light of what has 
happened you wish now to retrace your steps and dis sociate yourself from the 
policy of last summer, you have only to let me know  and I will at once consider 
the matter further. And if I have failed to underst and your object, you must not 
hesitate to let me know without delay in what respe ct I have done so, and tell 
me what positive suggestion you wish to put to me. You know me well enough 
after these many years to believe that I shall be o nly too concerned to read 
with the same close attention as ever any message w hich I receive from you, to 
give it the fullest weight and approach it with the  deepest anxiety to 
understand your feelings and your motives. 
Yours sincerely, 
 LINLITHGOW  
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government—1942- '44, pp. 19-20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 225   
87. TO LORD LINLITHGOW 
Detention Camp, 19-1-1943  
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW , 
I received your kind letter of the 13th instant yes terday at 2.30 p.m. I had 
almost despaired of ever hearing from you. Please e xcuse my impatience. 
Your letter gladdens me to find that I have not los t caste with you. 
My letter of 31st December was a growl against you.  Yours is a counter-growl. It 
means that you maintain that you were right in arre sting me and you were sorry 
for the omissions of which, in your opinion, I was guilty. 
The inference you draw from my letter is, I am afra id, not correct. I have re-
read my letter in the light of your interpretation,  but have failed to find your 
meaning in it. I wanted to fast and should still wa nt to if nothing comes out of 
our correspondence and I have to be a helpless witn ess to what is going on in 
the country including the privations of the million s owing to the universal 
scarcity stalking the land. 
If I do not accept your interpretation of my letter , you want me to make a 
positive suggestion. This, I might, be able to do, only if you put me among the 
members of the Working Committee of the Congress. 
If I could be convinced of my error or worse, of wh ich you are evidently, I 
should need to consult nobody, so far as my own act ion is concerned, to make a 
full and open confession and make ample amends. But  I have not any conviction 
of error. I wonder if you saw my letter to the Secr etary to the Government of 
India (H.D.) of September 23, 1942. I adhere to wha t I have said in it and in my 
letter to you of August 14, 1942. 
Of course I deplore the happenings that have taken place since 9th August last. 
But have I not laid the whole blame for them at the  door of the Government of 
India? Moreover, I could not express any opinion on  events which I cannot 
influence or control and of which I have but a one- sided account. You are Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 226  bound  prima facie  to accept the accuracy of reports that may be plac ed before 
you by your departmental heads. But you will not ex pect me to do so. Such 
reports have, before now, often proved fallible. It  was that reason that in my 
letter of 31st December I pleaded with you to convi nce me of the correctness 
of the information on which your conviction was bas ed. You will perhaps 
appreciate my fundamental difficulty in making the statement you have 
expected me to make. 
This however, I can say from the house-top, that I am as confirmed a believer 
in non-violence as I have ever been. You may not kn ow that any violence on the 
part of Congress workers, I have condemned openly a nd unequivocally. I have 
even done public penance more than once. I must not  weary you with 
examples. The point I wish to make is that on every  such occasion I was a free 
man. 
This time, the retracing, as I have submitted, lies  with the Government. You 
will forgive me for expressing an opinion challengi ng yours. I am certain that 
nothing but good would have resulted if you had sta yed your hand and granted 
me the interview which I had announced, on the nigh t of August 8, I was to 
seek. But that was not to be. 
Here, may I remind you that the Government of India  have before now owned 
their mistakes, as for instance, in the Punjab when  the late General Dyer was 
condemned, in the United Provinces when a corner of  a mosque in Cawnpore 
was restored and in Bengal when the Partition was a nnulled. All these things 
were done in spite of great and previous mob violen ce. 
To sum up: 
1. If you want me to act singly, convince me that I wa s wrong and I will make 
ample amends. 
2. If you want me to make any proposal on behalf of th e Congress you should 
put me among the Congress Working Committee members . 
I do plead with you to make up your mind to end the  impasse. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 227  If I am obscure or have not answered your letter fu lly, please point out the 
omissions and I shall make an attempt to give you s atisfaction. 
I have no mental reservation. 
I find that my letters to you are sent through the Government of Bombay. This 
procedure must involve some loss of time. As time i s of the essence in this 
matter, perhaps you will issue instructions that my  letters to you may be sent 
directly by the Superintendent of this camp. 
I am,  
Your sincere friend,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government,—1942 -44, pp. 21-22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 228   
87A. FROM LORD LINLITHGOW 
The Viceroy's House,  
New Delhi,  
25th January 1943  
DEAR MR. GANDHI , 
Many thanks for your personal letter of the 19th Ja nuary, which I have just 
received, and which I need not say I have read with  close care and attention. 
But I am still, I fear, rather in the dark. I made clear to you in my last letter 
that, however reluctantly, the course of events, an d my familiarity with what 
has been taking place, has left me no choice but to  regard the Congress 
movement, and you as its authorized and fully empow ered spokesman at the 
time of the decision of last August, as responsible  for the sad campaign of 
violence and crime, and revolutionary activity whic h has done so much harm, 
and so much injury to India's credit, since last Au gust. I note what you say 
about non-violence. I am very glad to read your une quivocal condemnation of 
violence, and I am well aware of the importance whi ch you have given to that 
article of your creed in the past. But the events o f these last months, and even 
the events that are happening today, show that it h as not met with the full 
support of certain at any rate of your followers, a nd the mere fact that they 
may have fallen short of an ideal which you have ad vocated is no answer to the 
relations of those who have lost their lives, and t o those themselves who have 
lost their property or suffered severe injury as a result of violent activities on 
the part of Congress and its supporters. And I cann ot I fear accept as an answer 
your suggestion that "the whole blame" has been lai d by you yourself at the 
door of the Government of India. We are dealing wit h facts in this matter, and 
they have to be faced. And while, as I made clear i n my last letter, I am very 
anxious to have from you anything that you may have  to say or any specific 
proposition that you may have to make, the position  remains that it is not the Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 229  Government of India, but Congress and yourself that  are on their justification in 
this matter. 
If therefore you are anxious to inform me that you repudiate or dissociate 
yourself from the resolution of the 9th August and the policy which that 
resolution represents, and if you can give me appro priate assurances as regards 
the future, I shall, I need not say, be very ready to consider the matter further. 
It is of course very necessary to be clear on that point and you will not, I know, 
take it amiss that should make that clear in the pl ainest possible words. 
I will ask the Governor of Bombay to arrange that a ny communication from you 
should be sent through him, which will I trust redu ce delay in its transmission. 
Yours sincerely,  
LINLITHGOW  
M.  K.  GANDHI , ESQ . 
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government—1942- '44, pp. 23-24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 230   
88. TO LORD LINLITHGOW 
Detention Camp, January 29, 1943  
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW , 
I must thank you warmly for your prompt reply to my  letter of the 19th instant. 
I wish I could agree with you that your letter is c lear. I am sure you do not wish 
to imply by clearness simply that you hold a partic ular opinion strongly. I have 
pleaded and would continue to plead till the last b reath that you should at 
least make an attempt to convince me of the validit y of the opinion you hold, 
that the August resolution of the Congress is respo nsible for the popular 
violence that broke out on the 9th August last and after, even though it broke 
out after the wholesale arrest of principal Congres s workers. Was not the 
drastic and unwarranted action of the Government re sponsible for the reported 
violence ? You have not even said what part of the August resolution is bad or 
offensive in your opinion. That resolution is in no  way a retraction by the 
Congress of its policy of non-violence. It is defin itely against Fascism in every 
shape or form. It tenders co-operation in war effor t under circumstances which 
alone can make effective and nationwide co-operatio n possible. 
The Government have evidently ignored or overlooked  the very material fact 
that the Congress, by its August resolution, asked nothing for itself. All its 
demands were for the whole people. As you should be  aware, the Congress was 
willing and prepared for the Government inviting Qu aid-i-Azam Jinnah to form 
a national government subject to such agreed adjust ments as may be necessary 
for the duration of the war, such government being responsible to a duly 
elected assembly. 
Being isolated from the Working Committee, except S hrimati Sarojini Devi, I do 
not know its present mind. But the Committee is not  likely to have changed its 
mind. 
Is all this open to reproach? Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 231  Objection may be raised to that clause of the resol ution which contemplated 
civil disobedience. But that by itself cannot const itute an objection since the 
principle of civil disobedience is impliedly conced ed in what is known as the 
'Gandhi-Irwin Pact'. Even that civil disobedience w as not to be started before 
knowing the result of the meeting for which I was t o seek from you an 
appointment. 
Then, take the unproved and in my opinion unprovabl e charges hurled against 
the Congress and me by so responsible a Minister as  the Secretary of State for 
India. 
Surely I can say with safety that it is for the Gov ernment to justify their action 
by solid evidence, not by mere  ipse dixit.  
But you throw in my face the facts of murders by pe rsons reputed to be 
Congressmen. I see the fact of the murders as clear ly, I hope, as you do. My 
answer is that the Government goaded the people to the point of madness. 
They started leonine violence in the shape of the a rrests already referred to. 
That violence is not any the less so, because it is  organized on a scale so 
gigantic that it displaces the Mosaic Law of tooth for tooth by that of ten 
thousand for one—not to mention the corollary of th e Mosaic Law, i.e., of non-
resistance as enunciated by Jesus Christ. I cannot interpret in any other manner 
the repressive measures of the all- powerful Govern ment of India. 
Add to this tale of woe the privations of the poor millions due to India-wide 
scarcity which I cannot help thinking might have be en largely mitigated, if not 
altogether prevented, had there been a bona fide Na tional Government 
responsible to a popularly elected Assembly. 
If then I cannot get soothing balm for my. pain, I must resort to the law 
prescribed for Satyagrahis, namely, a fast accordin g to capacity. I must 
commence after the early morning breakfast of the 9 th February, a fast for 21 
days ending on the morning of the 2nd March. Usuall y during my fasts, I take 
water with the addition of salts. But nowadays, my system refuses water. This 
time therefore I propose to add juices of citrus fr uits to make water drinkable. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 232  For, my wish is not to fast unto death, but to surv ive the ordeal, if God so wills. 
The fast can be ended sooner by the Government givi ng the needed relief. 
I am not marking this letter personal, as I did the  two previous ones. They were 
in no way confidential. They were a mere personal a ppeal. 
I am,  
Your sincere friend, 
 M.  K.  GANDHI  
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government—1942- '44, pp. 24-25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 233   
88A. FROM LORD LINLITHGOW 
The Viceroy's House,  
New Delhi,  
5th February 1943  
DEAR MR. GANDHI , 
Many thanks for your letter of 29th January which I  have just received. I have 
read it, as always, with great care and with every anxiety to follow your mind 
and to do full justice to your argument. But I fear  that my view of the 
responsibility of Congress and of yourself personal ly for the lamentable 
disorders of last autumn remains unchanged. 
In my last letter I said that my knowledge of the f acts left me no choice but to 
regard the Congress movement, and you as its author ized and fully empowered 
leader at the time of the decision of last August, as responsible for the 
campaign of violence and crime that subsequently br oke out. In reply you have 
reiterated your request that I should attempt to co nvince you that my opinion 
is correct. I would readily have responded earlier to that request were it not 
that your letters gave no indication, such as I sho uld have been entitled to 
expect, that you sought the information with an ope n mind. In each of them 
you have expressed profound distrust of the publish ed reports of the recent 
happenings, although in your last letter, on the ba sis of the same information, 
you have not hesitated to lay the whole blame for t hem on the Government of 
India. In the same letter you have stated that I ca nnot expect you to accept the 
accuracy of the official reports on which I rely. I t is not therefore clear to me 
how you expect or even desire me to convince you of  anything. But in fact, the 
Government of India have never made any secret of t heir reasons for holding 
the Congress and its leaders responsible for the de plorable acts of violence, 
sabotage and terrorism that have occurred since the  Congress resolution of the 
8th August declared a "mass struggle" in support of  its demands, appointed you 
as its leader and authorized all Congressmen to act  for themselves in the event Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 234  of interference with the leadership of the movement . A body which passes a 
resolution in such terms is hardly entitled to disc laim responsibility for any 
events that follow it. There is evidence that you a nd your friends expected this 
policy to lead to violence; and that you were prepa red to condone it; and that 
the violence that ensued formed part of concerted p lan, conceived long before 
the arrest of Congress leaders. The general nature of the case against the 
Congress has been publicly stated by the Home Membe r in his speech in the 
Central Legislative Assembly on the 15th September last, and if you need 
further information I would refer you to it. I encl ose a complete copy in case 
the press versions that you must have seen were not  sufficient. I need only add 
that all the mass of evidence that has come to ligh t has confirmed the 
conclusions then reached. I have ample information that the campaign of 
sabotage has been conducted under secret instructio ns, circulated in the name 
of the A.I.C.C; that well-known Congressmen have or ganized and freely taken 
part in acts of violence and murder; and that even now an underground 
Congress organization exists in which, among others , the wife of a member of 
the Congress Working Committee plays a prominent pa rt, and which is actively 
engaged in planning the bomb outrages and other act s of terrorism that have 
disgusted the whole country. If we do not act on al l this information or make it 
publicly known it is because the time is not yet ri pe; but you may rest assured 
that the charges against the Congress will have to be met sooner or later and it 
will then be for you and your colleagues to clear y ourselves before the world if 
you can. And if in the meanwhile you yourself, by a ny action such as you now 
appear to be contemplating, attempt to find an easy  way out, the judgment 
will go against you by default. 
I have read with surprise your statement that the p rinciple of civil disobedience 
is implicitly conceded in the Delhi settlement of t he 5th March 1931 which you 
refer to as the 'Gandhi-Irwin Pact'. I have again l ooked at the document. Its 
basis was that civil disobedience would be "effecti vely discontinued" and that 
certain 'reciprocal action' would be taken by Gover nment. It was inherent in 
such a document that it should take notice of the e xistence of civil 
disobedience. But I can find nothing in it to sugge st that civil disobedience was Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 235  recognized as being in any circumstances legitimate . And I cannot make it too 
plain that it is not so regarded by my Government. 
To accept the point of view which you put forward w ould be to concede that 
the authorized Government of the country, on which lies the responsibility for 
maintaining peace and good order, should allow subv ersive and revolutionary 
movements described by you yourself as open rebelli on, to take place 
unchallenged; that they should allow preparations f or violence, for the 
interruptions of communications, for attacks on inn ocent persons, for the 
murder of police officers and others to proceed unc hecked. My Government and 
I are open indeed to the charge that we should have  taken drastic action at an 
earlier stage against you and against the Congress leaders. But my anxiety and 
that of my Government has throughout been to give y ou, and to give the 
Congress organization, every possible opportunity t o withdraw from the 
position which you have decided to take up. Your st atements of last June and 
July, the original resolution of the Working Commit tee of the 14th July, and 
your declaration on the same day that there was no room left for negotiation, 
and that after all it was an open rebellion are all  of them grave and significant, 
even without your final exhortation to 'do or die'.  But with a patience that was 
perhaps misplaced, it was decided to wait until the  resolution of the All-India 
Congress Committee made it clear that there could b e no further toleration of 
the Congress attitude if Government was to discharg e its responsibility to the 
people of India. 
Let me in conclusion say how greatly I regret, havi ng regard to your health and 
age, the decision that you tell me that you now hav e in your mind to take. I 
hope and pray that wiser counsels may yet prevail w ith you. But the decision 
whether or not to undertake a fast with its attenda nt risks is clearly one that 
must be taken by you alone and the responsibility f or which and for its 
consequences must rest on you alone. I trust sincer ely that in the light of what I 
have said you may think better of your resolution a nd I would welcome a 
decision on your part to think better of it, not on ly because of my own natural 
reluctance to see you willfully risk your life, but  because I regard the use of a Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 236  fast for political purposes as a form of political blackmail (himsa ) for which 
there can be no moral justification, and understood  from your own previous 
writings that this was also your view. 
Yours sincerely,  
LINLITHGOW  
M.  K.  GANDHI ESQ . 
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government—1942- '44, pp. 26-28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 237   
89. TO LORD LINLITHGOW 1 
Detention Camp, 7-2-1943  
DEAR LORD LINLITHGOW , 
I have to thank you for your long reply dated 5th i nstant to my letter of 29th 
January last. I would take your last point first, n amely, the contemplated fast 
which begins on 9th instant. Your letter, from a Sa tyagrahi's standpoint, is an 
invitation to fast. No doubt the responsibility for  the step and its consequences 
will be solely mine. You have allowed an expression  to slip from your pen for 
which I was unprepared. In the concluding sentence of the second paragraph 
you described the step as an attempt "to find an ea sy way out". That you, as a 
friend, can impute such a base and cowardly motive to me passes 
comprehension. You have also described it as "a for m of political blackmail", 
and you quote my previous writings on the subject a gainst me. I abide by my 
writings. I hold that there is nothing inconsistent  in them with the 
contemplated step. I wonder whether you have yourse lf read those writings. 
I do claim that I approached you with an open mind when I asked you to 
convince me of my error. A "profound distrust" of t he published reports is in no 
way inconsistent with my having an open mind. 
You say that there is evidence that I (I leave my f riends out for the moment) 
"expected this policy to lead to violence", that I was "prepared to condone it", 
and that "the violence that ensued formed part of a  concerted plan conceived 
long before the arrest of Congress leaders". I have  seen no evidence in support 
of such a serious charge. You admit that part of th e evidence has yet to be 
published. The speech of the Home Member, of which you have favoured me 
with a copy, may be taken as the opening speech of the prosecution counsel 
and nothing more. It contains unsupported imputatio ns against Congressmen. 
Of course he has described the violent outburst in graphic language. But he has 
not said why it took place when it did. I have sugg ested why it did. You have 
condemned men and women before trying them and hear ing their defence. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 238  Surely, there was nothing wrong in my asking you to  show me the evidence on 
which you hold them guilty. What you say in your le tter carries no conviction. 
Proof should correspond to the canons of English Ju risprudence. 
If the wife of a member of the Working Committee is  actively engaged in 
"planning the bomb outrages and other acts of terro rism" she should be tried 
before a court of law and punished if found guilty.  The lady you refer to could 
only have done the things attributed to her after t he wholesale arrests of 9th 
August last, which I have dared to describe as leon ine violence. 
You say that the time is not yet ripe to publish th e charge against the Congress. 
Have you ever thought of the possibility of their b eing found baseless when 
they are put before an impartial tribunal, or that some of the condemned 
persons might have died in the meanwhile, or that s ome of the evidence that 
the living can produce might become unavailable? 
I reiterate the statement that the principle of civ il disobedience is implicitly 
conceded in the settlement of 5th March 1931, arriv ed at between the then 
Viceroy on behalf of the Government of India and my self on behalf of the 
Congress. I hope you know that the principal Congre ssmen were discharged 
before that settlement was even thought of. Certain  reparations were made to 
Congressmen under that settlement. Civil disobedien ce was discontinued only 
on conditions being fulfilled by the Government. Th at by itself was, in my 
opinion, an acknowledgement of its legitimacy, of c ourse under given 
circumstances. It therefore seems somewhat strange to find you maintain that 
civil disobedience "cannot be recognized as being i n any circumstances 
legitimate by your Government". You ignore the prac tice of the British 
Government which has recognised its legitimacy unde r the name of "passive 
resistance". 
Lastly you read into my letters a meaning which is wholly inconsistent with my 
declaration, in one of them, of adherence to unadul terated non-violence. For, 
you say in your letter under reply, that "acceptanc e of my point of view would 
be to concede that the authorized Government of the  country on which lies the 
responsibility for maintaining peace and good order , should allow movements Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 239  to take place, that would admit preparations for vi olence, interruptions of 
communications, for attacks on innocent persons, fo r murders of police officers 
and others, to proceed unchecked". I must be a stra nge friend of yours whom 
you believe to be capable of asking for recognition  of such things as lawful. 
I have not attempted an exhaustive reply to the vie ws and statements 
attributed to me. This is not the place nor the tim e for such reply. I have only 
picked out those things which in my opinion demande d an immediate answer. 
You have left me no loophole for escaping the ordea l I have set before for 
myself. I begin it on the 9th instant with the clea rest possible conscience. 
Despite your description of it as "a form of politi cal blackmail", it is on my part 
meant to be an appeal to the Highest Tribunal for j ustice which I have failed to 
secure from you. If I do not survive the ordeal I s hall go to the Judgment Seat 
with the fullest faith in my innocence. Posterity w ill judge between you as 
representative of an all-powerful Government and me  as a humble man who has 
tried to serve his country and humanity through it.  
My last letter was written against time, and theref ore a material paragraph 2 
went in as postscript. I now send herewith a fair c opy typed by Pyarelal who 
has taken Mahadev Desai's place. You will find the postscript paragraph 
restored to the place where it should have been. 
I am,  
Your sincere friend, 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Gouernment—1942- '44, pp. 30-32 
 
1. The reply from the Viceroy to Gandhiji's intimation  on fast was not only not 
responsive but also threatening. He went to the len gth of describing Gandhiji's 
decision to fast as political blackmail. Gandhiji a ddressed the above last letter to 
the then Viceroy'. 
2 This has been restored to its proper place as parag raph 3 in letter 88. 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 240   
90. TO AGATHA HARRISON 1 
Dilkusha,.  
Panchgani, 13th July 1944  
MY DEAR AGATHA , 
I have your letter of 14th June. Everything I do tu rns to dust. It must be so, so 
long as I am 'untrustworthy'. If I could plead guil ty, I would at once mend my 
way. On the contrary I know I have done nothing to forfeit the confidence I 
used at one time to enjoy among the official circle s. 
You know the attempt I made to see the members of t he Working Committee 
and, failing that permission, to see the Viceroy. P erhaps the chief difficulty is 
the opinion reported to have been held by Mr Church ill about me. You know the 
oftquoted passages attributed to him. He is said to  want to "crush" me "the 
naked fakir". The body can be crushed, never the sp irit. But if the report is 
true—and it has never been denied—it gives the clue  to all my so-called 
failures. 
I can give you the assurance that nothing dismays o r disappoints me. If I 
represent the truth and if I do as God bids me, I k now that the wall of 
distortion and suspicion will topple. Only be patie nt with me. I feel for you and 
friends like you. 
Recently I had, sent to me, a letter 2 written by Henry [Polak] to the Press 
whilst he was in America. Tell him if you see him t hat it distressed me deeply. I 
never could have thought that he could believe lies  about me without 
verification from me. 
Ere this reaches you, you will have known from the Press about the attempt I 
made to solve the communal tangle in collaboration with Rajaji who has been 
with me these few days. 
My love to all the friends. I sent a letter to Muri el. 
Yours, BAPU  Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 241  MISS AGATHA HARRISON , 
2 CRANBOURNE COURT , 
ALBERT BRIDGE ROAD , LONDON , S.W.  11 
Mahatma Gandhi—Correspondence with the Government— 1944-'47,  pp. 33-34 
 
1 Miss Agatha Harrison—During World War I, went int o social work in factories; in 1921-24 
went to China and while there served on the Child L abour Commission of Shanghai; in 
1925-28 worked in America on Industrial and Interna tional questions; in 1929 came to India 
with the Royal Commission on Labour; since 1931, wo rked with C. F. Andrews; and under 
Gandhiji's advice, helped in disseminating correct information on Indian affairs in Britain; 
visited India several times then. 
2 In the letter in question Henry Polak had made ce rtain remarks about Gandhiji's attitude 
in regard to the war and his role in "Quit India" s truggle at a time when Britain was in 
distress which Gandhiji considered to be highly dam aging. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 242   
91. TO WINSTON CHURCHILL 
DILKUSHA , PANCHAGANI , 17th  JULY  1944  
DEAR PRIME MINISTER , 
You are reported to have the desire to crush the 'n aked fakir', as you are said to 
have described me. I have been long trying to be a fakir and that, naked—a 
more difficult task. I therefore regard the express ion as a compliment though 
unintended. I approach you then as such and ask you  to trust and use me for 
the sake of your people and mine and through them t hose of the world. 
Your sincere friend,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
MR. WINSTON CHURCHILL  
Mahatma Gandhi—Correspondence with the Government— 1944-'47,  p. 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 243   
92. TO SHRIMAN NARAYAN 
On the train to Calcutta, 1-12-1945  
BHAI SHRIMAN , 
I am sending today your manuscript 1 and my Foreword. 2 
I finished all this work last night at 9.30 p.m. Du ring the period I could snatch 
some time only for meals and spinning. Please let m e know if any alterations 
are required in my Foreword. 
I have made two changes in the manuscript. If you d o not approve of them, 
please discuss with me. 
You will notice that I have left the Taluka and Dis trict Panchayats unspecified. 
They should be only advisory. Why should we give th em a definite place in our 
constitutional system. I am doubtful about their ne ed. When the villages really 
become active and alive, the need for advisory bodi es should automatically 
diminish. The Provincial Panchayats could discharge  these responsibilities, and 
whenever necessary, enlist the co-operation of the Taluka and District units. If 
there is any error in this idea, please let me know . I have been able to go 
through the manuscript rather hurriedly. 
It is for consideration whether Pakistan and the Pr incely States can have any 
place in my conception. Remember that a Gandhian Co nstitution could be 
feasible only if we reach that stage through nonvio lence. 
Bapu ke Ashirvad  
 
1 Manuscript of Shriman Narayanji's treatise entitled  The Gandhian Constitution for 
Free India  (Published by Kitabistan, Allahabad, 1946). 
2 See Appendix III on page 275. 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 244   
93. TO LORD PETHICK LAWERNCE 
Valmiki Mandir,  
Reading Road, New Delhi, 
2nd April, 1946  
DEAR LORD LAWERENCE , 
Our mutual friend Sudhir Ghosh tells me that you wo uld like me to reduce to 
writing the points I told him to discuss informally  with you and Sir Stafford. 
One is universal among all independence-minded peop le as distinguished from 
the dumb millions, whether Congressmen or other. It  is the immediate release 
of political  prisoners irrespective of the charge of violence o r non-violence. 
They cannot be a danger to the State now that the n ecessity for independence 
has become common cause. It seems to be ridiculous to keep, say Shri 
Jayaprakash Narayan and Dr. Lohia, both learned and  cultured men of whom 
any society would be proud, nor is there any occasi on for beating any person as 
an underground worker. To leave the question of dis charge for disposal by the 
incoming national Government would be a step no one  will understand or 
appreciate. Independence will lose its grace. 
The other affects the masses. I refer to the salt t ax. As a means of raising 
revenue, it is insignificant. As a means of harassi ng the masses, it is a measure 
of which the mischief is indescribable. The masses will hardly appreciate 
independence if the burden of the salt monopoly con tinues to afflict them. I 
must not weary you with argument. I mention the two  measures as a 
preparation of the Indian mind for independence. Th ey will produce a 
psychological effect. 
I may mention that I discussed both the measures in  a different setting with Mr 
Casey and I am now in correspondence with the prese nt Governor of Bengal. I 
may add that I have today heard from Mr Abell in re gard to the salt tax that 
"the Government do not find themselves able to acce pt the suggestion". Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 245  Yours sincerely,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
THE RT. HON 'BLE LORD PETHICK LAWRENCE , 
SERCETARY OF STATE FOR INDIA , NEW DELHI . 
Mahatma Gandhi—Correspondence with the Government— 1944-'47,  pp. 156-57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 246   
94. TO SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL 
Shrirampur, December 25, 1946  
CHI. VALLABHBHAI, 
Your letter to Pyarelal reached me direct yesterday . Pyarelal and all the rest 
are engrossed in their own work and are staking the ir lives.... So Pyarelal does 
not know about this letter. He comes to see me occa sionally and will read it 
when he comes here next. 
I am dictating this at 3 a.m. I shall have a wash a t 4 a.m. and prayers after 
that. This is the present routine. I shall carry on  only if such is God's will. 
However there is nothing in my health which should make you anxious. The 
body responds to the demands made upon it, but it i s a real ordeal for me. My 
truth and non-violence are being weighed in a balan ce which is much more 
accurate than any a pearl merchant ever used. It is  so sensitive as to register 
the difference of even the hundredth fraction of a hair. They in themselves can 
never be found wanting. If anything is to be found wanting, it may be I who 
have constituted myself their representative; if so , I at least hope that God will 
take me away and work through some other worthier a gent. I am sorry that I 
cannot myself do the work which Pyarelal used to do  for me and I have not yet 
been able to prepare the two men who are with me to  do it. But both are 
intelligent. I therefore hope to be able to arrange  it. In this your letter will 
afford me encouragement. Jaisukhlal left Manu at he r own wish three or four 
days ago. I allowed her to come, as she was prepare d to stay and die with me if 
necessary. And now I am dictating this to her, lyin g down with my eyes closed 
so as to reduce my exertion to the minimum. Sucheta  [Kripalani] is also in this 
room. She is still asleep.... 
The telegram you sent me is fit only to be thrown i nto the waste-paper basket. 
There is no limit to exaggeration here. Not that th e people exaggerate 
intentionally; they simply do not know what exagger ation means. The 
imagination of the people runs riot like the local vegetation which presses in on Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 247  all sides. All around us I find huge coconut and be telnut palms, and a large 
variety of greens grow in their shade. The rivers a re all like the Sindhu, the 
Ganga, the Yamuna and the Brahmaputra. These empty their waters in the Bay 
of Bengal. My advice is that if you have not replie d to him already you should 
ask the man who sent the telegram to you to furnish  proof for his statements so 
that "the Central Government may try to do somethin g about it, though they 
have no power to interfere in terms of the Constitu tion". And add: "Gandhi is 
there in your midst and it is impossible that he wo uld not hear you. But he is an 
apostle of truth and non-violence and therefore the re is a possibility of his 
disappointing you. But if he disappoints you, how c an we, who were trained 
under him, hope to satisfy you? But we shall do wha t we can." Don't tell anyone 
that since Gandhi is there, he need not bring his p roblems to you. Let him write 
to you as well, and it would be your duty to afford  relief to him even by going 
against me, for that is what I have taught you. The  situation is difficult. Truth 
is nowhere to be found. Violence masquerades as non -violence, irreligion as 
religion. But truth and non-violence can be tested only in such conditions, I 
know; that is why I am here. Do not call me away. I f I ran away in fear, that 
would be my own misfortune; but India is certainly not so unlucky. I am here to 
do or die. News came over the radio yesterday that Jawaharlal, Kripalani and 
Deo were coming to have consultations with me. That  is enough. 
What is the use of my meeting every one? However, i f any one among you wants 
to ask me anything, he can. 
What I wrote about Assam was not meant for immediat e publication. But rest 
assured that I am right on that point. 
You will have seen the report of the Bihar [Muslim]  League. I wrote to 
Rajendrababu about it and have asked him to acquain t all of you with my 
views. I have also written to the Bihar Chief Minis ter. Even if half of what the 
report says is correct, it is bad business. I have no doubt that an impartial 
commission of inquiry with which no one can find an y fault ought to be set up 
without a single day's delay. Whatever is correct i n the allegations must be 
admitted straightaway and the rest should be referr ed to the commission. You Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 248  should also discuss this with your Muslim League co lleagues in the Cabinet. I am 
still in correspondence with Suhrawardy. When it is  completed I shall send it all 
to you. Jawaharlal will see what has passed between  us so far. 
If you are not doing it already, please read the su mmary of my post-prayer 
speeches which is sent to the newspapers. Or go thr ough the cuttings which 
Mani could give you. I know the high pressure under  which you are working, but 
some things have to be done in spite of this pressu re. To keep abreast of what I 
am saying is one of them. 
I do not think I can hope that your health is excel lent, but trust that it is good 
enough for you to work. I think it can be very much  improved. I would still ask 
you to call Dinshah [Mehta] in for treatment. I hav e no doubt that he is a good 
and sincere man with a benevolent outlook on life. What if he is not so 
efficient? You ask about Sushila. I cannot say she is in good health. She is at her 
post in inhospitable villages and is doing good wor k. Even a quack is a rarity in 
these parts; so naturally the people make much of s omeone like her. Therefore 
do not be anxious about any of us here. And when ev ery one of them is here to 
die, their falling ill should not be of great conce rn. If they die, it would be a 
master for congratulation. For this they have to di e in purity. 
Blessing, BAPU  
SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL , 
AURANGZEB ROAD , NEW DELHI  
Letters to Sardar Vallobhbhai Patel,  pp. 201-204 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 249   
95. TO THE VICEROY1 
On the train to Patna, 8th May 1947  
DEAR FRIEND , 
It strikes me that I should summarize what I said a nd wanted to say and left 
unfinished for want of time, at our last Sunday's m eeting. 
I 
1 Whatever may be said to the contrary, it would be a  blunder of first 
magnitude for the British to be party in any way wh atsoever to the division of 
India. If it has to come, let it come after the Bri tish withdrawal, as a result of 
understanding between the parties or [of] an armed conflict which according to 
Quaid-i-Azam Jinnah is taboo. Protection of minorit ies can be guaranteed by 
establishing a court of arbitration in the event of  difference of opinion among 
contending parties. 
2 Meanwhile the Interim Government should be composed  either of 
Congressmen or those whose names the Congress choos es or of Muslim League 
men or those whom the League chooses. The dual cont rol of today, lacking 
team work and team spirit, is harmful for the count ry. The parties exhaust 
themselves in the effort to retain their seat and t o placate you. Want of team 
spirit demoralizes the Government and imperils the integrity of the services so 
essential for good and efficient government. 
3 Referendum at the stage in the Frontier (or any pro vince for that matter) is 
a dangerous thing in itself. You have to deal with the material that faces you. 
In any case nothing should or can be done over Dr K han Sahib's head as Premier. 
Note that this paragraph is relevant only if divisi on is at all to be countenanced. 
4 I feel sure that partition of the Punjab and Bengal  is wrong in every case and 
a needless irritant for the League. This as well as  all innovations can come after 
the British withdrawal not before, except always fo r mutual agreement. WTiilst 
the British Power is functioning in India, it must be held principally responsible Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 250  for the preservation of peace in the country. That machine seems to be 
cracking under the existing strain which is caused by the raising of various 
hopes that cannot or must not be fulfilled. These h ave no place during the 
remaining thirteen months. This period can be most profitably shortened if the 
minds of all were focused on the sole task of withd rawal. You and you alone 
can do it to the exclusion of all other activity so  far as the British occupation is 
concerned. 
5 Your task as undisputed master of naval warfare, gr eat as it was, was 
nothing compared to what you are called to do now. The singlemindedness and 
clarity that gave you success are much more require d in this work. 
6 If you are not to leave a legacy of chaos behind, y ou have to make your 
choice and leave the government of the whole of Ind ia including the States to 
one party. The Constituent Assembly has to provide for the governance even of 
that part of India which is not represented by the Muslim League or some 
States. 
7 Non-partition of the Punjab and Bengal does not mea n that the minorities in 
these Provinces are to be neglected. In both the Pr ovinces they are large and 
powerful enough to arrest and demand attention. If the popular Governments 
cannot placate them the Governors should during the  interregnum actively 
interfere. 
8 The in transmissibility of paramountcy is a vicious  doctrine, if it means that 
they [the States can become sovereign and a menace for Independent India. All 
the power wherever exercised by the British in Indi a must automatically 
descend to its successor. Thus the people of the St ates become as much part of 
Independent India as the people of British India. T he present Princes are 
puppets created or tolerated for the upkeep and pre stige of the British power. 
The unchecked powers exercised by them over their p eople is probably the 
worst blot on the British Crown. The Princes under the new regime can exercise 
only such powers as trustees can and as can be give n to them by the 
Constituent Assembly. It follows that they cannot m aintain private armies or 
arms factories. Such ability and statecraft as they  possess must be at the Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 251  disposal of the Republic and must be used for the g ood of their people and the 
people as a whole. I have merely stated what should  be done with the States. It 
is not for me to show in this letter how this can b e done. 
9 Similarly difficult but not so baffling is the ques tion of the Civil Service. Its 
members should be taught from now to accommodate th emselves to the new 
regime. They may not be partisans taking sides. The  slightest trace of 
communalism among them should be severely dealt wit h. The English element 
in it should know that they owe loyalty to the new regime rather than to the 
old and therefore to Great Britain. The habit of re garding themselves as rulers 
and therefore superiors must give place to the spir it of true service of the 
people. 
II  
10  I had a very pleasant two hours and three quarters with Quaid-i-Azam Jinnah 
on Tuesday last. We talked about the joint statemen t on non-violence. He was 
agreeably emphatic over his belief in non-violence.  He has reiterated it in the 
Press statement which was drafted by him. 
11  We did talk about Pakistan-cum-partition. I told hi m that my opposition to 
Pakistan persisted as before and suggested that in view of his declaration of 
faith in non-violence he should try to convert his opponents by reasoning with 
them and not by show of force. He was, however, qui te firm that the question 
of Pakistan was not open to discussion. Logically, for a believer in nonviolence, 
nothing, not even the existence of God could be out side its scope. 
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur saw the first eight paragraphs , the purport of which she 
was to give to Pandit Nehru with whom I was to send  you this letter. But, I 
could not finish it in New Delhi, I finished it on the train. 
I hope you and Her Excellency are enjoying your har d-earned rest. 
Yours sincerely,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
To 
H.  E.  THE VICEROY , SIMLA  Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 252  Mahatma Gandhi—Correspondence with the Government— 1944-'47,  pp. 247-50 
 
1 Lord Mountbatten 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 253   
96. TO THE VICEROY 
New Delhi, 10/111th June 1947  
DEAR FRIEND , 
The Rajkumari has given me the purport of your conv ersation with her. 
Though you have been good enough to tell me that J could see you at any time 
I wanted to, I must not avail myself of the kindnes s. I would like, however, to 
reduce to writing some of the things I hold to be n ecessary for the proper and 
swift working of the scheme. 
2. As to the referendum in the Frontier Province I mus t confess that my idea 
does not commend itself to Pandit Nehru and his col leagues. As I told you, 
if my proposal did not commend itself to them, I wo uld not have the heart 
to go any further with it. 
3. This, however, does not in any way affect my propos al that before 
proceeding with the referendum, you should invite Q uaid-i-Azam Jinnah to 
proceed to the Frontier Province and to woo the Min isters including 
Badshah Khan and his Khudai Khidmatgars who have ma de the Province 
what it is—better or worse. Before he goes, no doub t, he should be assured 
of a courteous hearing from them. 
4. Whether he favours the idea or not Quaid-i-Azam sho uld be asked to give a 
fair picture of the Pakistan scheme before the simp le Pathan mind is asked 
to make its choice of Hindustan or Pakistan. I fanc y that the Pathan knows 
his position in Hindustan. If he does not, the Cong ress or the Constituent 
Assembly now at work should be called upon to compl ete the picture. It 
will be unfair, I apprehend, to choose between Hind ustan or Pakistan 
without knowing what each is. He should at least kn ow where his entity 
will be fully protected. 
5. There is as yet no peace in the Frontier Province. Can there be a true 
referendum when strife has not completely abated ? Minds are too heated 
to think coherently. Neither the Congress nor the L eague can disown Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 254  liability for disturbances by their followers. If p eace does not reign in the 
land, the whole superstructure will come to pieces and you will, in spite of 
division, leave behind legacy of which you will not  be proud. 
6. The sooner you have homogeneous ministry the better . In no case can the 
League nominees work independently of the whole Cab inet. It is a vicious 
thing that there is no joint responsibility for eve ry act of individual 
members. 
7. The only way to keep the wonderful time table made by you is to 
anticipate the future and ask your special staff to  work out all the items 
presented by you without reference to the Cabinet a nd then when the 
time comes, the report should be presented to the r espective parties for 
acceptance, amendment or rejection 
8. The more I see things the more firmly I believe tha t the States problem 
presents a variety of difficulties which demand ver y serious and fearless 
treatment on your part. 
9. The problem of the civil and military services, tho ugh in a way not equally 
difficult, demands the same firm handling as the St ates. Gurgaon strife is 
an instance in point. So far as I know one single o fficer is responsible for 
the continuance of the mischief. 
10. Lastly may I suggest that the attempt to please all  parties is a fruitless and 
thankless task. In the course of our conversation I  suggested that equal 
praise bestowed on both the parties was not meant. No praise would have 
been the right thing. "Duty will be merit when debt  becomes a donation." 
It is not too late to mend. Your undoubted skill as  a warrior was never 
more in demand than today. Fancy a sailor without h is fleet, save his 
mother wit! 
11. I have tried to be as succinct as possible. I could  not be briefer. If any of 
the points raised herein demand a personal talk, yo u have but to appoint 
the suitable time. Please do not think of calling m e for the sake of 
courtesy. 
12. I received your kind note of 10th instant whilst I had almost finished this 
note. It does not call for a separate reply. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 255  This was finished at 9.25 p.m. It will be typed tom orrow. 
Yours sincerely,  
M.  K.  GANDHI  
H.  E.  THE VICEROY , NEW DELHI  
Mahatma Gandhi—Correspondence with the Government— 1944-'47,  pp. 256-58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 256   
96A. FROM LORD MOUNTBATTEN 
The Viceroy's House, New Delhi,  
12th June 1947  
DEAR MR. GANDHI , 
Thank you for your letter of 10/11th June. I am gra teful to you for your 
comments on current affairs, and I will certainly b ear them in mind. 
I doubt whether it would be practicable to make my special staff work out all 
the details of the splitting up of the Departments of the Government of India 
and a complete allotment of India's assets and liab ilities, but they will do 
everything in their power to help. It is a tremendo us task and only a fraction of 
it can be done before the transfer of power. It is essentially a matter in which 
there must be negotiation between the parties conce rned. 
I am so grateful for your unfailing advice and supp ort and kindness, which have 
done so much to sustain me in this difficult task. 
Yours sincerely,  
MOUNTBATTEN OF  BURMA  
MR. GANDHI  
Mahatma Gandhi—Correspondence with the Government— 1944-'47,  pp. 258-59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 257   
97. TO ABDUL GHAFFAR KHAN 
Bhangi Colony, New [Delhi, 5th July 1947] 
 DEAR  BADSHAH , 
Khudai Khidmatgar Alam Khkn saw me before 12 o'cloc k and he said that he was 
leaving for Peshawar tonight. I did not send any le tter through him. But I told 
him that there should be no demonstration against t he Muslim League, that it 
should be enough that in the present state of tensi on and misrepresentation 
Khudai Khidmatgars should not vote at all one way o r the other, that they were 
entitled so far as internal affairs were concerned to claim and to have 
complete autonomy without any interference from Pak istan or the Union, and 
that they could come to a decision as to the choice  between the Union or 
Pakistan when the constitutions of the two were pro mulgated and when the 
Frontier Province had fashioned its own autonomous constitution. Above all, 
every occasion for clash with the Muslim League mem bers was to be avoided. 
Real Pathan bravery was now on its trial. It was to  be shown by cheerfully 
meeting blows or even meeting death at the hands of  the opponents without 
the slightest sort of retaliation. Boycott would ce rtainly result in a legal victory 
for Pakistanis, but it would be a moral defeat, if without the slightest fear of 
violence from your side, the bulk of Pathans refrai ned in a dignified manner 
from participating in the referendum. There should be no fuss, no procession, 
and no disobedience of any orders from the authorit y. 
I had acted promptly on receipt of your letter. I w rote a long letter to His 
Excellency on which he took action. You must have s een also how I had dealt 
with the question of the Frontier Province in one o f my post- prayer speeches. I 
send you herewith a copy of my letter to the Vicero y and of my post-prayer 
speech. This letter is also in answer to a complain t received by the Viceroy that 
it was reported that there was fear of disturbance to be caused by the Khudai 
Khidmatgars. 
I hope the strain under which you are working is no t telling upon your health. 1 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 258  Love, BAPU 
Abdul Ghaffar Khan,  p. 445 
 
1 Two days later, Gandhi again wrote to him: 
"No news from you. I hope you had my long letter an d that you have acted up to it. Your 
and my honour is involved in strict adherence to no n-violence on our part in thought, word 
and deed. No news up to now (9-30) in the papers." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 259   
97A. FROM ABDUL GHAFFAR KHAN 
July 12, 1947  
I and my workers have been going about from village  to village asking the 
people to remain absolutely non-violent even under'  provocation on the part of 
the Muslim Leaguers. The Muslim Leaguers are daily taking out processions, 
raising highly objectionable slogans. They call us kafirs and resort to abusive 
language. I have been personally hooted. I feel tha t there is organized 
conspiracy between the Muslim Leaguers, the officia ls and the officers in the 
charge of the referendum. Presiding officers have a ctively encouraged the 
passing of hundreds of bogus votes. In some places eighty to ninety per cent 
votes have been polled, a thing unheard of in any e lection, and more so on the 
basis of an electoral roll which was prepared about  two years ago. 
We have been working under very difficult and tryin g circumstances but have 
adhered to non-violence in thought, word and deed. How long a state of affairs 
like this can last, it is not easy for me to say. I n a nutshell, the Muslim Leaguers 
backed by officials are out to create disturbances.  We have done everything 
humanly possible to avoid a clash. 
Another matter which is causing serious concern to us is the presence in our 
province of a large number of Punjabis who openly i ncite people to violence. 
Not only that, but they have also gone to the lengt h of suggesting in public 
meetings that the top leaders of the Red Shirts sho uld be done away with. They 
also proclaim openly that after Pakistan has been e stablished, there will be a 
trial on the lines of the Nuremberg trial and all o f them who are called as 
traitors will be hanged. Mr. Jalal-ud-din, M.L.A., (Hazara), stated in a public 
meeting that if any of the Muslim ministers visited  Hazara, he would be killed. 
Yours,  
Abdul Gaffar Khan,  pp. 445-46 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 260   
98. TO A FRIEND 1 
Bhangi Colony, New Delhi, July 26, 1947  
DEAR  FRIEND , 
I was much touched by your letter of 19th instant. I wholly agree with you that 
the number of years a person lives in this world is  of no consequence whether 
to him or to the world but even a day spent in true  service of mankind is of 
supreme and only importance. I further agree with y ou that hope and faith are 
as often as not synonymous terms. Of course good is  eternal, evil transitory. 
I must abide by my statement. There can be no place  for a man of peace in a 
society full of strife. Please do not look at my ba d imperfect English but 
consider the heart of my meaning. I am sure you wil l agree with me that a man 
of peace is out of place in a society full of strif e. He must know this fact and 
yet work and act in that society. I wonder if I hav e at all made my meaning 
clear. There is no such thing as surrender in me to  the spirit of evil. 
I do hope that your physical illness is under contr ol. Love to you all, 
Yours,  
From a photostat:  S.N. 22666 
 
1 Probably Carl Heath 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 261   
99. TO MADAME EDMOND PRIVAT 1 
Birla House, New Delhi, November 29, 1947  
DEAR  BHAKTI , 
I was glad to receive your argued letter of 27th Au gust. I see that you have 
grasped the fundamental difference between Passive Resistance and  
Non-violent Resistance. Resistance both forms are, but you have to pay a very 
heavy price when your resistance is passive, in the  sense of the weakness of the 
resister. Europe mistook the bold and brave resista nce full of wisdom by Jesus 
of Nazareth for passive resistance, as if it was of  the weak. As I read the New 
Testament for the first time I detected no passivit y, no weakness about Jesus 
as depicted in the four gospels and the meaning bec ame clearer to me when I 
read Tolstoy's  Harmony of the Gospels  and his other kindred writings. Has not 
the West paid heavily in regarding Jesus as a Passi ve Resister? Christendom has 
been responsible for the wars which put to shame ev en those described in the 
Old Testament and other records, historical or semi - historical. I know that I 
speak under correction for I can but claim very sup erficial knowledge of 
history—modern or ancient. 
Coming to my own personal experience, whilst we und oubtedly got through 
passive resistance our political freedom, over whic h lovers of peace like you 
and your good husband of the West are enthusiastic,  we are daily paying the 
heavy price for the unconscious mistake we made or better still, I made in 
mistaking passive resistance for non-violent resist ance. Had I not made the 
mistake, we would have been spared the humiliating spectacle of weak brother 
killing his weak brother thoughtlessly and inhumanl y. 
I am only hoping and praying and I want all the fri ends here and in other parts 
of the world to hope and pray with me that this blo od-bath will soon end and 
out of that, perhaps, inevitable butchery, will ris e a new and robust India—not 
warlike, basely imitating the West in all its hideo usness, but a new India Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 262  learning the best that the West has to give and bec oming the hope not only of 
Asia and Africa, but the whole of the aching world.  
I must confess that this is hoping against hope, fo r, we are today swearing by 
the military and all that naked physical force impl ies. Our statesmen have for 
over two generations declaimed against the heavy ex penditure on armaments 
under the British regime, but now that freedom from  political serfdom has 
come, our military expenditure has increased and st ill threatens to increase 
and of this we are proud! There is not a voice rais ed against it in our legislative 
chambers. In spite, however, of the madness and the  vain imitation of the 
tinsel of the West, the hope lingers in me and many  others that India shall 
survive this death dance and occupy the moral heigh t that should belong to her 
after the training, however imperfect in non-violen ce for an unbroken period of 
32 years since 1915. 
As to the last paragraph of your letter, I must con fess my ignorance of psycho-
analysis. Richard Gregg of U.S.A. has put the probl em in a more concrete form 
than you have. You must have seen his letter and my  reply in the columns of  
Harijan. 1 
I hope this will find you both in the same vigour i n which you used to be during 
those happy days that you passed with me in India. I wonder if you will ever 
again come to India and see it, not in her madness,  but wisdom, inspiring every 
department of life. 
Love to you both, 
BAPU  
MADAME EDMOND PRIVAT , 1 AVENUE DE LA GARE , NEUCHATEL , SWITZERLAND  
From a photostat:  S.N. 23961 
 
1 Madame Edmond Privat—Wife of Dr Edmond Privat, Prof essor, University of 
Neuchatel, Switzerland. 
2 Vide  Appendix II, pp. 272-275 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 263   
100. TO THE PEOPLE OF GUJARAT 
To 
THE  MEN AND  WOMEN OF  GUJARAT , 
I am dictating this from my bed early on Wednesday morning. It is the second 
day of the fast though twenty- four hours have not been completed since the 
fast commenced. It is the last day of posting for t his week's Harijan.  Hence, I 
have decided to address a few words in Gujarati to the people of Gujarat. 
I do not regard this fast as an ordinary fast. I ha ve undertaken it after deep 
thought and yet it has sprung not from reasoning bu t God's will that rules men's 
reason. It is addressed to no particular section or  individual and yet it is 
addressed equally to all. There is no trace of ange r of any kind behind it nor 
the slightest tinge of impatience. But behind it is  the realization that there is a 
time for everything and an opportunity, once missed  never returns. Therefore, 
the only thing that now remains is for every Indian  to think as to what his or her 
duty in the present hour is. Gujaratis are Indians.  So, whatever I write in 
Gujarati is addressed equally to all the people of India. 
Delhi is the Metropolis of India. If, therefore, we  really in our hearts do not 
subscribe to the two nation theory, in other words,  if we do not regard the 
Hindus and the Muslims as constituting two distinct  nations, we shall have to 
admit that the picture that Delhi presents today is  not what we have envisaged 
always of the capital of India. Delhi is the Eterna l City, as the ruins of its fore-
runners—Indraprastha and Hastinapur testify. It is the heart of India. Only a nit-
wit can regard it as belonging to the Hindus or the  Sikhs only. It may sound 
harsh but it is the literal truth. From Kanya Kumar i to Kashmir and from Karachi 
to Dibrugarh in Assam, all Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Parsis, Christians and Jews 
who people this vast sub-continent and have adopted  it as their dear 
motherland, have an equal right to it. No one has a  right to say that it belongs 
to the majority community only and that the minorit y community can only 
remain there as the underdog. Whoever serves it wit h the purest devotion must Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 264  have the first claim. Therefore, anyone who wants t o drive out of Delhi all 
Musalmans as such must be set down as its enemy No.  1 and therefore, enemy 
No. 1 of India. We are rushing towards that catastr ophe. It is the bounden duty 
of every son and daughter of India to take his or h er full share in averting it. 
What should we do then? If we would see our dream o f  Panchayat Raj,  i.e. true 
democracy realized, we would regard the humblest an d lowest Indian as being 
equally the ruler of India with the tallest in the land. This presupposes that all 
are pure or will become pure if they are not. And p urity must go hand-in-hand 
with wisdom. No one would then harbour any distinct ion between community 
and community, caste and out-caste. Everybody would  regard all as equal with 
oneself and hold them together in the silken net of  love. No one would regard 
another as untouchable. We would hold as equal the toiling labourer and the 
rich capitalist. Everybody would know how to earn a n honest living by the 
sweat of one's brow and make no distinction between  intellectual and physical 
labour. To hasten this consummation, we would volun tarily turn ourselves into 
scavengers. No one who has wisdom will ever touch o pium, liquor or any 
intoxicants. Everybody would observe Swadeshi as th e rule of life and regard 
every woman, not being his wife, as his mother, sis ter or daughter according to 
her age, never lust after her in his heart. He woul d be ready to lay down his life 
when occasion demands it, never want to take anothe r's life. If he is a Sikh in 
terms of the commandment of the Gurus he would have  the heroic courage to 
stand single- handed and alone—without yielding an inch of ground— against the 
"one lakh and a quarter" enjoined by them. Needless  to say, such a son of India 
will not want to be told what his duty in the prese nt hour is. 
Yours, etc., 
 M.  K.  GANDHI  
NEW  DELHI , 
MAKAR SANKRANTI , 14-1-'48 
Hanjan , 18-1-'48, p. 517 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 265   
APPENDIX I 
WHO SHOULD BE PROVINCIAL GOVERNORS ? 
The following is a free translation of Principal Sh riman Narain Agarwal's letter 
in Hindustani from Wardha: 
"In the Constitution that is being framed by the Co nstituent Assembly, there is 
to be provision for the election of provincial Gove rnors  by  the majority of 
voters under the adult franchise system. From this one is entitled to infer that 
as a rule, the nominees of the Congress Parliamenta ry Board will be elected. 
The Chief Minister of the province will also be of the Congress Party. 
Commonsense dictates that the provincial Governor m ust be above the party 
politics of the province concerned, or above being unduly influenced by the 
Chief Minister or above friction between himself an d his Chief Minister. 
"In my opinion there is no necessity for a Governor . The Chief Minister should 
be able to take his place and people's money to the  tune of Rs. 5,500 per month 
for the sinecure of the Governor will be saved. Nev ertheless, no provincial 
Governor should belong to his own province. 
"Moreover, in this way the expense and worry of an election by the majority of 
the adult population will be saved. Will it not be proper and better for the 
President of the Union to select Governors satisfyi ng the reasonable test above 
suggested ? Such Governors will surely raise the to ne of the public life of the 
provinces governed by them. It is worthy of note th at the present Governors 
have been appointed by the Central Cabinet of the U nion on the above basis 
and, therefore, their influence on their provinces has been wholesome. I fear 
that if the Governors are elected as threatened und er the forthcoming 
Constitution, their influence is likely to be unwho lesome. 
"Further, the Constitution as foreshadowed makes no  mention of the village  
panchayats  being the foundation of the progressive decentrali zation in the 
place of the old hunger for centralization. There a re other such defects which 
one can profitably point out, but I have no right o r desire to enter into an Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 266  elaborate criticism of our seasoned leaders. I have  but ventured to draw your 
attention to the defects which have appeared to me and demand your 
guidance." 
There is much to be said in favour of the argument advanced by Principal 
Agarwal about the appointment of provincial Governo rs. I must confess that I 
have not been able to follow the proceedings of the  Constituent Assembly. I do 
not know the context in which the proposal under di scussion has been made. 
But, examined in isolation, the criticism appears i rresistible, with the exception 
that much as I would like to spare every piece of t he public treasury, it would 
be bad economy to do away with provincial Governors  and regard Chief 
Ministers as a perfect equivalent. Whilst I would r esent much power of 
interference to be given to Governors, I do not thi nk that they should be mere 
figure-heads. 
They should have enough power enabling them to infl uence ministerial policy 
for the better. In their detached position they wou ld be able to see things in 
their proper perspective and thus prevent mistakes by their Cabinets. Theirs 
must be an all-pervasive moral influence in their p rovinces. 
Principal Agarwal says that there is no mention or direction about village  
panchayats  and decentralization in the foreshadowed Constitut ion. It is 
certainly an omission calling for immediate attenti on if our independence is to 
reflect the people's voice. The greater the power o f the  panchayats , the better 
for the people. Moreover,  panchayats  to be effective and efficient, the level of 
people's education has to be considerably raised. I  do not conceive the increase 
in the power of the people in military, but in mora l terms. Naturally, I swear by 
Nayee Talim  in this connection. 
Hanjan,  21-12-'47, p. 473 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 267   
APPENDIX II 
A PSYCHOLOGICAL EXPLANATION 
The following is from Mr. Richard B. Gregg, whom ma ny readers of the  Harijan  
know as an American friend who used to live in Shan ti niketan as also with me 
in Sabarmati years ago: 
"Though because of my ignorance I am hesitant, yet I venture to send you an 
idea that seems to me not only to explain with perh aps less moral blame a part 
of the recent communal violence in India but also t o offer hope for the future. 
"It seems to me probable that much of this violence  is an expression not so 
much of inter-communal suspicion and hatred, but ra ther, and more deeply and 
originally, of the long pent-up resentments of the masses because of their 
oppression. The oppression was not only by foreign political rule but by foreign 
modern, social, economic and financial ways which a re contrary to the ancient 
habits of  dharma  which were a very part of the nature of the masses . By 
foreign ways I mean such things as the English land -holding system, usurious 
money lending, heavy taxes payable not in kind but in money, and other 
interferences with long established village life co mmon to all Indian 
communities. 
"Psychological studies have shown clearly that seve re frustrations suffered 
during the childhood of an individual generate rese ntments which are 
suppressed, and remain suppressed long after the pe rson who caused the 
original frustration has died, but later some occas ion pulls a trigger, as it were, 
and releases the pent-up energy of the old resentme nt which then pours forth 
in violence upon some perfectly innocent person. Th is explains many crimes of 
violence, and perhaps some of the cruelties against  the Jews in Europe. In India 
the establishment of religious electorates created a channel into which it was 
easy for this energy to flow, but I believe the fea rful energy of the explosion of 
wrath comes from the older cause I have mentioned. Such an idea as this would 
help explain why in all countries all through histo ry a major change of political Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 268  power results in more or less violence and disorder . The masses always suffer 
some oppression and, therefore, have resentments wh ich flare up upon a shift 
of control or may be exploited by selfish leaders. 
"If this surmise is true, it suggests that the susp icion and hatred of one 
community towards another is not so deep as now app ears. It also means that 
as soon as the masses can be guided back into their  ancient ways of life with 
the chief emphasis on religion and small organizati ons village  panchayats  and 
communal family systems the energy of the people wi ll be turned from violence 
into creative channels. I would expect that Khadi w ork among the refugees 
might help start such a diversion of energy into so und channels. In such a 
development I see hope. 
"Forgive me if this seems to be presumptuous. I wri te it only in the hope that an 
humble outsider, just because he is outside, may se e a gleam of 
encouragement that is not so easy to see in the dus t and distraction of the 
struggle. Anyhow, I love you and India." 
Though many psychologists have recommended a study of psychology, I am 
sorry, I have not been able, for want of time, to s tudy the subject. Mr Gregg's 
letter does not mend matters for me. It does not fi ll me with any impelling 
enthusiasm for undertaking the study. Mr Gregg give s an explanation which 
mystifies the mind instead of clearing it. "Hope fo r the future" I have never lost 
and never will, because it is embedded in my undyin g faith in non-violence. 
What has, however, clearly happened in my case is t he discovery that in all 
probability there is a vital defect in my technique  of the working of non-
violence. There was no real appreciation of non-vio lence in the thirty years' 
struggle against British  Raj.  Therefore, the peace, the masses maintained 
during that struggle of a generation with exemplary  patience, had not come 
from within. The pent-up fury found an outlet when British  Raj  was gone. It 
naturally vented itself in communal violence which was never fully absent and 
which was kept under suppression by the British bay onet. This explanation 
seems to me to be all-sufficing and convincing. In it there is no room for failure 
of any hope. Failure of my technique of non-violenc e causes no loss of faith in Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 269  non-violence itself. On the contrary, that faith is , if possible, strengthened by 
the discovery of a possible flaw in the technique.  
Harijan,  23-11-'47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 270   
APPENDIX III 
FOREWORD TO "THE GANDHIAN CONSTITUTION FOR FREE IND IA" 
Perhaps the expression 'Gandhian Constitution' is n ot a fitting title for Principal 
Agarwal's pages. It may be acceptable as a convenie nt and compact title. The 
framework is really Principal Agarwal's, based on h is study of my writings. He 
has been interpreting them for a number of years. A nd as he is anxious not to 
misinterpret them in any way he would publish nothi ng without my seeing it. 
This is both an advantage and a disadvantage. The a dvantage is obvious. The 
disadvantage lies in the reader mistaking the parti cular writing being my view 
in every detail. Let me then warn him against makin g any such mistake. If I 
were to commit myself to every word appearing in th ese pages, I might as well 
write the thing myself. Though I have endeavoured t o read the constitution 
twice, with as much attention as I was able to best ow on it during my other 
engagements, I could not undertake to check every t hought and every word of 
it. Nor would my sense of propriety and individual freedom permit me to 
commit any such atrocity. All therefore I am able t o say is that the brochure 
contains ample evidence of the care bestowed upon i t by the author to make it 
as accurate as he could. There is nothing in it whi ch has jarred on me as 
inconsistent with what I would like to stand for. 
The author was good enough to make such alterations  as I thought necessary. 
The word "constitution" must not mislead the reader  into thinking that the 
author has made any profession to give him a comple te constitution. He has 
made it perfectly clear in the beginning pages that  he has only laid down broad 
lines to indicate what a constitution of my concept ion would be. I regard Prin-
cipal Agarwal's to be a thoughtful contribution to the many attempts at 
presenting India with Constitutions. The merit of h is attempt consists in the 
fact that he has done what for want of time I have failed to do. 
M.  K.  GANDHI  
On the train to Calcutta, 30th November, 1945 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 271   
 
 
 
 
SELECTED LETTERS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION TWO 
 
EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 272   
1. FAITH IN GOD 
This world is transient. If, therefore, I leave thi s world, why should one be 
worried on that account? It should be enough to wis h that nothing improper is 
done by me as long as I live. We should of course b e careful that we do nothing 
improper even by mistake. True, I have not yet reac hed the stage when I can 
attain liberation but I do believe that if I leave this body while treading the 
path along which my thoughts are nowadays running, I shall be reborn and 
speedily attain to  moksha 1 at the end of that life. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi —Vol. VIII, p. 254, 21-5-1908 
 
The body should not be dearer than the soul. He who  knows the soul, and also 
knows that it is different from the body, will not try to protect his body by 
committing violence. All this is very difficult ind eed; but he who has imbibed 
very noble ideas easily understands it and acts acc ordingly. The belief that the 
soul can do good or evil only when it is encased in  a body is quite mistaken and 
terrible sins have been and are being committed owi ng to it. There is no such 
law that the soul can be known only at an advanced age. Many old men pass 
away without knowing the soul, while persons like t he late Raichandbhai have 
been able to realize the self even at the age of 8.  Mistakes are made and sins 
committed despite such knowledge; but these can be eliminated after very 
careful thought. The body has been gi ven  to us for curbing it. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi—Vol. IX, p. 4 18, 17-9-1908 
 
To ask how there can be  moksha  if there is no God is to fail to understand  
moksha.  We can grasp only a part of the meaning of  moksha ; the rest must be 
experienced; it cannot be put into words. We have n o organs with which to 
describe it. In so far as we can understand, it mea ns deliverance from having to 
assume an endless succession of various bodies, and  from the resultant Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 273  suffering. There is no need, however, to deny the e xistence of God. We may try 
to define God in accordance with the limits of our knowledge. 
At any rate, God is no dispenser of rewards and pun ishments, nor is He an 
active agent. But, if one atman 2 can be conceived after the embodied  atmans 
have become free; it is God. He is no material thin g but pure consciousness. 
This is also the view of the advaitavadins .3 At no time and in no circumstances 
we need a kinglike God. By thinking that we do, we put a limit to the power of 
the atman, which is infinite. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi —Vol. XII, p. 92, 30-5-1913 
 
We are to concern ourselves only with activities th at tend to spiritual welfare. 
Everything else—even health— is subordinate to that . Certain it is that he he 
who strives to realize the Self will have everythin g else given to him. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi —Vol. XII, p. 125, 2-7-1913 
 
God exists, and yet does not. He does not, in any l iteral sense. The  atmah  that 
has attained  moksha  is God and therefore omniscient. The true meaning of 
bhakti 4 is search for the  atman.  When the  atman realizes itself,  bhakti  is 
transformed into  jnana. 5 
Narsimha (Mehta) 6 and others gave themselves to such devoted search of the  
atman.  
Krishna, Rama and others were divine incarnations, but we, too, can be like 
them when immense  punya 7 has accrued to us. The  atmans  about to attain  
moksha  are so many divine incarnations. We need not belie ve in their 
perfection while yet alive. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi— Vol. XII, p. 126, 2- 7-1913 
 
It is difficult to say who was the greatest among K rishna, Rama, the Buddha, 
Jesus, etc. Their achievements differed, because th ey lived in different times Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 274  and under different circumstances. In point of char acter alone, possibly the 
Buddha was the greatest. But who can say ? They hav e been described by their 
devotees according to their own inclinations.  Vaishanavas 8 attribute perfection 
to Krishna. One has to, of course. Otherwise single -minded  bhakti  would be 
impossible. Christians do the same to Jesus. In Ind ia, Krishna being the last (of 
the incarnations), his figure is invested with espe cial greatness. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi—Vol  XII, p. 126, 2-7-1913 
 
Those who deny the existence of God will end up on the wrong path, for they 
will be obliged to deny the existence of the  atman. Avatar 9 is, and will always 
remain, a necessity. It is only when people are in utter despair and immorality 
is widespread that a belief in avatar  comes to prevail. A small number following 
normal morality in the midst of a wicked majority l ooks for support. In a 
situation of this kind, a man of great moral streng th who has no fear of the 
wicked but of whom the wicked stand in fear, is loo ked upon as an avatar after 
his death, or even during his lifetime. It is not p robable, in most cases, that 
such a person regards himself as an  avatar  right from the beginning. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi— Vol. XII, p. 126, 2- 7-1913 
 
Besides  tamas,  there are the qualities of  rajas  and sattava 10 . The first keeps a 
man blind, ignorant and lethargic. The second makes  him rash, daring and 
energetic in worldly pursuits. The quality of  rajas predominates among the 
nations of Europe. Most of our activities are also of a like nature. Those 
endowed with the quality of  sattva  are tranquil, self-collected and 
discriminating. They do not bother themselves with the affairs of the world, 
but keep their minds fixed on God. This  sattvic  disposition has been rightly 
described as "soothfastness". "Soothfast" means cal m. With "ness", the word 
becomes a noun and means peace. Only when the mind is peaceful one can 
realize God, and the state of mind in which such re alization becomes possible is 
the  sattvic  state. God, as transcending the three qualities ha s no activity, good 
or otherwise, but (through) mava 11  He exists as  chaitanya. 12  He is beyond the Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 275  three qualities. When, however, He does engage Hims elf in some activity, such 
as instructing Arjuna, the impulse behind it is a  sattvic  one and, since activity 
as such is a mode of qualification, He (Krishna) is  described as (God) in his 
sattva-qualified aspect. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi —Vol. XII, pp. 188-89, 17-9-1913 
 
The body is sure to fall, and that, on the appointe d day. Remedies occur to us 
accordingly. The  atman, besides, is immortal and, though we seem to be 
concerned only with the body, our real concern shou ld be for the  atman.  For a 
truth, we don't preserve the body for any length of  time after the soul has left 
it. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi —VoL XII, p. 373, 5-3-1914 
 
There is no God but Truth. One's virtues are no dea d matter but are all life. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi—Vol XIV,  p.  385, 1-5-1918 
 
God's ways are inscrutable. Karma can never be undo ne. All action bears fruit, 
good or bad, and what we call an accident is not on e in fact. It but seems so to 
us. No one dies before his time. Death, besides, is  only the final transformation 
of the same entity, it is not a total annihilation.  The  atman  is immortal. Even 
the transformation is only of the body. The state c hanges, not the  atman.  
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi —Vol. XIV p. 502, 24-7-1918 
 
Just as we are happy changing from an old house to a new one, we have no 
cause, surely, to mourn when an atman -friend gives up a worn-out body and 
assumes a new one. This would be true, whether the person died young or old. 
When exactly a body ceases to be serviceable, its C reator alone knows. We may 
not aspire to know it. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 276  The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi— Vol.  XV,  p. 313, 19-5-1919 
 
I have no axes to grind, no worldly ambition to ser ve. The only purpose of life is 
to see God face to face, and the more I see of life  and its experiences, the 
more I feel that everyone does not receive the ligh t in the same way even as, 
though the sun is the same, we see it differently f rom the equatorial regions, 
from the temperate zone and from the frigid zone. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi— Vol. XXIII, p. 267, 18-3-1924 
 
In my opinion, God's name and God's work go hand to  hand. There is no 
question of preference because the two are indivisi ble. A parrot-like repetition 
of the name is worse than useless, and service or a ction without the 
consciousness that it is done in God's name and for  God's sake is also valueless, 
and if we sometimes pass our time in merely repeati ng the name of the deity as 
we have to, it is simply a course of preparation fo r self- dedication, that is, 
service for the sake of and in the name of God, and  when we are thoroughly 
attuned, continued service in that spirit is itself  equal to the repetition of the 
name of the deity. In the vast majority of cases, h owever, the setting apart a 
part of our time for prayer is a vital necessity. S o far as I am aware, all 
scriptures and, certainly, the Indian scriptures, h old a guru 13  to be absolutely 
indispensable, but if we cannot get a real  guru,  a sham substitute is not only 
useless but injurious. That is one of the reasons w hy I suppose the tenth  guru  
established the Granth Sahib as the last Guru.  
I have no spiritual  guru, but believing in the institution, I have been in search 
of one for the last thirty years. The very search i s the greatest consolation to 
me. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi— Vol. XXIII, p. 289, 1-3-1924 
 
Why should one fear who knows that God is the Prote ctor of all? By saying that 
God is the Protector of all I do not mean that none  would be able to rob us or Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 277  that no animal will attack us. It is no slur on God 's protection if such things 
happen to us; it is only due to our lack of faith i n Him. The river is for ever 
ready to give water to all. But if one does not go near it with a pot to get 
water, or avoids it thinking its water poisonous, h ow can that be the fault of 
the river ? All fear is a sign of lack of faith. Bu t faith cannot be developed by 
means of reasoning. It comes gradually through quie t thinking, contemplation 
and practice. To develop such faith, we pray to God , read good books, seek the 
company of the good and take to sacrificial spinnin g at the wheel. He who has 
no faith will not even touch the spinning-wheel. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 28, 16-5-1927 
 
Truth is that God saves me so long as He wants me i n this body. The moment 
His wants are satisfied, no precautions on my part will save me. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 91, 8-4-1929 
 
Those who believe in God's guidance just do the bes t they can and never worry. 
The sun has never been known to suffer from overstr ain and yet who slaves 
with such unexampled' regularity as he! And why sho uld we think that the sun is 
inanimate ? The difference between him and us may b e that he has no choice, 
we have a margin, no matter how precarious it may b e. But no more 
speculation of this sort. Suffice it for us that we  have his brilliant example in 
the matter of tireless energy. If we completely sur render ourselves to His will 
and really become ciphers, we too voluntarily give up the right of choice and 
then we need no wear and tear. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 171, 11-2-1932 
 
If we have trust in God, we should not worry even a s we would not when we 
have a trustworthy doorkeeper or guard. And who can  be a better doorkeeper 
or guard than God the never-failing. It is not enou gh that we sing about such 
things or have a mere intellectual grasp. It is nec essary to feel the thing within. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 278  Feeling is exactly like feeling pain or pleasure. I t admits of or needs no 
argument. Who can argue us out of our experience? I  write this, because I want 
you to be absolutely free from all care and anxiety . 
My Dear Child,  p. 89, 13-4-1932 
 
There cannot be any proof for the existence of God which is acceptable to 
human reason, for, God is beyond reason. We land ou rselves in great difficulty 
if we think that reason is everything and that ther e is nothing beyond it. The 
human soul herself is beyond reason. People have tr ied to reason out her 
existence as well as the existence of God. But he w ho knows the soul and God 
by his intellect knows nothing. Intellect at times is useful in the acquisition of 
knowledge, but man who depends upon it, alone can n ever know the self, just 
as someone who knows the advantages of eating food-  grains by his intellect 
cannot derive the benefits which accrue from actual  eating. The soul and God 
are not objects of knowledge. They are knowers them selves and therefore 
cannot be apprehended by the intellect. There are t wo stages in the knowledge 
of God, (1) faith and (2) experience arising from f aith. The great teachers of 
mankind have borne witness to the existence of God by their experience. And 
those whom the world would dismiss as fools have bo rne witness by their faith. 
If we share their faith, we shall have actual exper ience in God's good time. A 
man sees another with his eyes, but being deaf hear s nothing. If then he says 
the other man cannot be heard he would be wrong of course. In the same way 
to say that God cannot be recognized by reason is t o betray our ignorance. We 
cannot perceive God by the senses or apprehend Him by the intellect, just as 
we cannot hear with the eyes. A different faculty i s needed to realize God and 
that faculty is unshakable faith. The intellect can  be misled every moment as 
we know to our cost. But real faith can never be le d astray. 
Selected Letters—II,  pp. 11-12, 5-5-1932 
 
Though death and life are the faces of the same com  and though we should die 
as cheerfully as we live, it is necessary while the re is life to give the body its Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 279  due. lt is a charge given to us by God. And we have  to take all reasonable care 
about it. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai—V 61. I, p. 124, 22-5-1932 
 
I was at first lacking in faith, but, I acquired it  by contemplation and study of 
religions. It grows stronger from day to day, as I have an increasing realization 
of the fact that God abides with me in my heart. . . . But . . . one man's 
experience in this line is of no use to another. Fa ith can be strengthened only 
by constant effort informed by faith. 
The Diary of Mahadev Dcsai—V ol. I, p. 125, 23-5-1932 
 
God means Truth. For the last few years I have been  saying that Truth is God 
instead of 'God is Truth'. The former statement is more consonant with facts, 
for in this world there is nothing besides Truth. T ruth here should be 
understood in a wide sense. It is full of intellige nce. God as Truth and His Law 
are not different but one and the same; therefore i t also is full of intelligence. 
Indeed it is all the same whether we say that the u niverse is a function of Truth 
or that it is a function of Law. This Truth is char ged with infinite power. In the 
language of the Gita, (Chapter 10), the universe is  sustained by a fraction of it. 
Therefore if you replace the word God by the word T ruth wherever it occurs, 
you will have some idea of what I mean. 
If God is, it is our duty to worship Him even if we  recognize him as Truth. We 
tend to become what we worship. That is the whole a nd comprehensive 
meaning of prayer. Truth abides in the human heart.  But we realize it 
indifferently or not at all. Sincere prayer is the key to such realization. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai—V ol. I, p. 160, 13-6-1932 
 
The purpose of life is undoubtedly to know oneself!  We cannot do it unless we 
learn to identify ourselves with all that lives. Th e sum-total of that life is God. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 280  Hence the necessity of realizing God living within every one of us. The 
instrument of this knowledge is boundless selfless service. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai —Vol. I, p. 184, 21-6-1932 
 
The inner voice defies description. But sometimes w e do feel that we receive 
an inspiration from within.... 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai— Vol. I, p. 275, 7-8-1932 
 
My spiritual growth has been unnoticed like the gro wth of hair on our heads. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai—Vol  I, p. 275, 7-8-1932 
 
Sorrows of God's servants are their joys. They are the fires through which God 
tries and purifies them. Unmixed joys of the earth will stink in our nostrils and 
we should die for want of the oxygen of sorrows. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 34, 9-10-1932 
 
When God is the care-taker for us all, why need we carry the burden? Ours is 
but to do the task that falls to our lot. 
Selected Letters—II,  p.  35, 22-10-1932 
 
If we exist, God exists as well; for the totality o f life is God even as the totality 
of solar rays is the sun. In order to have faith in  this God, you must have faith 
m yourself. Faith in oneself can be won by the self less service of humanity. Or 
else we may believe in God because all the world be sides believes in Him. 
Selected Letters—II,  p.  32, 19-12-1932 
 
Objects of senses are eradicated only by seeing God  face to face, in other 
words by faith in God. To have complete faith in Go d is to see Him. Nor is the 
matter any better by assuming the existence of the fourth dimension. It Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 281  ultimately points to the same thing. "Seek ye first  the Kingdom of God and all 
else will be added unto you." When we meet Him we w ill dance in the joy of His 
Presence and there will be neither fear of snakes, nor of the death of dear 
ones. For there is no death and no snake bite in Hi s Presence. The fact is that 
the most living faith too falls short of the perfec t. Hence there is no such thing 
as complete absence of fear for the embodied, i.e. imprisoned soul. The 
possession of the body is a limitation. It is a wal l of separation. We can 
therefore but try to shed our fear, i.e. increase o ur faith. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 231, 22-12-1932 
 
We are the Universe. We are in it and it is in us. God also is within us. Our eyes 
do not see the air that fills our bodies, but we ha ve the faculty to perceive it. 
It is possible to develop the faculty of perceiving  God and if we do succeed in 
doing so, we can even recognize God. 
To Gandhian Capitalist,  p. 150, 11-1-1933 
 
If you have a living faith in a living God, you wou ld feel His never-failing 
presence protecting you. Till that state is reached  even faith in an individual 
clothed in flesh and bone is not of any avail. It i s relying on a broken reed. You 
should first think this out clearly and then get th e heart to co-operate with the 
intellect. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 260, 4-5-1933 
 
When we know that God Himself is the mystery of mys teries, why should 
anything that He does perplex us? If He acted as we  would have Him do or if He 
acted exactly like us, we would not be His creature s and He our Creator. The 
impenetrable darkness that surrounds us is not a cu rse but a blessing. He has 
given us power to see the steps in front of us and it would be enough if 
Heavenly Light reveals that step to us. We can then  sing with Newman 'One 
step enough for me'. And we may be sure from our pa st experience that then Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 282  next step will always be in view. In other words th e impenetrable darkness is 
nothing so impenetrable as we may imagine. But it s eems impenetrable when in 
our impatience we want to look beyond that one step . And since God is love, 
we can say definitely that even the physical catast rophies that He sends now 
and then must be a blessing in disguise and they ca n be so only to those who 
regard them as a warning for introspection and self -purification. 
My Dear Child,  pp. 104-05, 31-3-1934 
 
God watches us all not with a view to punish but to  chasten. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 17 
 
The power that moves us is God. Just as a watch sto ps when its wound up 
spring has run out, so also when our spring is done , our cart comes to a dead 
halt. While it is still on the move, we feel that a  certain freedom of action is 
granted to us. Let us use that freedom to learn and  do the will of the great 
Carpenter. 
Selected Letters—I,  p. 23 
 
I have known God only as Truth. There was a time wh en I had doubts about the 
existence of God, but I never doubted the existence  of Truth. This Truth is not 
something material but pure intelligence. It rules over the universe; therefore 
it is Ishvara  (The Lord). . . . This is for me almost a matter o f experience. 
Selected Letters—I,  p. 38 
 
Perfect realization of the Supreme is impossible so  long as one is subject to the 
limitations of life. He might reach the door but ca nnot enter as he still bears 
his body like chains. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 39 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 283  I say that Truth is God not because God is without form and so is Truth, but 
because Truth is the only comprehensive attribute o f God. Other attributes are 
only partial expressions of the reality that is God . 
Selected Letters —I, p. 55 
 
By looking upon Truth as God we steer clear of quit e a number of dangers. We 
lose all interest in seeing or hearing about miracl es. Seeing God is difficult to 
understand; but seeing Truth presents no such diffi culty. Seeing Truth is indeed 
a hard task, but as we approach nearer and nearer t o truth, we catch a glimpse 
of the God of Truth, so that we hope to have a full  view in His good time and 
our faith also burns brighter and brighter. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 56 
 
We may have any number of co-workers but God alone can be our friend. 
Friendship with men comes in the way of our friends hip with God, as I have 
found from experience. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 43 
 
A man realizes the Supreme by becoming absolutely f ree from likes and dislikes 
and never otherwise. I hold that he who says that h e has attained realization is 
far, far away from his destination. Realization is a matter of experience but 
does not lend itself to description in language. 
I can live only in virtue of my faith in God. In my  view there is no God different 
from Truth. Truth is God. 
Selected Letters—I,  p. 51 
 
We must believe in the existence of God, inasmuch a s we believe in our own. 
Living beings exist and so does God who is the sum- total of all life. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 284  By a disbelief in God we injure ourselves in the sa me way as if we disbelieved 
in ourselves. That is to say, not to believe in God  is something like suicide. But 
it is one thing to believe in God, and quite anothe r thing to conduct ourselves 
as if we had such a living faith. As a matter of fa ct there is no atheist in the 
world; atheism is a mere presence. 
Selected Letters—I,  p. 51 
 
1 Freedom from birth 
2 The Self, not identifiable with any aspect of human  individuality 
3 Those who hold the view that the atman, the Self in  man, is not distinct from the 
Biahman, the Absolute. 
4 Devotion 
5 Knowledge 
6 Poet-Saint of Gujarat 
7 Accumulated merit 
8 A Hindu sect worshipping Vishnu—the second deity of  sacred Triad (Brahma, Vishnu and 
Mahesh) 
9 Incarnation 
10  Mental propensities derived from one's physiologica l equipment  (Vide  Bhagwad Gita, 
XIV, 5-8) 
11  A Vedantic concept, seeking to explain phenomenal e xistence 
12  Principle of life and consciousness 
13  Spiritual Guide 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 285   
2. RELIGION AND SCRIPTURES 
Throughout the  Bhagwadgita, 1 I can see no warrant for holding that a man who 
can only control "the organs of action" but cannot help "dwelling in his mind on 
the objects of the senses" had better use the organ s of action until the mind, 
too, is under control. In ordinary practices, we ca ll such use an indulgence, and 
we know, too, that, if we can control the flesh eve n while the spirit is weak, 
always wishing that the, spirit were equally strong , we will certainly arrive at a 
right correspondence. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 248, 10-5-1910 
 
Personally, I think the world as a whole will never  have, and need not have, a 
single religion. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 94, 30-5-1913 
 
Comparison of religions is uncalled for. One must g ain a mature understanding 
of one's own religion and then study others. For pu rposes of comparison in a 
general way, the criterion is compassion as a rule of life. The greater the scope 
for compassion in a way of life, the more of religi on it has. "The ethical way has 
its roots in compassion" that is the first principl e to be taught to everyone; and 
the second, " Brahman  is the Reality; the Phenomenal world is unreal." N o single 
principle may appeal to all, but it would seem that  one who is in quest of the  
atman  will have the right principle spring to his lips a t the right time. 
In fact, there are as many paths as there are human  beings. So long as men 
differ (in temperament), their paths are bound to d iffer. He who sees the 
identity of his  atman  with the  atmans  of others will also see unity in the 
religions. 
When the  atman  is free from bondage to the body, it is said to ha ve attained  
moksha.  The nature of that state is not to be described. I t can only be Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 286  experienced. Ghosts, etc., are an evil order of bei ngs. Those guilty of wicked 
deeds are born in that order. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 127, 2-7-1913 
 
David's Psalm has a meaning which is worth understa nding. He desires in it the 
destruction of the wicked; the significance of this  is that he cannot bear evil. 
The same idea appears in the  Ramayana. 2 Gods and men both pray for the 
destruction of  rakshasas. 3 
The prayer  Jaya Rama Rama 4 is inspired by the same sentiment. The spiritual 
significance of the Psalm is that David (Arjuna—den oting god ward attributes) 
desires destruction of Duryodhana and others (denot ing satanic attributes). This 
is the  sattvic  impulse. It comes into play when one is in a state  of  bhakti.  When 
one attains to the state of  jnana 5, both the impulses subside and all that 
remains is pure consciousness—Knowledge Absolute. Y ou will not probably find 
this state described in the Bible. Though David was  imperfect, he was a 
bhakta. 6 His sentiments have found expression in the Psalm in simple language 
and, though a great man, he makes himself humble be fore God, looking upon 
himself as a mere blade of grass. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 407, 12-4-1914 
 
Our scriptures place parents on a level with God. I t is not always that parents in 
this world are fit to carry such responsibility. Be ing but earthly, they pass on 
the legacy to their children and so from generation  to generation mere 
embodiments of selfishness come into this world. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIV P- 221, 27-2-1918 
 
The true end of all effort in life is to gain contr ol over the impulses of one's 
nature; that is Dharma. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIV p. 385, 1-5-1918 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 287  My bent is not political but religious and I take p art 
Politics because I feel that there is no department  of life which can be divorced 
from religion and because politics touch the vital being of India almost at every 
point. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIV p. 5, 4-8-1919 
 
I consider myself a Hindu of Hindus. I believe that  I have a fine perception of 
the truth of Hinduism and the priceless lesson I ha ve learnt from it is that I 
should not wish that others may become Hindus but t hat they become best 
specimens in their own faith. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI,  p.  477, 13-1-1920 
 
Reciting  Gayatri 7, daily or occasionally, without a fixed rule can ne ver bring the 
same reward as reciting it with a devout heart at a  fixed hour every day. 
Progress in life is possible only if one regulates one's life according to rules. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVII, p. 526, 13-2-1920 
 
Holy men of  tapascharya 8 have told us that those who study the  Vedas 9 but do 
not follow  Dharma 10  in conduct are mere pedants; that they neither swi m 
across themselves, nor help others to do so. So it is that I am never impressed 
by those who have the Vedas on their lips or have g ot the commentaries by 
heart and, instead of marvelling at their learning,  cherish my little knowledge 
as of greater value. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIX, p. 98, (on or after) 11-12-1920 
 
True religion being the greatest thing in life and in the world, it has been 
exploited the most. And those who have seen the exp loiters and the 
exploitation and missed the reality naturally get d isgusted with thing itself. But 
religion is after all a matter for each individual and then too a matter of the Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 288  heart, call it then by whatever name you like, that  which gives one the greatest 
solace in the midst of the severest fire is God. 
A Bunch of Old Letters,  p. 43, 25-4-1925 
 
Religion declares that so long as man harbours evil  he is impure and unfit to 
stand before God. So the first duty of any of you w ho has such thoughts is to 
confess about it and thus purge yourselves of the e vil. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 47, 26-9-1927 
 
We should not kill others for what we regard as Tru e and Pure. We should 
prepare to die for that Truth and, when the call co mes, give our life for it and 
put the seal of our blood on our Truth. In my view this is the essence of all 
religions. 
Letters to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur,  p. 223
 
What you say about rebirth is sound. It is nature's  kindness that we do not 
remember past births. Where is the good either of k nowing in detail the 
numberless births we have gone through? Life would be a burden if we carried 
such a tremendous load of memories. A wise man deli berately forgets many 
things, even as a lawyer forgets the cases and thei r details as soon as they are 
disposed of. Yes, "death is but a sleep and a forge tting". 
Bapu's Letters to Mira , p. 154, 25-1-1931 
 
Pinda  is our body, and  Brahmanda  is the universe. Now everything found in the 
body is found in the universe also; and if anything  is not there in the former it 
is absent from the latter too. Our body is of the e arth earthy. There are five 
elements on the earth (earth, water, fire, air, eth er) as well as in the body. 
There is a variety of living beings on the earth an d of living cells in the body. 
The body dies and is reborn; so the earth also unde rgoes transformation. And so 
on. From this we may infer that if we have true kno wledge of the body, we Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 289  shall have knowledge of the universe too, and need not go far a field in search 
of it. The body is at hand, and if we get to know i t, we shall have attained our 
object. If we try to know the universe this knowled ge must always remain 
incomplete. Therefore wise men have told us that th ere is nothing in the 
universe which is not in the body too, and therefor e if we know the self, this 
knowledge embraces all knowledge whatever. But in t he act of knowing the self 
we get to know something about other objects, and w e have the right to derive 
what enjoyment we can from this external knowledge,  as it is part of self-
knowledge. 
We should not mix up the historic Krishna with the Krishna of the Gita who was 
not discussing the question of violence and non-vio lence. Arjuna was not averse 
to killing in general, but only to killing his own relatives. Therefore Krishna 
suggested that in doing one's duty one may not trea t one's relations differently 
from other people. In the age of the Gita the quest ion whether one should or 
should not wage war was not raised by any important  person. Indeed it appears 
to have been raised only in recent times. All Hindu s in those days believed 
Ahimsa (non-violence), but what amounted to and wha t did not amount to 
violence was a question debated then as it is debat ed now. Many things which 
we look upon as non-violent will perhaps be conside red violent by future 
generations. For we destroy life when we use milk o r cereals as food. Therefore 
it is quite possible that posterity will give up mi lk production and the 
cultivation of food grains. Just as we consider our selves as non-violent in spite 
of our consumption of milk and food grains, so also  in the age of the Gita 
fighting was such a common thing that no one though t it was contrary to 
Ahimsa. Therefore I do not see anything wrong in th e Gita having used warfare 
as an illustration. But if we study the whole of th e Gita and examine its 
descriptions of  sthitaprajana, 11  brahma- bhuta, 12  bhakta 13  and  yogi 14  we can 
reach only this conclusion that the Krishna of the Gita was the very incarnation 
of Ahimsa and his exhortation to Arjuna to fight do es not detract from his 
greatness. On the other hand if he had given him di fferent advice, his 
knowledge would have been proved inadequate, and he  would not have been Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 290  entitled to be called  Yogeshuara  (the prince of  Yogis)  and  Puma Avatara 
 (the perfect incarnation). 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, pp. 93-94, 28-4-1932 
 
Tulsidas holds that the name of Rama is more powerf ul than Rama himself and 
suggests that there is no relation between the word  Rama and its meaning. The 
meaning will be filled in later by the devotee in a ccordance with the nature of 
his devotion. That is the beauty of this repetition  ( japa ). Otherwise it would be 
impossible to prove that it will make a new man eve n of a simpleton. The 
devotee must fulfil only a single condition. The na me should not be repeated 
for show or with a view to deceiving others, but wi th determination and faith. 
If a man perseveres with such repetition, I have no t the shadow of a doubt that 
it will be for a universal provider. Everyone who h as the requisite patience can 
realize this in his own case. For days and sometime s for years, the mind 
wanders and becomes restless; the body craves for s leep when one is engaged 
in repeating the name. Indeed even still more painf ul symptoms intervene. Still 
if the seeker perseveres with the repetition, it is  bound to bear fruit. Spinning 
is a gross material accomplishment and yet it can b e acquired only after our 
patience is sorely tried. Things more difficult tha n spinning demand a greater 
effort on our part. Therefore he who is out to atta in the Supreme must undergo 
the necessary discipline for a long, long time and never be downhearted. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, pp. 120-21, 20-5-1932 
 
As the sixth chapter assures us, the least little sadhana  (spiritual effort) is not 
wasted. The seeker will proceed further in his next  birth, starting from it as a 
base. Similarly if a person has the will but not th e ability to make spiritual 
progress, his environment in his subsequent birth w ill be such as to strengthen 
that will. But this fact must not be made an excuse  for relaxation now. If it is 
so made, it means that the will is only intellectua l and not heart-felt. 
Intellectual willing serves no useful purpose, as i t does not persist after death If 
the will is heart-felt, it must manifest itself in effort But it is quite possible Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 291  that physical weakness as well as the environment m ay come in its way. Even 
so, when the soul leaves the body, it carries its g oodwill with it. which 
fructifies into deed in the subsequent birth when c ircumstances are more 
favourable. Thus one who does good is sure to make steady progress. 
Jnaneshvar 15  may have meditated on Nivritti 16 during the latter's life-time. But 
we must not follow his example. One on whom we medi tate must be a perfect 
individual. To ascribe such perfection to a living person is improper and 
unnecessary. Again it is possible that Jnaneshvar m editated on Nivritti not as he 
actually was but as he had imagined him to be. Such  refinement is not however 
for people like ourselves. When we raise the questi on of meditating on living 
person, there is no room for a mental image of him.  If the question is answered 
with such an image in view, it can only throw the q uestioner into mental 
confusion. 
All the names given in the first chapter of the Git a are in my opinion not so 
much proper nouns as names of qualities. In describ ing the eternal warfare 
between the heavenly and the devilish natures, the poet has personified them 
as the characters in the Mahabharat. This does not imply a refusal to believe 
that an actual battle took place at Hastinapur betw een the Pandavas and the 
Kauravas. I hold that the poet took some such actua l event as the thread upon 
which to hang his discourse. But I may be wrong. Ag ain if all the names given 
are the names of real historical characters, the po et has done nothing improper 
in giving the list at the historical beginning. And  as the first chapter is an 
essential part of the subject-matter of the Gita, i t too should be recited as part 
of  Gita-patha,. 17  
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, pp. 171-72, 18-6-1932 
 
Nama-japa 18  helps one to conquer sin. One who repeats the Name  with a pure 
heart is full of faith that the repetition is bound  to help him in this conquest. 
To conquer sin in other words means self-purificati on. One who repeats the 
Name in faith will never tire of it, so that the Na me which is at first on the 
tongue enters the heart and purifies it. This is th e universal experience without Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 292  any exceptions. Even psychologists hold that as a m an thinks, so he becomes. 
This principle applies to Ramanama. I have the full est faith in  Nama- japa.  Its 
discoverer was a man of experience, and I am firmly  of opinion that his 
discovery is extremely important. Purification shou ld be possible even for the 
illiterate. And here  Nama-japa  comes in (Gita, IX, 22; X, 10). Telling the beads 
of a rosary is a help in achieving mental concentra tion. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 275, 7-8-1932 
 
Silence is looked upon as a very important thing am ong our people.  Samadhi  
means silence.  Muni  (sage) and  mauna  (sage-hood, silence) are both derived 
from the same root. It is true that when we practis e silence at first, many 
thoughts enter our minds and we even begin to doze.  Silence is intended to 
remedy these defects. We are accustomed to talk muc h and hear loud sounds. 
Silence, therefore, seems difficult. A little pract ice however enables us to like 
it, and when we like it, it gives us a sense ineffa ble peace. We are seekers of 
truth. We must therefore understand what silence me ans and observe it 
accordingly. We can certainly take Ramanama during silence. The fact is that 
we should prepare the mind for it. We shall realize  its value if we bestow a 
little thought on it. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 313, 28-8-1932 
 
You have asked me for my opinion about occult scien ces. I am not in love with 
them. The book of life is open to the simplest mind s and it should be so. There 
is nothing occult in God's plan. Anyway the mysteri ous and the occult have 
never made any appeal to me. Truth has no secrets, and truth is God. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 27, 30-10-1932 
 
Because I do not find a particular thing helpful fo r me, I may not be indifferent 
about others and not take the trouble of knowing wh ether it is helpful for 
them. I know that that particular form of idolatry is helpful for millions, not Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 293  because they are less developed than I am, but beca use they are differently 
constituted. What must not be forgotten about me is  that not only do I not 
consider idol worship to be a sin, but I know that in some form or other it is a 
condition of our being. The difference between one form of worship and 
another is a difference in degree and not in kind. Mosque-going or church-going 
is a form of idol worship. Veneration of the Bible,  the Kuran, the Gita and the 
like is idol worship, and even if you do not use a book or a building, but draw a 
picture of divinity in your imagination and attribu te to it certain qualities, it is 
again idol worship. And I refuse to call the worshi p of the one who has a stone 
image a grosser form of worship. Learned judges hav e been known to have such 
images in their own homes. A philosopher like Pandi t Malaviyaji will not eat his 
meal without offering worship to the household deit y. It would be both 
arrogant and ignorant to look down upon such worshi p as superstition. Again in 
the imagination of the worshipper, God is in consec rated stone and not in the 
other stones lying about him. Even so the sanctuary  in a church is more sacred 
than any other place in it. You can multiply for yo urself instances of this 
character. All this is a plea not for laxity in tho ught or worship, but it is a plea 
for a definite recognition of the fact that all for ms of honest worship are 
equally good and equally efficient for the respecti ve worshippers. Time is gone 
for the exclusive possession of the right by an ind ividual or group. God is no 
respecter of forms or words, for He is able to pene trate our actions and our 
speech and understand our thoughts even when we do not understand them 
ourselves, and it is just our thoughts that matter to Him. 
Selected Letters—II,  pp. 29-30, 29-11-1932 
 
Nirvan  is utter extinction of all egoism, self. Its posit ive aspect is capable of 
being experienced but incapable of being described.  But we know from 
inference that it is something vastly superior to a ny bliss that we can possibly 
experience on this earth. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 233, (probably) 29-12-1932 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 294  There is nothing so bad in all the world. And yet I  cannot leave religion and 
therefore Hinduism. My life would be a burden to me , if Hinduism failed me. I 
love Christianity, Islam and many other faiths thro ugh Hinduism. Take it away 
and nothing remains for me. But then I cannot toler ate it with untouchability—
the high-and-low belief. Fortunately Hinduism conta ins a sovereign remedy for 
the evil. I have applied the remedy. 
A Bunch of Old Letters,  p. 113, 2-5-1933 
 
The  Mahabharata  is poetry not history. The poet tries to show that  if a man 
resorts to violence, untruth too is sure to come in , and even people like Krishna 
cannot escape it. A wrong is a wrong, no matter who  the wrongdoer is. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 41 
 
1 Literally, the Divine Song. It is the epitome of Hi ndu religion and philosophy as 
expounded by Lord Krishna to Arjuna on the battlefi eld of Kurukshetra. 
2 The national epic of which Rama is the divine hero.  
3 Demons 
4 Victory to Rama  
5 Enlightenment 
6 Devotee 
7 Most potential Vedic Mantra to eliminate evil 
8 Penance, austerity 
9 Most profound and highly lyrical works of the Aryan s from which sprang the religious 
beliefs or practices and their social structure, et c. 
10  Religion or religious duty 
11  One whose understanding is steadfast. 
12  Absorbed into the Supreme Spirit 
13  Devotee Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 295  14  One who practises Yoga, the process of inner and bo dily purification through the 
inhaling and exhaling process of breathing. 
15  Medieval saint of Maharashtra who at 16 composed mo st illuming treatise on  
Bhagwadgita,  known as  Dnaneshwari.  
16  His eldest brother and initiator into the knowledge  of Him. 
17  Recitation of Gita 
18  Repeating God's name 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 296   
3. VALUE OF PRAYER 
One cannot pray to God for help in a spirit of prid e but only if one confesses 
oneself as helpless. As I lie in bed, every day I r ealize how insignificant we are, 
how very full of attachments and aversions, and wha t evil desires sway us. 
Often I am filled with shame by unworthiness of my mind. Many a time I fall 
into despair because of the attention my body crave s and wishes that it should 
perish. From my condition, I can very well judge th at of others. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. Xy p. 65, 26-11-1918 
 
Do you read something or other regularly? Do you pr ay as you get up from bed? 
If you don't, allow me to remind you about it, for I am certain that prayer does 
us a world of good. You will realize its value in t imes of trouble, and even from 
day to day if you offer it thoughtfully. Prayer is food for the soul. As the body 
languishes for want of nourishment, even so does th e soul wither away without 
her appropriate food. 
Selected Letters—II.  p. 19, 2-6-1919 
 
Do attend the prayer meetings even if your mind is inclined to wander. We 
offer prayers to concentrate our minds on the one t hing needful. One who has 
achieved this concentration may or may not attend p rayer meetings; it is all 
the same to him. All that we can do is not delibera tely to allow the mind to 
wander. Striving in this way we may hope one day to  be conscious at all times 
of the presence of God even as the poet-saint Tulsi das was. 
Selected Letters —II,  p. 9 
 
Those of you who have promised to attend the prayer  daily should make it a 
point to be present except in circumstances beyond your control. 
Selected Letters—I,  p. 4, 6-12-1926 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 297  We may miss many things in life but not prayer, whi ch implies our co-operation 
with God and with one another. Prayer should be bat h of purification for the 
spirit of man. Physical health suffers if we do not  wash our bodies; similarly the 
spirit becomes unclean if the heart is not washed w ith prayer. Please therefore 
never be negligent in prayer. 
Selected Letters—I,  p. 5, 31-12-1926 
 
Devotion to duty is itself prayer. We go and pray i n order to be qualified for 
doing actual service. But when one is engaged in ac tual practice of duty, prayer 
is merged with the execution of duty. If someone wh o is engaged in deeper 
prayer, hears the cry of another who is stung by a scorpion, she is bound to 
leave the prayer and run to help him. Prayer finds fulfilment in the service of 
the distressed. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 79, 23-9-1929 
 
And now here is the first verse of the morning pray er: 
"Early in the morning, I call to mind that Being wh ich is felt in the heart, which 
is  sat  (the eternal),  chit (knowledge),  sukham  (bliss), which is the state 
reached by perfect men and which is the superstate.  I am that immaculate 
Brahma which ever notes the states of dream, wakefu lness and deep sleep, not 
this body, the compound made of the elements (earth , water, space, light and 
air)!" You will be interested to know that the firs t verse was commenced on the 
6th last. 
I am sorry that the very first verse needed correct ing. The more I think, the 
more clearly I see the meaning. And then I do not m ind how often I cut about 
the translation. Formerly I used to shudder to utte r this verse thinking that the 
claim made therein was arrogant. But when I saw the  meaning more clearly, I 
perceived at once that it was the very best thought  with which to commence 
the day. It is a solemn declaration that we are not  the changeful bodies which 
require sleep, etc., but deep down, we are the Bein g, the witness pervading Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 298  the countless bodies. The first part is the recalli ng to mind the presence of the 
vital principle and the second part is the affirmat ion that we are that vital 
principle. The description of the Being, the Brahma  is also quite apposite. It is, 
nothing else  is {sat),  it is all knowledge or light  (chit),  and naturally, therefore, 
it is all bliss ( sukham)  or the word generally used is ( anand).  
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 143, 20-12-1930 
 
"In the early morning I worship Him who is beyond t he reach of thought and 
speech and yet by whose grace „ all speech is possi ble, I worship Him whom the 
Vedas describe as  neti neti  (not this, not this). Him they (the sages) have ca lled 
God of gods, the unborn, the unfallen, the source o f all." 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 145, 30-12-1930 
 
"In the early morning I bow to him who is beyond da rkness, who is like the sun, 
who is perfect, ancient, called  Purushottam ! (the best among man) and in 
whom (through the veil of darkness) we fancy the wh ole universe as appearing 
even as (in darkness) we imagine a rope to be a sna ke." 
The idea is that the universe is not real in the se nse of being permanent, it is 
neither a thing to be hankered after nor feared bec ause it is supposed to be 
God's creation. As a matter of fact, it is a creati on of our imagination even as 
the snake in the rope is. The real universe like th e real rope is there. We 
perceive either when the veil is lifted and darknes s is gone—compare, "And with 
the morn, those angel faces smile which I have love d long since and lost a 
while." The three verses go together and I think ar e Shankar's composition. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira , p. 146, 3-1-1931 
 
"O Goddess Earth, with the ocean for thy garment, m ountains for thy breasts, 
thou consort of Vishnu (Preserver) 1 bow to thee; f orgive the touch of my feet." 
Bowing to the earth we learn or ought to learn to b e humble even as the earth 
is humble. She supports the beings that tread upon her. She is therefore rightly Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 299  the consort of Vishnu. This conception, in my opini on, does no violence to 
truth. On the contrary, it is beautiful and is whol ly consistent with the idea 
that God is everywhere. There is nothing inanimate for Him. We are of the 
earth earthy. If earth is not, we are not. I feel n earer God by feeling Him 
through the Earth. In bowing to the Earth, I at onc e realize my indebtedness to 
Him and if I am a worthy child of that Mother, I sh all at once reduce myself to 
dust and rejoice in establishing kinship with not o nly the lowliest of human 
beings, but also with lowest forms of creation whos e fate—reduction to dust—I 
have to share with them. And if considered as mere life without the earthy 
tabernacle, I regard myself as imperishable; the lo west form of creation is just 
as imperishable as my soul is. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 147, 12-1-1931 
 
"May the Goddess Saraswati (of learning), the Destr oyer completely of black 
ignorance, protect me, she who is white as the  mogra  flower, the moon, and a 
garland of snow, who has worn white robes, whose ha nds are adorned with the 
beautiful bamboo of her veena  (a kind of violin), who is seated on a white lotus  
and who is always adored by Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva a nd other gods." 
To me the thought here is very beautiful. Learning of course means wisdom. 
The emphasis on threefold whiteness—that of snow, m oon, flower and the 
white dress and white seat is intended to show that  uttermost purity is an 
indispensable part of wisdom or learning. As you ex plore the deeper meaning of 
these and kindred verses, you will find every virtu e personified and made a 
living reality instead of a dead dictionary word. T hese imaginary gods are most 
real than the so-called real things we perceive wit h our five senses. When I 
recite this verse, for instance, I never think that  I am addressing an imaginary 
picture. The recitation is a mystical act. That whe n I analyse the act 
intellectually, I know that the goddess is an imagi nary being, does not in any 
way affect the value of this recitation at prayer t ime. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p, 151, 14-1-1931 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 300  "Guru  (teacher) is Brahma, he is Vishnu, he is Mahadeo, he is the great  
Brahman  itself. I bow to that guru"  
This refers of course to the spiritual teacher; thi s is not a mechanical or 
artificial relationship. The teacher is not all thi s in reality, but he is all that to 
the disciple who finds his full satisfaction in him  and imputes perfection to him, 
who gave him a living faith in a living God. Such a  guru  is a rarity at least 
nowadays. The best thing, therefore, is to think of  God Himself as one's guru  or 
await the Light in faith. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 153, 25-1-1931 
 
There is really only one prayer that we may offer: "Thy will be done." Someone 
will ask where is the sense in offering such a pray er. The answer is: Prayer 
should not be understood in a gross sense. We are a ware of the presence of God 
in our heart, and in order to shake off attachment,  we for the moment think of 
God as different from ourselves and pray to Him. Th at is to say, we do not wish 
to go where our wayward will may lead us but, where  the Lord takes us. We do 
not know whether it is good to live or to die. Ther efore we should not take 
delight in living, nor should we tremble at the tho ught of death. We should be 
equiminded towards both. This is the ideal. It may be long before we reach it, 
and only a few of us can attain it. Even then we mu st keep it constantly in 
view, and the more difficult it seems of attainment , the greater should be the 
effort we put forth. 
The Diary of Mahadeu Desai,  Vol. I, pp. 118-19, 19-5-1932 
 
I do not forbid the use of images in prayer. I only  prefer the worship of the 
Formless. This preference is perhaps improper. One thing suits one man; 
another thing will suit another man, and no compari son can fairly be made 
between the two. You are not right about Shankara a nd Ramanuja. Spiritual 
experience has greater influence than environment. The seeker of truth should 
not be affected by his surroundings but rise above them. Views based on the 
environment are often found to be wrong. For instan ce take the case of body Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 301  and soul. The soul being at present in close contac t with the body, we cannot 
at once realize her as distinct from her physical v esture. Therefore it was a 
very great man indeed who rose above his environmen t and said, "It (the soul) 
is not this (the body)." The language of saints lik e Tukaram should not be taken 
in literal sense. I suggest that you read his  abhang—kela maticha pashupati, 1 
etc. The moral is that we must realize the idea whi ch underlies the words of 
holy men. It is quite possible that they worshipped  the Formless even while 
they pictured God in a particular form. This is imp ossible for ordinary mortals 
like ourselves, and therefore we would be in a sorr y plight if we did not 
penetrate a little deeper into the implications of their statements. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, pp. 168-69, 17-6-1932 
 
There can be no manner of doubt that this universe of sentient being is 
governed by a Law. If you can think of Law without its Giver, I would say that 
the Law is the Law-giver, that is God. When we pray  to the Law we simply 
yearn after knowing the Law and obeying it. We beco me what we yearn after. 
Hence the necessity for prayer. Though our present life is governed by our past, 
our future must by that very Law of cause and effec t be affected by what we 
do now. To the extent therefore that we feel the ch oice between two or more 
courses we must make that choice. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 227, 13-7-1932 
 
A person must shed all spiritual dirt at prayer tim e. As he is ashamed of doing 
anything immoral while other people are looking on,  so should he be in the 
presence, of God. But God knows our every act and e very thought. There is not 
a single moment when we can think any thought or do  any act unknown to Him. 
He who thus prays from the bottom of his heart will  in time be filled with the 
spirit of God and become sinless. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 232, 17-7-1932 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 302  A prayer can be offered in connection with some per son or thing, and may even 
be granted. But if it is offered without any such s pecific end in view, it will 
confer a greater benefit on the world as well as ou rselves. Prayer exerts an 
influence over ourselves; our soul becomes more vig ilant, and the greater its 
vigilance, the wider the sphere of its influence. P rayer is a function of the 
heart. We speak aloud in order to wake it up. The P ower that pervades' the 
universe is also present in the human heart. The bo dy does not offer it any 
obstruction. The obstruction is something of our ow n making, and is removed 
by prayer. We can never know if a prayer has or has  not yielded the desired 
result.... Prayer is never fruitless, but we cannot  know that the fruit of it. Nor 
should we imagine that it is a good thing if it yie lds the desired result. Here too 
the Gita doctrine has to be practised. We may pray for something and yet 
remain free from attachment. We may pray for some o ne's  mukti  (salvation) 
but should not worry whether he gets or does not ge t what we want for him. 
Even if the result is just the opposite of what we had asked for, that is no 
reason for the conclusion that the prayer has been fruitless. 
Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 233 17-7-1932 
 
Absence of food is an indispensable but not the lar gest part of it. The largest 
part is the prayer- communion with God. It more tha n adequately replaces 
physical food. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 263, 8-5-1933 
 
1 The image of God is made of clay. 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 303   
4. TRUTH AND NON-VIOLENCE 
Untruth does not become truth because of purity of motive. Just as a moneyed 
man is said to have but one eye for watching things , there is only one path of 
truth. Likewise, there are many paths of untruth, i n the same way that a thief 
has as many as four eyes, as the saying goes. A per son lost in this mazy network 
of paths is ruined and, if he happens to be a guard ian or trustee, he also ruins 
the person whose interests he is appointed to prote ct. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XV p. 23, 17-9-1918 
 
Ignorance is also a kind of darkness, a species of untruth. It cannot, therefore, 
withstand knowledge or truth. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI, p., 87, 3-9-1918 
 
My desire is to close this life searching for truth , acting truth and thinking truth 
and that alone, and I request the blessings of the nation that that desire of 
mine may be fulfilled. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI, p. 175, 28-9-1919 
 
Truth has no form. Therefore everyone will form suc h an idea or image of truth 
as appeals to him, and there will be as many images  of truth as there are men 
These will all be true as long as they last. For th ey enable a man to obtain 
everything he wants. As a matter of fact names such  as Brahma, Vishnu, 
Ishvara, Bhagavan are either meaningless or at leas t not significant enough, 
whereas  Satya  (Truth) is the perfect name for God. If one says h e will die for 
God's sake, he cannot make plain to others what he means, and people who 
hear him say so will hardly understand it. On the o ther hand one who says he 
will die for truth knows what he means, and his wor ds will be generally 
understood by those who hear him. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 304  The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 120, 20-5-1932 
 
I feel that whilst we should spare evil-doers, we d are not be sparing in our 
condemnation of evil. Perfect gentleness is not inc onsistent with clearest 
possible denunciation of what one knows to be evil,  so long as that knowledge 
persists; and there would need to be no cause for r egret later if our knowledge 
of the past was found to be a great error of judgme nt. In our endeavour to 
approach absolute truth we shall always have to be content with relative truth 
from time to time, the relative at each stage being  for us as good as the 
absolute. It can be easily demonstrated that there would be no progress if 
there was no such confidence in oneself. Of course our language would be one 
of caution and hesitation if we had any doubt about  the correctness of our 
position. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 129, 25-5-1932 
 
One who resorts to untruth with any end in view wha tsoever and is full of likes 
and dislikes can never attain the Supreme. 
The Diaty of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 250, 24-7-1932 
 
To tread the path of truth implies an active life i n the world of men. In the 
absence of such activity, there is no occasion for either pursuing or swerving 
from truth. The Gita has made it clear that a man c annot remain inactive even 
for a single moment. The difference between one who  is a devotee of God and 
another who is not is that the former is active in the service of others, never 
gives up truth in the midst of activity and gradual ly overcomes his likes and 
dislikes, while the other is active for selfish rea sons, and has no scruples 
whatever as regards the means he employs in order t o achieve his selfish ends. 
This world is not something evil in itself, for onl y an active life in the world can 
help us to attain the goal of God-realization. This  activity must be directed to 
the good of others. Selfish activity is fit only to  be condemned and should be 
given up. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 305  The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I p. 251, 24-7-1932 
 
The truth, where it is relevant, must be told at an y cost. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 45 
 
A lover of truth entertains only righteous wishes w hich are bound to be 
fulfilled. Our prayers bear fruit for the world to the extent that our soul is 
grounded in Truth. The universe is not different fr om us, and we are not 
different from the universe. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 55 
 
Non-violence and truth are convertible terms. This seems to be the idea behind 
the saying, "One must speak truth, truth that is ag reeable." That is genuine 
truth which causes no pain, for that alone is non-v iolent. Truth may sound 
harsh but it can never result in suffering. Our emp loyment of truth may offend 
the other person, but his conscience will tell him that what was said about him 
was true and was said with the best of motives. We are here interpreting truth 
in its widest connotation. Truth does not mean mere ly being truthful in speech; 
the term "truth" means exactly the same thing as it  does in the  sutra  about  
Brahma  alone being true. The English word "truth" also ca rries the same 
meaning. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XIV p. 97, 22-11-1917 
 
Truth and non-violence are the same thing. The one includes the other. If 
anyone vowed to non-violence speaks or acts untruth , he will be violating his 
vow. If a man dedicated to truth commits violence, he will sacrifice truth. Even 
if a man refuses to reply, out of fear, he will be violating the vow of non-
violence. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XIV, p. 157, 17-2-1918 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 306  You cannot teach Ahimsa to a man who cannot kill. Y ou cannot make a dumb 
man appreciate the beauty and the merit of silence.  Although I know that 
silence is most excellent, I do not hesitate to tak e means that would enable the 
dumb man to regain his speech. I do not believe in any Government,—but 
Parliamentary Government is perhaps better than cap ricious rule. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XIV P- 444, 22-6-1918 
 
It is my practice of Ahimsa and failure to get our people even to understand the 
first principles of Ahimsa that have led to the dis covery that all killing is not 
himsa,  that, sometimes, practice of Ahimsa may even neces sitate killing and 
that we as a nation have lost the true power of kil ling. It is clear that he who 
has lost the power to kill cannot practise non-kill ing. Ahimsa is a renunciation 
of the highest type. A weak and an effeminate natio n cannot perform this 
grand act of renunciation, even as a mouse cannot b e properly said to renounce 
the power of killing a cat. It may look terrible bu t it is true that we must by 
well-sustained, conscious effort, regain this power , and, then, if we can only do 
so, deliver the world from its travail of  himsa by a continuous abdication of this 
power. I cannot describe to you in sufficiently tel ling language the grief I often 
used to feel as I watched my failure to carry convi ction about Ahimsa even to 
the members of the Ashram. Not that they were unwil ling listeners, but I could 
perceive, as I now think plainly, that they had not  the capacity for 
apprehending the truth. It was like singing the fin est music to ears untuned to 
any music. But today practically everyone at the As hram understands it, and is 
aglow with the expectation that Ahimsa is a renunci ation out of strength and 
not out of weakness. It is not possible to make any  distinction between 
organized warfare and individual fighting. There mu st be an organized 
opposition and therefore even organized bloodshed, say, in the case of bandits. 
The noblest warrior is he who stands fearless in th e face of immense odds. He 
then feels not the power to kill, but he is supreme ly triumphant in the 
knowledge that he has the willingness to die when b y taking to his heels he Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 307  might easily have saved his life. I do believe that  we shall have to teach our 
children the art of self-defence. 
Collected, Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XIV P- 485, 17-7-1918 
 
I am more and more becoming convinced of the correc tness of the non-violence 
doctrine. The greater the possession of brute force , the greater coward does 
the possessor become. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XVI, p. 58, 22-8-1919 
 
We should remain non-violent, unmindful of whether we succeed or fail in our 
undertaking. This is the only natural way of demons trating the principle of non-
violence. It would be more correct to say that the result of Ahimsa is always 
good. Such being our firm faith, we are not concern ed whether our efforts are 
crowned with success today or years later. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIV p. 273, 21-6-1924 
 
It is one's duty to say only that which, after a pa instaking inquiry, one has come 
to regard as the truth, even if the world considers  it to be an error. In no other 
way can one become fearless. I cannot consider anyt hing dearer to me than  
moksha.  Yet even that moksha  I would renounce if it were to conflict with truth  
and non-violence. 
Collected Works Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXV P- 127, 2-8-1924 
 
The only way to conquer violence is through nonviol ence pure and undefiled. I 
have said also that every violent act, word and eve n thought interferes with the 
progress of non-violent action. If in spite of such  repeated warnings, people will 
resort to violence, I must own responsibility save such as inevitably attaches to 
every human being for the acts of every other human  being. But the question of 
responsibility apart, I dare not postpone action on  any cause whatsoever if non-Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 308  violence is the force the seers of the world have c laimed it to be and if I am 
not to belie my own extensive experience of its wor king. 
Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi,  p. 74 
 
There is nothing wrong in an ordinary man wanting G od to punish the 
wrongdoer. Non-violence is a new thing. It would be  wrong for a non-violent 
man to call down the wrath of Gods or man. But a no n-violent man must not 
see anything wrong in a persecuted man retaliating and seeking the assistance 
of others. 
Letters to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur,  p. 247 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 309   
5. THE SCIENCE OF SATYAGRAHA 
We hold that our movement of passive resistance mer its the approval of all 
religious men, of all true patriots, of all men of commonsense and integrity. It 
is a movement so potent as to compel the respect of  our adversaries by virtue 
of our very non-resistance, of our willingness to s uffer; and we are the more 
firm in our determination to offer this opposition,  because we consider that our 
example, on a small scale in this Colony, whether s uccessful or unsuccessful 
may well be adopted by every oppressed people, by e very oppressed individual, 
as being a more reliable and more honourable instru ment for securing the 
redress of wrongs than any which has heretofore bee n adopted. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. VII, pp. 333-34, 4- 11-1907 
 
Who, then, should be regarded as true Satyagrahis? Of course, they who possess 
virtues like compassion, etc. 
Nowhere has it been said that suffering may not hav e to be undergone. And 
what does suffering after all mean? It is the mind,  says the  Gita,  which is the 
cause of our bondage as well as of our freedom. Sud hanva was thrown into 
boiling oil. The person who got him thrown into it thought that he was inflicting 
suffering on Sudhanva; but for the latter it was a grand opportunity to show the 
intensity of his devotion. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 206, 2-4-1910 
 
The function of violence is to obtain reform by ext ernal means; the function of 
passive resistance, that is, soul-force, is to obta in it by growth from within; 
which, in its turn, is obtained by self-suffering, self- purification. Violence ever 
fails; passive resistance is ever successful. The f ight of a passive resister is none 
the less spiritual because he fights to win. Indeed , he is obliged to fight to win, 
that is, to obtain the mastery of self. Passive res istance is always moral, never Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 310  cruel; and any activity, mental or otherwise which fails in this test is 
undoubtedly not passive resistance. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 248, 10-5-1910 
 
Passive resistance seeks to rejoin politics and rel igion and to test every one of 
our actions in the light of ethical principles. Tha t Jesus refused to use soul-
force to turn stones into bread only supports my ar gument. Modern civilization 
is at present engaged in attempting that impossible  feat. The use of soul-force 
for turning stones into bread would have been consi dered, as it is still 
considered, as black magic. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 248, 10-5-1910 
 
An ignorant mother may, from the purest motives, ad minister a dose of opium 
to her child. Her motives will not cure her of her ignorance, nor, in the moral 
world purge her of the offence of killing her child . A passive resister, 
recognizing this principle and knowing that, in spi te of the purity of his 
motives, his action may be utterly wrong, leaves ju dgment to the Supreme 
Being, and, in attempting to resist what he holds t o be wrong, suffers only in 
his own person. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 248, 10-5-1910 
 
A pure passive resister cannot allow himself to be regarded as a martyr nor can 
he complain of the hardships of prison or any other  hardships, nor may he make 
political capital out of what may appear to be inju stice or ill-treatment, much 
less may he allow any matter of passive resistance to be advertised. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 249, 10-5-1910 
 
The Gujarati for passive resistance is truth force.  I have variously defined it as 
truth force, love force or soul force. But truly th ere is nothing in words. What 
one has to do is to live a life of love in the mids t of the hate we see Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 311  everywhere. And we cannot do it without unconquerab le faith in its absolute 
efficacy. A great queen named Mirabai lived two or three hundred years ago. 
She forsook her husband and everything and lived a life of absolute love. Her 
husband at last became her devotee. 
My Dear Child,  p. 13, 11-6-1917 
 
I have presented to the youths and to Indians in ge neral in my humble way a 
better and more effective method and that is the me thod of soul force or truth 
force or love force which for want of a better term  I have described as passive 
resistance. And I am asking the leaders to adopt th is method fully and boldly at 
this critical juncture. It involves self-suffering and that alone throughout. No 
government in the world can afford continually to i mprison or molest innocent 
men; the British Government cannot afford it. It is  its great secret and 
character that even when it does wrong, it seeks to  justify it before the world 
on moral grounds. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIII, p. 465, 7-7-1917 
 
Satyagraha means fighting injustice by voluntarily submitting oneself to 
suffering. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIV p. 172, 22-1-1918 
 
The purpose of Satyagraha is not to save our face b ut to instill courage into the 
people and make them independent in spirit. If, bec ause of fear, or distrust of 
us, people lose heart and pay up, they but deserve to pay (compulsorily). We, 
on our part, should exert ourselves still more to b e worthy of their trust. This is 
the royal road of Satyagraha. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIV, p. 179, 31-1-1918 
 
Repression answers only so long as you can overawe people. But even cowards 
have been known to exhibit extraordinary courage un der equally extraordinary Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 312  stress. In offering the remedy of self-suffering wh ich is one meaning of 
Satyagraha, I follow the spirit of our civilization  and present the young portion 
with a remedy of which he need never despair. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XV, p. 106, 25-2-1919 
 
Passive resistance poorly expresses the meaning con veyed by the Satyagraha. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XV p. 96, 23-2-1919 
 
Satyagraha in the political field is an extension o f the law that governs the 
members of a family. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XV p. 176, 3-4-1919 
 
It is certainly the  Bhagwadgita's  intention that one should go on working 
without attachment to the fruits of work. I deduce the principle of Satyagraha 
from this. He who is free from such attachment will  not kill the enemy but 
rather sacrifice himself. Killing any enemy proceed s from impatience and 
impatience proceeds from attachment. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol.  XV,  p. 312, 19-5-1919 
 
As far back as 1889, when I had my first contact wi th the  Gita,  it gave me a 
hint of Satyagraha and, as I read it more and more,  the hint developed into a 
full revelation of Satyagraha. That a man of Krishn a's intelligence should 
indulge in all this wisdom of the  Gita for the benefit of an Arjuna in flesh and 
blood, would be like killing the buffalo for a leat her-strap. To believe he did so 
is to tarnish his name, if it is true that he was t he Supreme God, and to do 
injustice to Arjuna if he was a warrior of experien ce and judgment. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XV p. 313, 19-5-1919 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 313  Satyagraha, once started, ends only when it has ach ieved its aim. At times it 
does seem to have ended, but in fact it has not. Wh en Satyagraha is likely to be 
confused with  duragraha, 1 suspending it will be a way of launching true 
Satyagraha. It is such a subtle thing that only thr ough experience and constant 
reflection do we come to understand a little of it.  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol.  XV,  p. 314, 20-5-1919 
 
A Satyagrahi is ever his own master.... 
It is quite true that, when an organization offers Satyagraha, individuals should 
submit themselves to its discipline. But, once a pe rson has become a 
Satyagrahi, he will always find opportunities for o ffering Satyagraha.... 
To be a Satyagrahi is like walking on the blade of a sword. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol.  XV,  p. 315, 20-5-1919 
 
I have often said, "One real Satyagrahi is enough f or victory." This is becoming 
clear to me day by day. Even as a true coin fetches  its full value, so does a true 
Satyagrahi fetch his full value, i.e., attain the i ntended result. And even as 
false coins or coins of lesser value mixing with th e true may diminish for the 
time being the value of the true coin, it seems to me that a Satyagraha Sangh 
(Sabha) being a mixture is a weakness from the pure  Satyagraha standpoint. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol.  XV,  p. 389, 25-6-1919 
 
Civil resistance has come to stay. It is an eternal  doctrine of life which we 
follow consciously or unconsciously in many walks o f life. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI, p. 6, 4-8-1919 
 
No weapon in the Government armoury can either over come or destroy that 
eternal force. Indeed a time must come when civil r esistance will be Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 314  recognized as the most efficacious, if also the mos t harmless, remedy for 
securing redress of grievances. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI, p. 6, 4-8-1919 
 
We must be honourable friends, or equally honourabl e enemies. We shall be 
neither, unless we are manly, fearless and independ ent. . . to. . . say 'no' when 
we mean 'no' without fear of consequences. This is unadulterated civil 
resistance. It is the way to friendliness and frien dship. The other is the age-
worn method of open violence on honourable lines in  so far as violence can be 
allowed to be honourable. For me the roots of viole nce are in dishonour. I have 
therefore ventured to present to India the former, in its complete form called 
Satyagraha, whose roots are always in honour. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI, p. 7, 4-8-1919 
 
Satyagraha has presented the rising generation with  a new hope, an open road 
and an infallible remedy for most ills of life. It has armed that generation with 
an indestructible and matchless force which anyone may wield with impunity. 
Satyagraha tells the youth of India, self-suffering  is the only sure road to 
salvation— economic, political and spiritual. 
For the most part, Satyagraha  is  "evil resistance" and "civil assistance". But 
sometimes 'it  has  to be "civil resistance". 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI, p. 50, 20-8-1919
 
Thoreau in his immortal essay shows that civil diso bedience, not violence, is 
the true remedy. In civil disobedience, the resiste r suffers the consequences of 
disobedience. This was what Danial did when he diso beyed the law of the 
Medes and Persians. That is what John Bunyan did an d that is what the  raiyats  
have done in India from time immemorial. It is the law of our beings. Violence 
is the law of the beast in us. Self- suffering, i.e . civil resistance, is the law of 
the man in us. It is rarely that the occasion for c ivil resistance arises in a well-Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 315  ordered State. But when it does, it becomes a duty that cannot be shirked by 
one who counts his honour, i.e., conscience, above everything. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI, p. 51, 20-8-1919 
 
My truthfulness, I feel, is peculiarly my own. My A himsa is an intense feeling 
and the Satyagraha born of a blending of the two is  indeed indescribable. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI, p. 147, 15-9-1919 
 
A Satyagrahi is the strongest when he appears to th e outsider to have 
weakened. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI, p. 249, 20-10-1919 
 
I have drawn the distinction between passive resist ance as understood and 
practised in the West and Satyagraha before I had e volved the doctrine of the 
latter to its full logical and spiritual extent. I often used passive resistance and 
Satyagraha as synonymous terms, but as the doctrine  of Satyagraha developed, 
the expression passive resistance ceases even to be  synonymous, as passive 
resistance has admitted of violence as in the case of suffragettes and has been 
universally acknowledged to be a weapon of the weak . Moreover passive 
resistance does not necessarily involve complete ad herence to truth under 
every circumstance. Therefore it is different from Satyagraha in three 
essentials: Satyagraha is a weapon of the strong; i t admits of no violence under 
any circumstance whatever; and it ever insists upon  truth. I think I have now 
made the distinction perfectly clear. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI, p. 509, 25-1-1920 
 
If we can organize non-co-operation without indulgi ng in violence, we have 
every right to do so; it is in fact our duty to do so. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVII, p. 368-69, 1-5-1920 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 316  Violence dies when it ceases to evoke response from  its object. Non-violence is 
the corner-stone of the edifice of non-co-operation . 
Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi,  p. 42, Jan. 1921 
 
Intolerance is a species of violence and therefore against our creed. Non-
violent non-co-operation is an object lesson in dem ocracy. The moment we are 
able to ensure non-violence, even under circumstanc es the most provoking that 
moment we have achieved our end, because that is th e moment when we can 
offer complete non-co-operation. 
Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi,  p. 42, Jan. 1921 
 
The civil disobedience of Bardoli can make no impre ssion upon the country 
when disobedience of a criminal character goes on i n other parts of the 
country, both for the same end. The whole conceptio n of civil disobedience is 
based upon the assumption that it works in and thro ugh its completely non-
violent character. I may be a bad student of human nature to believe that such 
an atmosphere can ever be brought about in a vast c ountry like India, but that 
would be an argument for condemning my capacity for  sound judgment, not for 
continuing a movement which is in that case bound t o be unsuccessful. I 
personally can never be party to a movement half vi olent and half non-violent, 
even though it may result in the attainment of so-c alled Swaraj, for it will not 
be real Swaraj as I have conceived it. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XXII, pp. 350-51, 8-2-1922 
 
There is such a close connection between the means and the end that it is 
difficult to say which of the two is more important . Or we may say that the 
means is the body and the end is the soul. The end is invisible, the means is 
visible. Now we shall have the pleasure of demonstr ating this great truth. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIII, p. 69, 9-3-1922 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 317  There is no such thing as a settled fact in Satyagr aha. If you find that you have 
erred at any stage, it is never too late to retrace  your step. If, in Travancore, 
public opinion is not in favour, you may not overaw e the public by a 
demonstration from outside. You must patiently wait  and suffer. Reduce 
yourselves to the position of the suppressed classe s. Live with them and suffer 
their humiliation. You are the first person to tell  me that the public in 
Travancore are not with you. 
If you are fighting as an enlightened Hindu against  the bigoted Hindu, it is your 
bounden duty not only not to seek but respectfully to reject all support from 
non- Hindus. Surely, I do not need to prove the tru th of such a simple 
proposition. I think I have traversed all the point s raised by you in your 
manuscript. I have placed before you, in all humili ty, the view of Satyagraha as 
I know it; and since I am the author of the word, y ou must let me give its 
meaning, and if you do not accept the meaning, the proper thing is to find 
another word that will bear your own meaning. But, of course, this is a 
technical point. Even the author cannot claim any e xclusive control over words 
he may coin or the meanings he may give to them. On ce they escape his lips or 
pen, they are no longer his property. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIII, pp. 544-45. 6-5-1924 
 
Satyagraha is taken up by one who feels that truth is being trampled under 
foot. He fights against error with only God as his support. He is never in search 
for any other support. It comes in time, and if it is legitimate, he accepts it. A 
Satyagrahi is pledged to fight single-handed in the  face of starvation and worse. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIII, pp. 544-45, 6-5-1924 
 
My belief in Satyagraha and non-violence is as gree n as ever. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXVI, p. 208, 28-2-1925 
 
1 Insistence upon evil Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 318   
6. FASTING IN SATYAGRAHA 
I do not know any contemporary of mine who has redu ced fasting and prayer to 
an exact science and who reaped a harvest so abunda nt as I have. I wish that I 
could infect the nation with my experience and make  it resort to fasting and 
prayer with intelligence, honesty and intensity. We  would thus, incredible as it 
may appear, do millions of things pertaining to the  nation without elaborate 
organization and checks upon checks, but I know tha t fasting and prayer, to be 
as effective as I have found them to be in my own e xperience, have to be not 
mechanical things but definite spiritual acts. Fast ing then is crucifixion of the 
flesh with a corresponding freedom of the spirit an d prayer is a definite 
conscious longing of the soul to the utterly pure—t he purity thus attained being 
dedicated to the realization of a particular object  which is in itself pure. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVII, p. 104, 20-3-1920 
 
Fasting in Satyagraha has well-defined limits. You cannot fast against a tyrant, 
for it will be as a piece of violence done to him. You invite penalty from him 
for disobedience of his orders, but you cannot infl ict on yourself penalties when 
he refuses to punish and renders it impossible for you to disobey his orders so 
as to compel infliction of penalty. Fasting can onl y be restored to against a 
lover, not to extort rights but to reform him, as w hen a son fasts for a parent 
who drinks. My fast at Bombay, and then at Bardoli,  was of that character. I 
fasted to reform those who loved me. But I will not  fast to reform, say, General 
Dyer who not only does not love me, but who regards  himself as my enemy. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVIII, p. 420, 12-4-1924 
 
What you say about fasting is quite true. It has no  absolute value and it 
certainly does not produce the slightest spiritual effect if the motive behind it 
is not really spiritual. Fasting with a mixed motiv e ends with purely material 
results. But fasting for the sake of unfoldment of the spirit is a discipline I hold Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 319  to be absolutely necessary at some stage or other i n the evolution of an 
individual. I always considered Protestantism to be  deficient in this particular. 
Every other religion of any importance appreciates the spiritual value of 
fasting. Crucifixion of the flesh is a meaningless term unless one goes 
voluntarily through pangs of hunger. For one thing,  identification with the 
starving poor is a meaningless term without the exp erience behind. But I quite 
agree that even an eighty days' fast may fail to ri d a person of pride, 
selfishness, ambition and the like. Fasting is mere ly a prop. But as a prop to a 
tottering structure is of inestimable value, so is the prop of fasting of 
inestimable value for a struggling soul. 
My Dear Child,  p. 85, 20-8-1926 
 
Fasting should be inspired by perfect truth and per fect non-violence. The call 
for it should come from within and it should not be  imitative. It should never be 
undertaken for a selfish purpose, but for the benef it of others only. A fast is 
out of the question in a case where there is hatred  for anybody. But what is the 
inner voice? Is every one capable of hearing it? Th ese are big questions. The 
inner voice is there in every one of us, but one wh ose ears are not open for it 
cannot hear it, just as a deaf person is unable to hear the sweetest of songs. 
Self-restraint is essential in order to make our ea rs fit to hear the voice of God. 
Selected Letters—II,  pp. 46-47, 30-10-1932 
 
The fast has become the normal course of my life. I t is the spiritual medicine 
applied from time to time for diseases that yield t o that particular treatment. 
Not everyone can gain the capacity for it all of a sudden. I have gained it, if I 
have, after a very long course of training. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 228, 8-12-1932 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 320   
7. 'UNTO THIS LAST' 
I have such a vivid experience of India's deep pove rty that whenever money is 
uselessly spent, it seems to me that so much has be en taken away from the 
poor. If all the money that has been spent over sen ding me telegrams had been 
devoted towards purchasing Swadeshi Khadi and there with clothing the 
deserving naked or towards feeding the helpless, wo uld not they have blessed 
the donors? The curse of the poor has destroyed nat ions, has deprived kings of 
their crowns and the rich of their riches. Retribut ive justice is inexorable. The 
blessings of the poor have made kingdoms flourish. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XVI, p. 174, 28-9-1919 
 
If I have a duty at all towards fellow-creatures, I  must think what it is in the 
face of those who are simply skin and bone. Is ther e such a thing as the quality 
of mercy and pity and love, and if there is, am I t o say these men and women 
who are dying of slow starvation and who are almost  naked, are, after all, 
reaping the fruit of their past  karma  and I have no duty by them? Each for his 
own is the message for man. As I write these words in cold blood, I feel 
staggered, and if such was the implication of the l aw of  karma,  I should 
become a rebel against it. Fortunately it teaches m e a different lesson. On the 
one hand it insists on patience, and on the other i t peremptorily commands me 
to undo the past by rearranging the present. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIII, p. 422, 12-4-1924 
 
I am glad you realize that poverty is the common lo t of millions. The real way 
to pray to Lord Krishna is to do in His name some l ittle service to those who are 
less fortunate than ourselves; and when we show the  spirit of service in daily 
life, unbelieving neighbours will begin to believe in God. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 25, 14-11-1932 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 321   
8. KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRY 
Swadeshi as conceived by me consists in producing c loth enough for the wants 
of India and in distributing it; and for the purpos e of stimulating home 
production, it consists in inducing people to pledg e themselves to the use of 
Swadeshi cloth only, the right being retained where  necessary to continue the 
use of foreign cloth at present in possession of th e pledge / votary. The 
Swadeshi is conceived only as a religious and an ec onomic necessity; and 
although it is fraught with political consequences of a lofty, moral type in order 
that all may take part in it, the Swadeshi propagan da is restricted to the 
religious and economic aspects only. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI, p. 60, 25-8-1919 
 
A hundred years ago, the majority of the women of I ndia spun yarn either for 
profit or for pleasure and thousands upon thousands  of professional weavers 
wove cloth enough for home consumption. Whether the  same can be done 
today or not, it is unnecessary to inquire. It is b eyond question that if these 
millions of peasants can be induced to take to spin ning and weaving, it will 
materially decrease the economic drain and enable t hem to supplement their 
earnings. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI, pp. 60-61, 25-8-1919 
 
The work among the poor will be profitless and devo id of religion without the 
spinning-wheel. We must help the poor to feed and c lothe themselves. We can 
never succeed unless we reintroduced spinning wheel . No other industry can 
solve the problem of the mass poverty in India. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIX, p. 395, 2-3-1920 
 
Two hundred years ago, the women of India spun not only for home demand but 
also for foreign lands. They spun not merely coarse  counts but the finest that Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 322  the world has ever spun. No machine has yet reached  the fineness of the yarn 
spun by our ancestors. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XX, p. 496, 11-8-1921 
 
We must be prepared to be satisfied with such cloth  as India can produce, even 
as we are thankfully content with such children as God gives us. I have not 
known a mother throwing away her baby even though i t may appear ugly to an 
outsider. So should it be with the patriotic women of India about Indian 
manufactures. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XX, p. 496, 11-8-1921 
 
To me it seems utterly degrading to throw foreign c loth in the face of the poor 
because we have no longer any use for it, that clot h which has brought 
pauperism to the land and reduced thousands of wome n to a life of shame. Not 
even the poor will understand a sudden manifestatio n of pity for them in the 
shape of silk kerchiefs, flimsy saris and flimsier shirts, not to speak of 
thousands of stinking caps. The central point in bu rning is to create an utter 
disgust with ourselves that we have thoughtlessly d ecked ourselves at the 
expense of the poor. Yes, I see nothing wrong in ma king it a sin to wear cloth 
that has meant India's degradation and slavery. Wha t I am trying to do just now 
is to perform a surgical operation with a hand that  must not shake. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XX, p. 499, 13-8-1921 
 
India does not need to be industrialized in the mod ern sense of the term. It has 
7,50,000 villages scattered over a vast area 1,900 miles long, 1,500 broad. The 
people are rooted to the soil, and the vast majorit y are living a hand-to-mouth 
life. Whatever may be said to the contrary, having travelled throughout the 
length and breadth of the land with eyes open and h aving mixed with millions, 
there can be no doubt that pauperism is growing. Th ere is no doubt also that 
the millions are living in enforced idleness for at  least 4 months in the year. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 323  Agriculture does not need revolutionary changes. Th e Indian peasant requires a 
supplementary industry. The most natural is the int roduction of the spinning-
wheel, not the handloom. The latter cannot be intro duced in every home, 
whereas the former can, and it used to be so even a  century ago. It was driven 
out not by economic pressure, but by force delibera tely used as can be proved 
from authentic records. The restoration, therefore,  of the spinning- wheel 
solves the economic problems of India at a stroke. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXII, p. 401, 15-2-1922 
 
Of all my outward activities, I do believe that the  spinning-wheel is the most 
permanent and the most beneficial. I have abundant proof now to support my 
statement that the spinning-wheel will solve the pr oblem of the economic 
distress in millions of India's homes, and it const itutes an effective insurance 
against famines. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XXII, p. 401, 15-2-1922 
 
I have nothing to say against the development of an y other industry in India by 
means of machinery, but I do say that to supply Ind ia with cloth manufactured 
either outside or inside through gigantic mills is an economic blunder of the 
first magnitude, just as it would be to supply chea p bread through huge 
bakeries established in the chief centres in India and to destroy the family 
stove. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXII, pp. 401-2, 15-2-1922 
 
I would like you to see the truth of the spinning- wheel. It and it alone is the 
visible outward expression of the inner feeling for  humanity. If we feel for the 
starving masses of India, we must introduce the spi nning-wheel into their 
homes. We must, therefore, become experts and, in o rder to make them 
realize the necessity of it, we must spin daily as a sacrament. If you have 
understood the secret' of the spinning-wheel, if yo u realize that it is a symbol Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 324  of love of mankind, you will engage in no other out ward activity. If many 
people do not follow you, you have more leisure for  spinning, carding or 
weaving. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIII, p. 99, 17-3-1922 
 
Speaking purely from an economic point of view, I v enture to say that unless 
the merchants, dealing in foreign yarn and cloth gi ve up their trade, and the 
people get rid of their infatuation for foreign clo th, the greatest disease of the 
country, viz., starvation, can never be cured. I ho pe all the merchants will 
make the fullest contribution to the propagation of  Khadi and the spinning-
wheel. 
To A Gandhian Capitalist , p.  50,  18-3-1922 
 
This spinning is growing on me. I seem daily to be coming nearer to the poorest 
of the poor and to that extent to God. I regard the  four hours to be the most 
profitable part of the day. The fruit of my labour is visible before me. Not an 
impure thought enters my mind during the four hours . The mind wanders whilst 
I read the Gita, the Kuran, the Ramayana. But the m ind is fixed whilst I am 
turning the wheel, or working the bow. I know that it may not and cannot mean 
all this to everyone. I have so identified the spin ning-wheel with the economic 
salvation of pauper India that it has for me a fasc ination all its own. There is a 
serious competition going on in my mind between spi nning and carding on the 
one hand and literary pursuits on the other. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIII, p. 134, 14-4-1922 
 
To remove the curse of untouchability is to do pena nce for the sin committed 
by the Hindus of degrading a fifth of their own rel igionists. To remove the curse 
of intoxicating drinks and drugs not only purifies the nation, but it also deprives 
an immoral system of Government of an immoral sourc e of revenue to the 
extent of nearly 25 crores of rupees. To revive han d- spinning and hand-Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 325  weaving brings back to millions of cottages of Indi a their supplementary 
industry, revives the old Indian art, removes the d egrading pauperism and 
provides an automatic insurance against famine. At the same time, it deprives 
Great Britain of the strongest incentive for Indian  exploitation, for if India can 
cloth herself without importing foreign cloth and f oreign machinery, the 
relations between Great Britain and India become na tural and almost idealistic. 
They take the form then of a voluntary partnership resulting in mutual benefit 
and, probably, benefit to mankind in general. Unity  between the different 
religionists of India prevents Great Britain from p ursuing the immoral policy of 
Divide and Rule, and the practice of nonviolence in  resisting exploitation and 
degradation, if it becomes successful is likely to serve as an example for the 
whole world to copy. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIII, p. 244, 14-3-1924 
 
No machinery in the world can compete with these vi llagers who need no other 
machine than their own willing hands and feet, and a few simple wooden 
instruments which they can devise themselves. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIII, p. 327, 28-3-1924 
 
I believe in Khadi, I believe in the spinning-wheel . It has two aspects—terrible 
and benign. 
In its terrible aspect it is calculated to bring ab out the only boycott we need 
for independent national existence, viz., that of f oreign cloth.... 
In its benign aspect, it gives a new life and hope to the villager. It can fill 
millions of hungry mouths. It alone can bring us in  touch and in tune with the 
villagers. It is the very best popular education th at is needed for the millions. It 
is life giving. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XXIV p. 286, 26-6-1924 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 326  In our times, God resides in the spinning-wheel. St arvation stalks the country 
like a forest fire. I do not see any other help aga inst it except through the 
spinning-wheel. God always reveals Himself to us in  some visible form. 
Therefore, we sing in our hymn about Draupadi 1 for whom 'God took the form of 
raiment'. Anyone who desires to see God today may s ee Him in the form of the 
spinning-wheel. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 7, 20-12-1926 
 
In the course of my travels I realize every moment the country's need of a large 
number of spinning teachers from among women of cha racter. 
Letters to Manibehn Patel,  p. 31, 6-2-1927 
 
It will take me many incarnations to become disillu sioned with the slowness of 
the Charkha. The slowness of the Charkha is perhaps  its most appealing part for 
me. But it has so many attractions for me that I ca n never get tired of it. It has 
a perennial interest for me. Its implications are g rowing on me and I make 
discoveries of its beauties almost from day to day.  
The Diary of Mahatma Desai,  Vol. I, p. 154, 8-6-1932 
 
My study of books on economics has strengthened my belief that the remedies 
they propound in order to eradicate poverty in Indi a are fruitless. The right 
remedy lies in so organizing production and consump tion that they go on 
simultaneously of their own accord, that is to say in the revival of village 
industries. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 214, 5-7-1932 
 
All useful work ranks the same with us and may be d one by us. Tanning, 
carpentry, cleaning lavatories, agriculture, weavin g, cooking, cow-keeping and 
such other work are all of equal value, and if I co uld bring the people round to Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 327  my view, the literate and the illiterate, the teach er and the scavenger would 
be paid the same remuneration for their work. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 277, 4-8-1932 
 
There is no cause for worry over the fact that you 2 are not using village-made 
paper there. It requires a certain amount of fervou r on your part, as also an 
intense spirit of sympathy for the poor. When these  become part of your 
nature, you will take to the use of such things of your own accord. What you do 
spontaneously and in response to your own inner urg e will alone be genuine, 
and that alone will prove fruitful for you. 
While you are there you will do well not to discrim inate between articles of 
British and non-British manufacture. 
To A Gandhian Capitalist,  p. 142, 4-9-1935 
 
Your calling Khadi 'livery of freedom' will live as  long as we speak the English 
language in India. It needs a first class poet to t ranslate into Hindi the whole of 
the thought behind that enchanting phrase. For me i t is not merely poetry but 
it enunciates a great truth whose full significance  we have yet to grasp. 
A Bunch of Old Letters,  p. 245, 30-7-1937 
 
Let me make one thing clear about clothing. You are  free to give up the 
insistence on Khadi there, if you cannot maintain i t out of your own free will. It 
is open to you to put on whatever dress you find to  be convenient and to have 
it made of any cloth that seems suitable for the pu rpose. I think this contains 
an answer to all your questions. 
This means that you can, if you like, put an overco at, socks and a banian made 
of foreign or Indian mill-cloth. It will not be imp roper if you make an effort to 
have all these things made of hand-spun and hand- w oven cloth; at the same 
time an omission to do so will not amount to a sin.  Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 328  To A Gandhian Capitalist , p. 143, 4-9-1935 
 
A hundred and fifty years ago we manufactured all o ur cloth. Our women spun 
fine yarn in their own cottages and supplemented th e earnings of their 
husbands. The village weavers wove that yarn. It wa s an indispensable part of 
national economy in a vast agricultural country lik e ours. It enabled us in most 
natural manner to utilize our leisure. Today our wo men have lost the cunning of 
their hands and the enforced idleness of millions h as impoverished the land. 
Many weavers have become sweepers. Some have taken to the profession of 
hired soldiers. Half the race of artistic weavers h as died out, and the other half 
is weaving imported foreign yarn for want of finer hand-spun yarn. 
Famous Letters of Mahatma Gandhi,  p. 36 
 
I have ventured utterly to condemn modern civilizat ion because I hold that the 
spirit of it is evil. It is possible to show that s ome of its incidents are good, but I 
have examined its tendency in the scale of ethics. I distinguish between the 
ideals of individuals who have risen superior to th eir environment, as also 
between Christianity and modern civilization. Its a ctivity is by no means 
confined to Europe. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 247, 10-5-1910 
 
We who are engulfed in this civilization may avail ourselves of postal and other 
facilities as long as we are engulfed. If we make u se of these things with 
knowledge and understanding we shall not go crazy o ver them, and instead of 
increasing our preoccupation we shall gradually red uce them. He who will 
understand this will not be tempted to take the pos t or the railway to the 
villages which do not have these. You and I should not remain passive and 
increase the use of steamers and other evil means f or fear that these things 
cannot be abolished forthwith and that all the peop le will not give them up. 
Even if one man reduces or stops their use, others will learn to do. He who Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 329  believes that it is good to do so will go on doing so irrespective of others. This 
is the only way of spreading the truth; there is no  other in the world. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 204, 2-4-1910 
 
The total effect of European activity has not been for the good of India. The 
general body of Europeans who have come to India ha ve succumbed to the vices 
of the East instead of imposing their own virtues o n the East. It could not well 
be otherwise. Religion has not made a lasting impre ssion on them as we see 
demonstrated even by the present way. My theory is that modern civilization is 
decidedly anti-Christian. And what Europeans have b rought to India is that 
civilization, not the life of Jesus. You and a hand ful of others are striving to 
represent that life. It is bound to leave its mark upon the soil. But it must take 
time. "The mills of God grind slowly." You and peop le like you are not affected 
by the evil that stares you in the face. You get be hind it, discover the good 
lying underneath and add it to your own stock, thus  producing a perfect blend. 
What I want is reciprocity of that method. And so I  welcomed your visit to the 
Ashram as I welcome that of many European friends w ho are true to their best 
traditions and are broad-minded enough to take in t he best that this land has to 
give. 
My Dear Child,  pp. 11-12, 9-6-1917 
 
My message to the businessmen of America is: Unders tand the inner meaning of 
the message of the spinning-wheel and you will prob ably find the solution for 
the World Peace which I know so many Americans sinc erely desire. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIII, p. 382, 5-4-1924 
 
My own motive is to put forth all my energy in an a ttempt to save Indian, that 
is, ancient culture, from impending destruction by modern, that is, Western 
culture being imposed upon India. The essence of an cient culture is based upon 
the practice of the utmost non-violence. Its motto is the good of all including Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 330  every living thing, whereas Western culture is fran kly based upon violence. It, 
therefore, does not respect all life and, in its pr ogress onward, it has not 
hesitated to resort to wholesale destruction of eve n human life. Its motto is: 
Might is Right, and it is essentially individualist ic. This does not mean that 
there is nothing for India to learn from the West, for in spite of the acceptance 
by the West of the Doctrine of Might is Right, the human touch has not 
altogether disappeared in the West. The relentless pursuit of a false ideal 
conceived as truth has opened the eyes of numerous men in the West to the 
falsity of that ideal. I would like India to copy t hat spirit of search for the truth 
in the place of being satisfied with tradition with out question, but India can 
safely copy nothing before she has come to her own and realized that her 
culture has a very important place in the universe and it must be defended at 
all costs. The importation of Western culture by th e British in India has meant 
exploitation of her resources for the supposed bene fit of Great Britain. It has 
brought millions of people to the verge of starvati on, and it has almost 
emasculated a whole nation. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIII, pp. 243-44, 14-3-1924 
 
The West has always commanded my admiration for its  surgical inventions and 
all-round progress in that direction. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 112, 7-7-1930 
 
1 In the Mahabharata, Draupadi was a woman of great p urity and devotion. She was 
protected by Lord Krishna by supplying garments whi le her garments were removed 
forcibly in the assembly of Duryodhan.  
2 Addressed to Kamalnayan Bajaj who was in England at  the time 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 331   
10. HINDU-MUSLIM UNITY 
I consider that God has not created lower forms of animal life for man to use 
them as he will. Man realizes his highest station n ot by indulging but by 
abstinence. I have no right to destroy animal life if I can subsist healthily on 
vegetable life. I have no right to slaughter all an imal life because I find it 
necessary to slaughter some animal life. Therefore if I can live well on goats, 
fish and fowl (surely enough in all conscience) it is sin for me to destroy cows 
for my sustenance. And it was some such argument th at decided the  rishis  of 
old in regarding the cow as sacred, especially when  they found that the cow 
was the greatest economic asset in national life. A nd I see nothing wrong, 
immoral or sinful in offering worship to an animal so serviceable as the cow so 
long as my worship does not put her on a level with  her Creator. I immensely 
appreciate the idea (so emphasized by Islam that sp ecial worship must be 
reserved for the Creator of us all. But I must not mix up cow-worship and cow-
slaughter.... 
Cow-slaughter is indefensible on moral grounds. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XVI, pp. 508-9, 25-1-1920 
 
Personally, after deep thought, I have come to the conclusion that, if there is 
anything that can serve an effective and visible sy mbol of the Hindu-Muslim 
unity, it is the adoption of Charkha and pure Khadd ar dress prepared from 
hand-spun yarn by the rank and file of both the com munities. Only universal 
acceptance of this cult can supply us with a common  idea and afford a common 
basis of action. 
The use of Khaddar cannot become universal until bo th the communities take 
to it. The universal adoption of Charkha and Khadda r, therefore, would awaken 
India. It will also be a proof of our capacity to s atisfy all our needs. Ever since 
the commencement of our present struggle, we have b een feeling the necessity 
of boycotting foreign cloth. I venture to suggest t hat, when Khaddar comes Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 332  universally in use, the boycott of foreign cloth wi ll automatically follow. 
Speaking for myself, Charkha and Khaddar have a spe cial religious significance 
to me because they are a symbol of kinship between the members of both the 
communities and hunger and disease-stricken poor. I t is by virtue of the fact 
that our movement can today be described as moral a nd economic as well as 
political. So long as we cannot achieve this little  thing, I feel certain success is 
impossible. Again, the Khaddar movement can succeed  only when we recognize 
non-violence as an essential condition for the atta inment of Swaraj and Khilafat 
both. Therefore, the Khaddar programme is the only effective and successful 
programme that I can place before the country at pr esent. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIII, p. 92, 12-3-1922 
 
Cow-protection to me is infinitely more than mere p rotection of the cow. The 
cow is merely a type for all that lives. Cow protec tion means protection of the 
weak, the helpless, the dumb and the deaf. Man beco mes then not the lord and 
master of all creation but he is its servant. The c ow to me is a sermon on pity. 
As yet we are merely playing at cow protection. But  we shall soon have to 
grapple with the reality. 
A Bunch of Old Letters,  p. 43, 25-4-1925 
 
Hindus and Muslims are going more and more away fro m each other. But this 
thing does not disturb me. Somehow or other, I feel  that the separation is 
growing in order only to bring them all closer late r on. 
A Bunch of Old Letters,  p. 47, 23-4-1926 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 333   
11. UPLIFTMENT OF WOMEN 
Women are the very incarnation of service, but at p resent they minister only to 
their own families. Why should they not extend the field of their ministry so as 
to embrace the whole of India? A truly religious pe rson becomes a citizen of the 
world, but the service of one's own country is step ping-stone to the service of 
humanity. And where service is rendered to the coun try consistently with the 
welfare of the world, it finally leads to self-real ization  (moksha).  
Selected Letters—I,  p. 6, 13-12-1926 
 
Many women are inactive. Who will make them industr ious? Mothers spoil their 
children from birth. Who will prevent them? They lo ad their children with 
ornaments and clothes of different kinds. They get their girls married quite 
young. They give them in marriage to old men. When I look at these ornaments 
on women I feel nothing but distress. Who will expl ain to them that real beauty 
lies in the heart and not in these ornaments? I mig ht go on writing about such 
matters. But how can all this be set right? It can be done only when a Draupadi 
of dazzling lustre rises from among women. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 19, 28-2-1927 
 
Man has kept woman in state of helplessness and dep endence; so it continues 
to be his duty to protect her. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 27, 9-5.1927 
 
So long as we retain even a subconscious attraction  for fineries, it is useless to 
give them up or making changes by seeing what other s are doing. But if our 
infatuation for fineries passes off, and still the mind is drawn towards them, 
then we would make the necessary outward changes wh ether through a sense 
of guilt or by way of limitation of others, and ult imately root out this craving. 
Infatuation and such like, are our enemies; they ha rass us so much that we Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 334  should protect ourselves from them with whatever he lp which might be secured 
from any appropriate quarter. I am writing all this  for those who are honest and 
sincere. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 59, 19-12-1927 
 
Our women do not let male doctors to examine their bodies or to operate upon 
them. This is a false sense of modesty which has it s root in sex-obsession. In 
this matter I prefer the practice of the West. I do  know that at times 
undesirable consequences have resulted from it. Whe n unscrupulous doctors 
and women who are easily duped or roused to passion  come together, it has led 
to immoral acts. But that kind of thing happens in this world practically under 
any other set of circumstances, and there is no rea son why on that account 
necessary and good activities should be put to a st op. We must have confidence 
in ourselves. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 88, 9-12-1929 
 
It is the lust of men which has often degraded wome n and taught them ways of 
dressing and behaving, whereby women might tempt an d excite them. The 
woman did not see this in the sense of her own ensl avement and degradation. 
She also harboured lust, and so she bored her nose,  bored her ears and put on 
shackles (in the form of ornaments) on her feet and  became a slave. An 
unscrupulous man can easily tempt a woman with a no se-ring or earring. I have 
never been able to understand why women put on thes e things which lead to 
their disablement. Real beauty lies in the heart. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 90, 9-12-1929 
 
Men must cease to be beasts if women of ill-fame ar e to be rehabilitated. So 
long as there are beasts in man's shape there must be beasts in woman's shape 
too. If such women give up their vile occupation an d turn over a new leaf, Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 335  respectable men would certainly marry them. Once a prostitute, always a 
prostitute—is not a sound proposition. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai , Vol. 1, p. 315, 28-3-1932 
 
A craving for things of beauty is prefectly natural . Only there is no absolute 
standard of beauty. I have therefore come to think that the craving is not to be 
satisfied, but that from the craving for things out side of us, we must learn to 
see beauty from within. And when we do that, a whol e vista of beauty is open 
out to us and the love of appropriation vanishes. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 184, 21-6-1932 
 
If a woman who is in danger of being molested has t he right to commit suicide, 
so has a trustee who is being robbed of the propert y in his charge. But he 
himself should have thought out what is the right t hing for him to do. If a 
woman prefers not to kill herself in order to save herself from rape, we have no 
right to say that she has done something wrong. On the other hand if a trustee 
gives up his life in the defence of trust property,  we cannot assume that he did 
the right thing. It all depends upon the individual 's state of mind at the time. 
Still I believe that a woman, if she has the requis ite courage, will be ready to 
give up her life rather than her virtue. I therefor e would certainly encourage 
such attitude in my talks with women, and make it c lear that it is an easy thing 
to give up life if we will. For many women are unde r the wrong impression that 
they can do nothing but yield to the wrongdoer if t here is no man to depend 
upon or if they do not learn to use dagger or a rev olver. I would certainly tell 
them that they need not depend upon the weapon in d efender's hand. Their 
virtue will be its own defence. But if such is not the case, they can resort to 
suicide instead of using a dagger and the like. The re is no need for them to look 
upon themselves as weak ( abala).  
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 210, 3-7-1932 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 336  You tell me how desolate B's house looked for want of the woman's touch. I 
have always considered this as a result of our fals e notions of division of work 
between men and women. Division there must be. But this utter helplessness 
on the man's part when it comes to keeping a househ old in good order and 
woman's helplessness when it comes to be a matter o f looking after herself 
more here than in the West are due to erroneous upb ringing. Why should man 
be so lazy as not to keep his house neat, if there is no women looking after it or 
why should a woman feel that she always needs a man  protector? This anomaly 
seems to me to be due to the habit of regarding wom an as fit primarily for 
housekeeping and of thinking that she must live so soft as to feel weak and be 
always in need of protection. We are trying to crea te a different atmosphere at 
the Ashram. It is difficult work. But it seems to b e worth doing. 
My Dear Child,  p. 92, 18-7-1932 
 
If you women would only realize your dignity and pr ivilege, and make full use 
of it for mankind, you will make it much better tha n it is. But man has 
delighted in enslaving you and you have proved will ing slaves till the slaves and 
the slave-holders have become one in the crime of d egrading humanity. My 
special function from childhood, you might say, has  been to make woman 
realize her dignity. I was once slave-holder myself  but Ba proved an unwilling 
slave and thus opened my eyes to my mission. Her ta sk was finished. Now I am 
in search of a woman who would realize her mission.  Are you that woman, will 
you be one? 
Letters to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur,  p. 100, 21-10-1936 
 
I began work among women when I was not even thirty  years old. There is not a 
woman in South Africa who does not know me. But my work was among the 
poorest. The intellectuals I could not draw. My app eals have always been from 
heart to heart. I have felt like fish out of water in the company of intellectuals. 
Hence you are wrong in laying down the sweeping pro position you have. You 
can't blame me for not having organized the intelle ctuals among women. I have Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 337  not the gift. And then my method of organizing is o ut of the ordinary, not 
necessarily superior. All I mean is that I have not hing to show on paper. But just 
as I never fear coldness on the part of the poor wh en I approach them, I never 
fear it when I approach poor women. There is an inv isible bond between them 
and me. And why do you miss the agony I am passing through? Is it not for 
womankind? I am wringing my soul for adequate purit y to enable me to render 
greater service to them and through them to the who le humanity. Ahimsa, 
which is my sheet-anchor, demands all this. 
Letters to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur,  p. 146, 8-7-1938 
 
Whoever works according to her capacity has fulfill ed her mission. But in your 
work you must cultivate that attitude of mind which  is inculcated in the Gita. 
That is to do everything with a view to serve or as  an offering to God, and if 
your action is an offering to God, you will never h ave the feeling "I am doing 
this." You will not then have ill-will for anybody and you will be generous to 
others. You should always ask yourselves whether yo ur smallest action is guided 
by these principles. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 338   
12. THE GOOD OF ALL 
Please do not carry unnecessarily on your head the burden of emancipating 
India. Emancipate your own self. Even that burden i s very great. Apply 
everything to yourself. Nobility of soul consists i n realizing that you are yourself 
India. In your emancipation is the emancipation of India. All else is make-
believe. If you feel interested, do persevere. You and I need not worry about 
others. If we bother about others, we shall forget our own task and lose 
everything. Please ponder over this from the point of view of altruism, not of 
selfishness. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 206, 2-4-1910 
 
True public service can be rendered only if fearles sness can be achieved as 
regards (the loss of) prestige, money, caste, wife,  family and even life. Then 
only will  moksha  (liberation), the ultimate end of life, be attaine d. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 350, 11-11-1910 
 
It is our duty to help every class of workers. I ha ve no doubt about this. I have 
little faith in what goes under the name of 'co-ope ration'. I think our first task is 
to make a careful survey of the condition of the wo rking-class. What does the 
worker earn? Where does he live ? In what condition  ? How much does he spend? 
How much does he save? What debts does he incur? Ho w many children has he? 
How does he bring them up? What was he previously? What brought about the 
change in his life? What is his present condition? It does not seem proper at all 
to start a co-operative society straightway, withou t finding answers to all these 
questions. It is necessary that we go into the mids t of the working-class. If we 
do, we can solve a number of problems in a very sho rt time. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIV P- 147, 3-1-1918 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 339  I am opposed to advertisements because they are so untrue. Every decent 
paper should, free of charge, advertise books which  it considers the public 
should read. It is, in my opinion, one of the neces sary functions of a N [ews] p 
[aperl. I feel too that we should have a general ad vertising agency which for a 
payment will advertise all useful things. But I abh or the idea of a newspaper 
making money out of advertisements. It is a fraud o n the public. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVI, p. 250, 22-10-1919 
 
Making people give up their habits with the help of  law does not by itself 
constitute brute force or violence—to stop the sale  of liquor by law and thereby 
force the addicts to give up the habit of drinking is not violence. If it were 
suggested that those given to drinking should be wh ipped, that would certainly 
be brute force. Selling liquor is no duty of the St ate. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIV p. 274, 21-6-1924 
 
Stick to truth alone. We should act non-violently i n everything we do. For the 
sake of the country and for our own sake, we should  ply the Charkha, wear 
Khadi; Hindus and Muslims should live amicably, Hin dus should give up 
untouchability, considering the untouchables to be our brothers; drunkards 
should give up drinking, addicts should give up the ir bad habits. This is the duty 
of us all. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXV P- 256, 22-10-1924 
 
Do we not recite — आ/glyph216मवत् सव/glyph110भूतेषु—that we are to regard all creatures as our 
own selves? If we think and feel in this way, when we see somebody's children 
dirty, we would feel as if our own children are dir ty and would feel ashamed, 
on finding someone else miserable, we would feel ou rselves miserable and 
begin to look for a way of removing the misery. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 13, 17-1-1927 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 340  A ruler can issue orders only if he has acquired th e highest qualification for 
service. His orders should be intended not to advan ce his own interests but the 
welfare of society. Rulers nowadays have lost sight  of their duty, so that 
instead of setting an example of selflessness and d evotion they give themselves 
up to pleasures and use their powers as an instrume nt of self-indulgence. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 8, Jan. 1927 
 
We have to develop in ourselves the quality which e nables us to look upon all as 
equals as laid down in the Gita. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 42, 22-8-1927 
 
Even if there are differences of opinion, annoyance s and irritation, whatever 
work has to be done must be done. We should certain ly not do less than what 
others do. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 52, 31-10-1927 
 
There will always be some thieves in this world. Th ere are three ways of 
guarding against them: (1) We should not keep anyth ing with us. This ideal is 
hardly feasible. (2) If we keep anything with us, t o that extent we should be 
vigilant. (3) We should frighten away the thief by fear of punishment by law, 
and we too should join in punishing him. We have tu rned away from this last 
course of remedy. The first method is to be our ide al. The second one we have 
already been putting into practice—accumulating as little as possible, and being 
extremely vigilant about that what it is absolutely  necessary to keep with us. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 85, 11-11-1929 
 
As we acquire more skill, we are able to put in mor e work with less strain on 
our physical and mental resources. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 13, 8-5-1932 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 341  The doctrine of the greatest good of the greatest n umber. . . means in its 
nakedness that in order to achieve the supposed goo d of 51 per cent the 
interest of 49 per cent may be, or rather, should b e sacrificed. It is a heartless 
doctrine and has done harm to humanity. The only re al, dignified, human 
doctrine is the greatest good of all, and this can only be achieved by uttermost 
self-sacrifice. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai , Vol. I, p. 149, 4-6-1932 
 
I do not believe in the "greatest good of the great est number", nor can I agree 
that might is right. For human beings the object in  view should be the good of 
all, with the weak being served first. We are two-l egged men, but have still to 
cast away the nature of four-footed beasts. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 221, 10-7-1932
 
A prison should be a house of correction and not pu nishment. If that is so, why 
should a forger have fetters on his legs in prison ? The fetters will not improve 
his character. To my mind it is intolerable that an yone should be fettered if 
there is no likelihood 0f his trying to escape or becoming unmanageable. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai , Vol. I, p. 170, 17-6-1932 
 
Good results do not justify violence and they not n ullify the evil that violence 
works. It is not always possible to lay one's hands  on the evil that violence 
works. Thus it is not possible to weigh the evil wr ought by hanging a murderer, 
though we may have a sigh of relief when he is put out. Faith would be 
meaningless, if we were able always to account for everything 
Letters to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur,  p. 116, 2-6-1937 
 
It is God's grace that there are undistressed perso ns even in the areas of 
distress. When all are in distress,  who can serve the nurses? So we must fend for  Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 342  ourselves when we go out to serve. We must not rely  on others, but should be 
thankful to them for such- help as they can afford to give. 
Selected Letters—I,  p. 22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 343   
13. INDIA'S FREEDOM 
It is very difficult to get rid of our fondness for  Parliament. It was no doubt 
barbarious when people tore off the skin, burned pe rsons alive and cut off their 
ears or nose; but the tyranny of Parliament is much  greater than that of 
Chengiz Khan, Tamerlane and others. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 204, 2-4-1910 
 
Swaraj is for those who understand it. You and I ca n enjoy it even today. All 
the others will have to learn to do likewise. What is secured for us by others is 
not Swaraj but  pararaj,  i.e. foreign rule, whether they be Indians or 
Englishmen. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 205, 2-4-1910 
 
The more experience I gain, the more I realize that  machinery will keep us in 
permanent slavery, and I find that what I said abou t it in Hind Swaraj is literally 
true. About Satyagraha, too, I have been discoverin g new truths. I see that, for 
the weak as for the strongest, it is a weapon of th e utmost purity. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XV p. 340, 1-6-1919 
 
[The] highest honesty must be introduced in the pol itical life of the country if 
we are to make our mark as a nation. This presuppos es at the present moment 
a very firm and definite acceptance of the creed of  Truth at any cost. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVII, p. 97, 18-3-1920 
 
My belief is that the instant India is purified Ind ia becomes free and not a 
moment earlier. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIX, p. 15, 23-9-1920 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 344  I am gathering together all the forces of hate and directing them in a proper 
channel. Hatred is a sign of weakness as contempt o f insolent power. If I could 
but show our countrymen that we need not fear the E nglish, we will cease to 
hate them. A brave man or woman never hates. Hatred  is essentially the vice of 
cowards. N [on-] C [o-] o [peration] is self-purifi cation. Even as the dirt comes 
to the surface when you are purifying sugar, so doe s our weakness come to the 
surface whilst we are purifying ourselves. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIX p. 137, 17-12-1920 
 
Let the students understand that Swaraj is not to b e obtained by learning but 
by an exhibition in their own lives of the qualitie s necessary for Swaraj, viz., 
openness, truthfulness, courage, cohesion, fellowsh ip and self-sacrifice. If they 
have these qualities, they must take them to their villages and spread them. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIX, p. 292, 29-1-1921 
 
The economic and the moral salvation of India... re sts mainly with you. The 
future of India lies on your knees, for you will nu rture the future generation. 
You can bring up the children of India to become si mple, god-fearing and brave 
men and women, or you can coddle them to be weaklin gs unfit to brave the 
storms of life and used to foreign finery which the y would find it difficult in 
after life to discard. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XX, p. 497, 11-8-1921 
 
My goal is to attain self-government for India. The  means adopted to attain the 
end are Non-violence and Truth. Therefore, Indian s elf-government not only 
means no menace to the world, but will be of the gr eatest benefit to humanity 
if she attains her end through those means and thos e means alone. The 
spinning-wheel is the external symbol of internal r eform, and its universal re-
adoption in India ensures her economic salvation an d frees millions of Indian 
peasants from growing pauperism. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 345  Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIII, p. 361, 5-4-1924 
 
It would be the nicest thing to achieve and run Swa raj if everyone sincerely felt 
that he was nothing and that the cause was everythi ng. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XXIII, p. 330, 28-3-1924 
 
Salutation of the national flag is in my opinion un objectionable. I see nothing 
inherently wrong about it. A national spirit is nec essary for national existence. 
A flag is a material aid to the development of such  a spirit. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXVI, p. 544, 25-4-1925 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 346   
14. EDUCATION 
Education does not mean knowledge of letters but it  means character-building, 
it means knowledge of duty. Our own word literally means 'training'. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. IX, p. 208, 25-3-1919 
 
Why should every lad have to know English? Is it no t enough if some men are 
specially trained in English in each province so th at they may diffuse among the 
nation through the vernaculars knowledge of new dis coveries and researches? 
So doing, our boys and girls will become saturated with the new knowledge and 
we may expect rejuvenation such as we have never wi tnessed during the past 
sixty years. I feel more and more that, if our boys  are to assimilate facts of 
different sciences, they will only do so if they re ceive their training through the 
vernaculars. No half measures will bring about this  much needed reform. Until 
we attain this state of things, I fear that we shal l have to let the Englishmen 
think for us and we must continue slavishly to imit ate them. No scheme of self-
government can avert the catastrophe if it does not  involve this much needed 
change. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XIV P- 153, 16-1-1918 
 
I have faith enough in the patriotism, selflessness  and the sagacity of the 
people of the Madras Presidency to know that those,  who at all want to render 
national service to come in touch with the other Pr ovinces, will undergo the 
sacrifice, if it is one, of learning Hindi. I sugge st that they should consider it a 
privilege to be able to learn a language that will enable them to enter into the 
hearts of millions of their countrymen. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XTV, p. 301, 31-3-1918 
 
A student means one who is hungry for learning. Lea rning is knowledge of what 
is worth knowing about. The only thing worth knowin g about is the  atman.  True Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 347  knowledge is thus knowledge of the self. But in ord er to attain this knowledge, 
one has to know literature, history, geography, mat hematics, etc. All these are 
by way of means. Knowledge of letters is considered  essential in order that one 
might acquire knowledge of these subjects. It is no t as if men of knowledge 
without this equipment do not exist within our expe rience. One who knows this 
would not go mad after knowledge of letters or of l iterature and other 
subjects; he would become mad only after knowledge of the self. He will give 
up anything which proves an obstacle in the pursuit  of this knowledge and 
dedicate himself only to that which helps him in th at pursuit. The student-life 
of one who realizes this never ends and, whether ea ting, drinking, sleeping, 
playing, digging, weaving, spinning or doing any ot her work, he is all the time 
growing in this knowledge. For this purpose, one ha s to develop one's faculty of 
observation. One would not, then, always need a mul titude of teachers or, 
rather, would look upon the whole world as one's te acher and accept 
everything in it which is good. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. XXVI, p. 362 
 
My opinion is that Devanagari is the most scientifi c and perfect script in the 
world and is therefore from that standpoint the mos t suitable national script. 
But I see no way out of the difficulty of Musalmans  in accepting it at the 
present moment. I, therefore, feel that the educate d classes should know 
either script equally well. That which has greater vitality and is easier will then 
become the national script, especially when Hindus and Mussulmans as well as 
the (other) classes have ceased altogether to distr ust one another and have 
learnt to decide non-religious questions on purely national lines. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIX, p. 1, 19-1-1920 
 
Literary education is intended only to quicken our spirit of service. Now that 
you have the opportunity to render service, pour yo ur soul into it and learn to 
enjoy it thoroughly. When you serve, do not give yo urself up to spiritual pride 
and say, "I do it". The service of the proud is not hing worth. The Gita is there to Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 348  teach us that we do nothing, that we can do nothing . We are only the 
instruments of God's will. 
The Selected Letters —I,  p. 23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 349   
15. CASTE SYSTEM AND UNTOUCHABILITY 
... I think we are committing a great sin in treati ng a whole class of people as 
untouchables and it is owing to the existence of th is class that we have still 
some revolting practices among us. Not to eat in co mpany with a particular 
person and not to touch him are two very different things. No one is an 
untouchable now. If we don't mind contact with a Ch ristian or a Muslim, why 
should we mind it with one belonging to our own rel igion? No defence of 
untouchability is possible now, either from the poi nt of view of justice or that 
of practical common sense. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIII, p. 120, 26-7-1915 
 
It has been a passion of my life to serve the untou chables because I have felt 
that I could not remain a Hindu if it was true that  untouchability was a part of 
Hinduism. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIX p. 289, 29-1-1921 
 
The crime against the untouchables I feel, the expl oitation of the dumb millions 
I feel, but I realize still more clearly our duty t o the lower animal world. When 
Buddha carried that lamb on his back and chastised the Brahmins, he showed 
the highest measure of love. The worship of the cow  in Hinduism typifies that 
love. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIX, p. 395, 2-3-1921 
 
The caste has every right to excommunicate a person  who commits a breach of 
its regulations. There is nothing however, in all t hat you have done so far for 
which you need feel ashamed or repentant. No doubt your influence on the 
caste will suffer a setback, and your capacity to c ollect funds will decrease; 
that, however, does not worry me in the least. It s hould not be a matter for 
sorrow or regret even if you have to be a pauper as  a result of this Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 350  development. Pauperism, if it comes in consequence of an adherence to 
principles that are dear to us, deserves to be welc omed. When ultimately the 
caste recognizes your firmness as also your courtes y, it will relent and be 
humble. Castes will necessarily have to undergo ref orm; and it is likely that this 
even will pave the way for it. 
To A Gandhian Capitalist,  p. 64, 16 7 1926 
 
Untouchability is a soul-destroying sin. Caste is a  social evil. . . 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 34, 10-10-1932 
 
Purity is of the mind. It ought to be in all men as  a matter of course. In this age 
of enlightenment, if a woman wants to preserve her  dharma,  she will have to 
serve  Daridranarayan,  and should educate herself. Service of  Daridranarayan  
means propagation of Khadi, spinning, etc. And Hari jan-service means to 
remove the blot of untouchability. These two things  are God's own work. 
Education can never go side by side with the observ ance of  purdah.  
To A Gandhian Capitalist,  p. 139, 25-10-1933 
 
In these days of self-purification, Harijans ought to know that they are to avoid 
all the bad customs of caste- Hindus. They should t herefore avoid child 
marriages. But reformers may not be impatient. Sard a Act is, in my opinion, a 
wise step. But it may not be strictly enforced agai nst Harijans when it is very 
laxly enforced against caste-Hindus. There should b e effective enlightened 
propaganda by Harijans among fellow Harijans on the  evil of child marriages 
and the bearing of the Sarda Act on them. And then when it is made certain 
that people willfully ignore that Act a few prosecu tions may be undertaken. But 
even then, they must be the sole concern of Harijan s. They may not ask for or 
receive even financial assistance in this matter fr om caste- Hindus. In any case 
at least one year should be given to concentrated p ropaganda. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 351  Letters to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur,  p. 11, 2-2-1935 
 
Castes are innumerable and in their present conditi on they are a drag upon 
Hinduism.... 
Varna  stands on a different footing, and it means profes sion. It has nothing to 
do with inter-dining and inter-marriage. People bel onging to the four 
professions used formerly to inter-dine and even to  intermarry and by so doing 
they naturally could not and did not leave their  varna.  This is absolutely clear 
from the definitions of the different  varnas  in the  Bhagavadgita.  A man falls 
from his  varna  when he abandons his hereditary profession. Today however  
varnashram  is a lost treasure and there is utter confusion. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 352   
16.  BRAHMACHARYA 
The vow of  Brahmacharya  and other vows are holy and bring happiness only 
when they are taken as a spiritual discipline. If r esorted to by a demon, they 
only add to misery. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. IX, p. 117, 28-12-1908 
 
When we have any doubt concerning problems of moral ity, we may disregard 
the orders of other elders; nay, it would be our du ty to disobey them. But when 
there is no doubt about the morality of a question,  even parents' orders can be 
disregarded; nay, it will be our duty to do so. If my father asks me to steal, I 
must not. If I want to observe  Brahmacharya  and my parents' orders are to the 
contrary, I must politely disobey them. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 406, 8-2-1911 
 
To indulge in the pleasures of the senses and then assert that one does nothing, 
that the senses just go their way, that one is a me re observer; all this is vain 
chatter. He alone may argue thus who has achieved c omplete mastery over his 
senses and whose senses function only to keep the b ody going. By the same 
token, there is not one among us who is fit enough to speak these words and 
there will be none till we have achieved true pover ty. There is no reason to 
believe that kings are kings in virtue of their  punya.  All that can be said is that 
they are kings because of their deeds. But to say t hat these were necessarily 
good deeds seems entirely wrong, considering the na ture of the  atman.  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XI, p. 150, 23-8-1911 
 
The desire must be suppressed with the utmost effor t. Improper desires will 
always occur. By suppressing them every time, we gr ow firmer in mind and gain 
in spiritual strength. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 353  Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 389, 17-3-1914 
 
Everything is transient, except the  atman.  Not only should we keep reminding 
ourselves of this but we should work on accordingly . The more I reflect, the 
more insistently I feel the supreme importance of T ruth and Brahmacharya.  The 
latter, together with all other rules of morality, is comprehended in truth. I 
cannot help thinking; however, the  Brahmacharya  is important enough to share 
the place of honour with truth. It is my unshakable  faith that these two can 
conquer any obstacle whatever. The real obstacles a re the evil desires of the 
mind. If, for our happiness, we depend in no way on  our outward relations with 
others, we would always think of what we ought to d o rather than of what 
people might say. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 396, 22-3-1914 
 
Truthfulness,  Brahmacharya,  non-violence, non- stealing and non-hoarding, 
these five rules of life are obligatory on all aspi rants. Everyone should be an 
aspirant. A man's character, therefore, is to be bu ilt on the foundation of these 
disciplines. Beyond doubt, they are to be observed by everyone in the world. 
Though a businessman, one must never utter or pract ice untruth; though 
married, one must remain celibate; though keeping o neself alive, one can 
practise non-violence. It is difficult to be of the  world and yet not to steal (to 
observe the rule of non-stealing and not to hoard w ealth or any other thing. 
One must, nevertheless, keep that as an ideal to be  attained and have some 
limit in these respects; when the mind has begun to  turn away from these 
things, one may even embrace the supreme renunciati on. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIII, pp. 17-18, 7-22-1915 
 
It is my conviction that one cannot build one's cha racter without the help of 
vows. They are to a man what anchor is to a ship. A  ship without an anchor is 
tossed to and fro and finally broken on the rocks; without vows, human beings 
meet a similar fate. The vow of truth includes all others. How would a man who Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 354  respects truth violate  Brahmacharya  or steal anything? "Brahma  alone is real; 
all else is non-existent." If this sutra  is true, knowledge of  Brahma  is implied in 
the observance of truth. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIV p. 97, 22-11-1917 
 
There is no temptation so difficult to overcome as that of the palate and it is 
because it is so difficult that we think so little about it. In my opinion, mastery 
of the palate means mastery of everything. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XV p. 34, 29-8-1918 
 
In order to observe  Brahmacharya  the following things are absolutely necessary: 
(1) solitude; (2) moderation in eating; (3) good bo oks; (4) regular meditation; 
(5) plenty of physical and mental labour; (6) absta ining from spicy and 
intoxicating food or drinks; (7) abstaining from sh ows and other things having a 
sex appeal; (8) giving up the desire for sexual int ercourse; (9) avoiding being 
alone with a woman; (10) repeating Ramanama  or some other  mantra  
(formula). 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXV PP- 133-34, 13-9-1924 
 
Brahmacharya  is such only if it persists under all conditions a nd in the face of 
every possible temptation. If a beautiful woman app roaches the marble statue 
of a man, it will not be affected in the least. A  Brahmachari  is one who reacts 
in a similar case in the same way as marble does. B ut just as the marble statue 
refrains from using its eyes or ears, even so a man  should avoid every occasion 
of sin. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 80, 19-4-1932 
 
Brahmacharya  hardly deserves the name if it can be observed onl y by avoiding 
the company of women even when such company is kept  with a view to serve. 
It amounts to physical renunciation unbacked by the  essential mental Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 355  detachment, and lets us down in critical times. The  Gita is right in saying (II: 
59) that one's yearning for the pleasures of the wo rld withers away only when 
he has had the beautific vision. But the converse o f this statement is equally 
true: one must not hope for realization so long as he yearns after the fleshpots 
of Egypt. That is to say, the two things go hand to  hand. The yearning departs 
when one beholds the Supreme. Although the objects of sense have 
disappeared, the yearning for them has not been tho roughly uprooted. 
Therefore there is a possibility of desire raising its head so long as one has not 
seen God. After a man has seen Him desire becomes a n impossibility; indeed he 
ceases to be masculine and becomes sexless. He is n o longer a significant figure 
but is reduced to zero. In other words his personal ity melts away in that of 
God. The idea becomes clearer if in place of the wo rds  param,  God,  Brahma , 
we used the word satya  or truth. There is no room here for self-deception . If 
there is any one in the Ashram who talks of taking the whole world for his 
family but harbours evil thoughts in his mind, he i s a  mithyachari  (hypocrite) in 
the language of the Gita (III: 6) while we are all along thinking of a  satyachari  
(truthful person) and how he should behave. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, pp. 80-81, 19-4-1932 
 
It is a sin to believe that any one else is inferio r or superior to ourselves. We 
are all equal. It is the touch of sin that pollutes  us, and never that of a human 
being. None are high and none are low for one who w ould devote his life to 
service. The distinction between high and low is a blot on Hinduism, which we 
must obliterate. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. 1, pp. 286-87, 14-8-1932 
 
Wandering thoughts can never be a stage in spiritua l development. They do 
trouble most of us; hence the usual emphasis laid o n mental concentration. 
What we have to bear in mind is this. We think a mu ltitude of thoughts which 
involve a waste of mental energy even as sensuality  results in the waste of vital 
energy. Just as physical debility affects the mind,  so also mental debility Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 356  affects the body. Therefore, I understand Brahmacharya  in a comprehensive 
sense and look upon aimless thinking as a breach of  it. We have made 
Brahmacharya  difficult to achieve by understanding it in a narr ow sense. But if 
we accept the broader definition and try to restrai n all the eleven organs of 
sense, the control of animal passion becomes compar atively very much easier. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 305, 23-8-1932 
 
Remember my definition of  Brahmacharya.  It means not suppression of one or 
more senses but complete mastery over them all. The  two states are 
fundamentally different. I can suppress all my sens es today but it may take 
aeons to conquer them. Conquest means using them as  my willing slaves. I can 
prick the ear drum and suppress the sense of hearin g by simple, painless 
operation. This is worthless. I must train the ear so that it refuses to hear 
gossip, lewd talk, blasphemy, but it is open to the  celestial music, it will hear 
the most distant cry for succour from thousands of miles. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira , p. 257, 27-4-1933 
 
Brahmacharya  is a mental state. It is undoubtedly helped by abs temiousness in 
all respects. But diet plays the least part in givi ng one the necessary mental 
state. Not that wrong diet will not hinder progress . What I want to say is that 
the right diet taken in moderation is not the only thing in the observance of  
Brahmacharya though it is undoubtedly one of the necessary thing s. Indulgence 
of the palate will be the surest sign of a weak men tal state which is repugnant 
to  Brahmacharya. The sovereign remedy for the observance of Brahmacharya  is 
realization that the soul is a part of the Divine a nd that the Divine resides 
within us. A heart grasp of this fact induces menta l purity and strength. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 3 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 357   
17. FEARLESNESS 
All fear is of the nature of a moral weakness and, so long as we are subject to 
it, we shall always have to face such misfortunes. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 93, 30-5-1913 
 
Death should make us think of our duty and fill us with contempt for the body, 
but inspire no fear. It seems that a man does not s uffer excessively even when 
he is burnt to death. When the pain becomes unbeara ble, he loses 
consciousness. Those who cling to the body so very tenaciously only suffer the 
more. One who knows the truth about the  atman  will have no fear of death. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, pp. 365-66, 1-3-1914 
 
I have not got rid of the fear of death, despite mu ch thinking. But I feel no 
impatience. I keep on trying and I am sure I shall get rid off it one day. We 
should not let go a single occasion when we may try . That is our duty. It is for 
God to produce or will the result. Why worry then? When feeding her baby, the 
mother has no thought of the result. The result doe s follow, though. To get rid 
of the fear of death and to drive away desire, make  the effort and keep 
cheerful; and they will disappear. Otherwise, it wi ll be the same with you as 
with the man who, resolving not to think about a mo nkey, kept on thinking of 
one. 
We are born in sin, and we are enslaved in the body , because of our sinful 
deeds; how can you hope to cleanse yourself of all the impurity just in a 
minute? You may live as you like, Realize God anyho w. 
This is the teaching of Akha Bhagat 1. 
Tulsidasji says: 
Whether in adversity or no, repeat over again the n ame of Rama and you will 
achieve all there is to be achieved. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 358  Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, pp. 375, 7-3-1914 
 
No man can hasten or delay my death even by a minut e. The best way of saving 
oneself from death is to go seeking it. It is no do ubt our duty to take care of 
our life in a general way. More than this we need n ot do. We should rather 
welcome death whenever it comes. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 386, 14-3-1914 
 
Death should cause no fear in us, if we have lived in the fear of God and have 
done nothing in violation of the voice of our consc ience. Then, indeed, is death 
but a change for the better and, therefore, a welco me change which need not 
evoke any sorrow. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 390, 18-3-1914 
 
The man who knows in his heart of hearts that this mortal frame is liable to 
perish any moment will be ever ready to meet death.  That he might be so, the 
householder will limit his external activities and expand the inner and live 
accordingly. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIII, p. 30, 27-2-1915 
 
The more I observe and study things, the more convi nced I become that sorrow 
over separation and death is perhaps the greatest d elusion. To realize that it is 
a delusion is to become free. There is no death, no  separation of the substance. 
And yet the tragedy of it is that though we love fr iends for the substance we 
recognize in them, we deplore the destruction of th e insubstantial that covers 
the substance for the time being. Whereas real frie ndship should be used to 
reach the whole through the fragment. You seem to h ave got the truth for the 
moment. Let it abide forever. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 41, 27-4-1927 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 359  To wish to see the dearest ones as long as possible  in the flesh is a selfish 
desire and it comes out of weakness or want of fait h in the survival of the soul 
after the dissolution of the body. The form ever ch anges, ever perishes, the 
informing spirit neither changes nor perishes. True  love consists in transferring 
itself from the body to the dweller within and then  necessarily realizing the 
oneness of all life inhabiting numberless bodies. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 156, 6-7-1931 
 
Death as such leaves little impression on me; I onl y feel for the bereaved 
relatives. There can be no greater ignorance than t o mourn over death. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 213, 5-7-1932 
 
So long as we wear this vesture of clay, let us kee p it clean, pure and healthy, 
and when we have to cast it off, let us discard it without any regret. It was 
given to us for use. Let the Giver take it away whe n He pleases. We have to use 
it for service only, and not for enjoyment. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 276, 7-8-1932 
 
The human body is less durable even than a glass ba ngle, which, if we 
preserved, may continue to exist for hundreds of ye ars. But our bodies, no 
matter how carefully preserved, cannot last beyond a certain period, and may 
be destroyed at any time during that period. We may  not put our trust in them. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, pp. 276-77, 7-8-1932 
 
The spirit which you love is always with you. The b ody through which you 
learned to love the spirit is no longer necessary f or sustaining that love. It is 
well that it lasts whilst there is use for it. It i s equally well that it perishes 
when there is no use for it. And since we don't kno w when it will outlast its use, 
we conclude that death through whatever cause means  that there was no 
longer any use of it. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 360  Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 210, 20-9-1932 
 
I have personally ceased for years to grieve over d eath at all. The shock is felt 
when a comrade is torn away from me, but that is pu rely due to personal 
attachment which in other words is selfishness. But  I immediately recover and 
realize that death is a deliverance and has to be w elcomed, even as a friend is 
welcomed, and that it means dissolution of the body , not of the indwelling 
spirit. 
Selected Letters-II,  p. 28, 24-11-1932 
 
We are born only to die and we die only to be born again. This is all old 
argument. Yet it needs to be driven home. Somehow o r other we refuse to 
welcome death as we welcome birth. We refuse to bel ieve even the evidence 
of our senses, that we could not possibly have any attachment for the body 
without the soul and that we have no evidence whats oever that the soul 
perishes with the body. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 260, 4-5-1933 
 
The frank admission of one's proved helplessness do es not make one a coward 
but may be the beginning of bravery. 
Letters to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur,  p. 29, 19-6-1935 
 
So long as God wants me to work on this earth in th is body, He will take care of 
it. Not all the physicians in the world can save me , when the hour strikes. 
Letters to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur,  p. 99, 16-10-1936 
 
We die to live once more, even as we live only to d ie at last. Life therefore is 
not an occasion for joy nor death an occasion for s orrow. But there is one thing Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 361  needful. We must ascertain our duty in life and con tinue to discharge it till we 
die. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 18 
 
To be afraid of death is like being afraid of disca rding an old and worn out 
garment. I have often thought of death and have the  intellectual conviction 
that it is sheer ignorance which makes us afraid of  death. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 24 
 
I am engaged in my present activities as I look upo n them as essential to life. If 
I have to face death while thus engaged, I shall fa ce it with equanimity. I am 
now a stranger to fear. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 32 
 
"Death is but a sleep and a forgetting." This is su ch a sweet sleep that the body 
has not to awake again, and the dead load of memory  is thrown overboard. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 5 
 
Death is an event to be celebrated and much more so  than birth. For birth is 
preceded by nine months of life in a solitary cell and is also followed by much 
unhappiness. But death for some of us spells the at tainment of the end of life. 
To qualify for such a death one should devote one's  life to work done in a spirit 
of detachment. 
Selected Letters—II  p. 49 
 
1 A mystic Gujarati poet of the 17th century known for his satire; a devotee and  
vedantist. 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 362   
18. HEALTH AND HYGIENE 
What service will an army of doctors render to the country ? What great things 
are they going to achieve by dissecting dead bodies , by killing animals, and by 
cramming worthless dicta for five or seven years? W hat will the country gain by 
the ability to cure physical diseases? That will si mply increase our attachment 
to the body. We can formulate a plan for preventing  the growth of disease even 
without the knowledge of medical science. This does  not mean that there 
should be no doctors or physicians at all. They wil l always be with us. The point 
is that many a young man who gives an undue importa nce to this profession and 
wastes hundreds of rupees and several years qualify ing for it, ought not to do 
so. We must know that we are not, nor are we going to be, benefited in the 
least by allopathic doctors. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 206, 2-4-1910 
 
Milk ... is but another form of meat and man has no  right to take it. [To argue] 
that because a baby sucks the mother's milk, man sh ould take cow's milk is the 
very limit of ignorance. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 127, 2-7-1913 
 
One should make do with the fewest possible article s [of food] and in the 
smallest possible quantity, no more than what is ab solutely necessary to pay 
the body its hire. It will be best to frame the rul es of our diet bearing this 
principle in mind. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 387, 17-3-1914 
 
It grieves me whenever I find that a medical man is  weak or ailing. It is a 
perpetual reminder to us that medicine is such an i ncomplete, such an 
unreliable, and such an empirical science. If we th ink about it with sufficient 
detachment, we would at once realize its inherent w eakness by understanding Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 363  that there is no such thing as an absolute cure. Th e most potent drugs admit of 
innumerable exceptions. The most successful operati on leaves literally and in 
the spirit a scar behind. 
My Dear Child,  p. 84, 20-8-1926 
 
It is . . . enough for us to realise that every ill ness is but a breach of some 
unknown law of nature and to strive to know the law s and pray for power to 
obey. Heart prayer, therefore, whilst we are ill, i s both work and medicine. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 58, 9-7-1927 
 
If we like tasty food, why hide that fact? Having a  taste for good food is no sin. 
The sin lies in our hiding the craving, and then in  secretly indulging in it. Every 
one, man or woman, is free to eat whatever he or sh e desires.... Any one may 
satisfy his taste for food, the only limitation bei ng that the good food prepared 
should be within the rules of the common kitchen. N one should cook dishes to 
satisfy special tastes whether secretly or openly, in one's quarters. One may go 
out and eat at a friend's place, there is nothing t o hide in this and no restriction 
about what one might eat. One may also keep eatable s such as dried fruits, 
etc. in one's room. It is better if such freedom is  not availed of, but it is in no 
way binding. My earnest request to you is this: alw ays seem what you are. 
Whatever you do, do it openly. Never allow yourself  to be unduly influenced by 
another. But if ever you promise to do a thing even  out of shame, never act 
contrary to it subsequently. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 64, 10-12-1928 
 
For the child's cold, give it a sun-bath. This will  act as hot fomentation, harden 
the skin and cure the cold. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 21, 28-11-1930 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 364  Every sickness leaves behind it a legacy of weaknes s unless the system is 
allowed full rest and the mind relieved of tension.  I suppose the mental control 
is the most difficult. For this the sovereign remed y is the application of the 
Gita. Each time mind suffers a shock, there is fail ure in application. Let good 
news as well as bad pass over you like water over a  duck's back. When we hear 
any, our duty is merely to find out whether any act ion is necessary and if it is 
so, to do it as an instrument in the hands of Natur e without being affected by 
or attached to the result. This detachment appears a scientific necessity when 
we remember that in bringing about a result more th an one instrument is 
employed. Who shall dare say "I have done it"? . . . Any truth received by the 
brain must immediately be sent down to the heart. W hen it is not, it suffers 
abortion and then it lies on the brain as much pois onous matter. What poisons 
the brain poisons the whole system. Hence the neces sity of using the brain as it 
should be merely as transmitting station. Whatever is there received is either 
transmitted to the heart for immediate action or it  is rejected there and then 
as being unfit for transmission. Failure of the bra in to perform this function 
properly is the cause of almost all the ills that f lesh is heir to as also for mental 
exhaustion. If the brain simply performed its funct ion, there need never be any 
brain-fag. So whenever we suffer from illness gener ally . . . there is not only a 
dietetic error but there is also failure on the par t of the brain to function 
properly. The author of the Gita evidently saw this  and gave the world the 
sovereign remedy in the clearest possible language.  
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 139, 13-12-1930 
 
It is my firm belief that in the vegetable kingdom there is undoubtedly 
something which can serve as an effective substitut e for milk and is yet free 
from the drawbacks of milk. But the physicians who possess the qualifications 
necessary for such research never give thought to t his subject. 
To A Gandhian Capitalist,  p. 75, 9-4-1932 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 365  You should cease to think the body as yours. It is God's, but God has given it to 
you for the time being to keep it clean and healthy  and use it for His service. 
You are therefore the trustee, not the owner. An ow ner may abuse or misuse 
his property, but a trustee or keeper has to be ver y careful and make the best 
use of the property left under his care. So whilst you must not be anxious about 
the body, you have to take every care you can of it . God will take it away when 
He wishes. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 27, 5-11-1932 
 
More people are weak through over-feeding or wrong- feeding than through 
under-feeding. It is wonderful, if we chose the rig ht diet, what an 
extraordinarily small quantity would suffice! 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 254, 13-3-1933 
 
Green vegetables, bread or  chapati,  milk and a little fruit is perfect food. 
When one gets milk, pulse is a harmful superfluity.  One gets all the protein 
needed in milk. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 24, 21-3-1933 
 
As a confirmed believer in the natural mode of livi ng, I think that we can 
rebuild shattered bodies by conforming to the laws of nature. Very often I have 
known persons who have succeeded in getting better where medical assistance 
has failed. This is no reflection on the doctor bro ther. 
Letters to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur,  p. 10, 17-1-1935 
 
Physical suffering can be and should be transmitted  into spiritual joy. It is 
difficult process but it has to be gone through, if  one is to be truly rich. This 
forced illness should be used for enriching one's t houghts. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 366  Letters to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur,  p. 232, 21-10-1946 
 
Take food as you would take medicine, and not in or der to gratify the palate. 
Keep mind and body fully engaged in acts of service . Meditate on God as Truth. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 37 
 
I have learnt from childhood, and experience has co nfirmed the soundness of 
teaching, that spiritual gifts should not be used f or the purpose of healing 
bodily ailments. I do however believe in abstention  from use of drugs and the 
like. But this is purely on physical, hygienic grou nds. I do also believe in utter 
reliance upon God, but then not in the hope that He  will heal me, but in order 
to submit entirely to His will, and to share the fa te of millions who, even 
though they wished to, can have no scientific medic al help. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 45 
 
Give the poor and the afflicted the benefit of your  medical knowledge free of 
charge. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 31 
 
Take great care of the body as a trustee of God's p roperty. Do not pamper or 
spoil it, fill it with dirt or overload it. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 33 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 367   
19. SELF-RESTRAINT 
There is no need to be sorry for what is past and o ver, but it is important that 
one should learn something from it. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, pp. 420-21, 28-5-1914 
 
All good actions, by whatever feelings prompted, yi eld some fruit. The man 
who follows truth or exercises self-restraint out o f fear or shame will yet reap 
the outward benefit of doing so; such is the power of good action. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVII, p. 369, 1-5-1920 
 
Not to dine with a fellow-being out of repugnance i s a sin. Not to dine with him 
by way of self-restraint is a virtue. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XVII, p. 500, 20-6-1920 
 
The one condition for fighting for peace and libert y is to acquire self-restraint. 
To do that, it is necessary to give up the pleasure  of the world. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXVI, p. 45, 25-1-1925 
 
The Gita says somewhere that those who practise sel f-control outwardly, but 
crave for pleasures of the senses in their thoughts , are foolish and deceitful. 
This statement was particularly made for hypocrites . About those who are 
honest and sincere, the same Gita says that they sh ould constantly control the 
instincts that agitate them. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 59, 19-12-1927 
 
Those who are afraid of getting excited by a mere t ouch should admit the fact 
candidly and they must remain within their limits. Such a passionate nature is a Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 368  kind of disease, and persons of this type should av oid the touch of another man 
or woman. The disease is likely to disappear in cou rse of time. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 89, 9-12-1929 
 
There are men who can be excited by merely touching  a woman. There are 
women who become so likewise by a mere touch from a  man. It is necessary 
that such persons should avoid all human contact ev en if it means a certain 
coercion or even illness. 
Bapu's letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 89, 9-12-1929 
 
Self-control is the best thing for a prisoner and h is friends and dear ones. But 
self-control to be self-control must brace one up. It becomes mechanical or 
superimposed when it unnerves or saddens one. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 170, 4-2-1932 
 
Man's span of life may be a hundred and even more. But no matter how long he 
lives, his life is hardly one millionth part of a d rop in the ocean that is eternity. 
All attachment for it and all calculations about it  hardly make sense. Our 
calculations are bound to be uncertain. We can only  make a guess at the 
maximum years a man may live. For the rest we see e ven healthy children 
succumb to death. And we cannot assert that a man g iven to the pleasures of 
life will not live long. All we can say is that a m an who lives a life of simplicity 
and chastity will probably live long. But to exerci se self-control in order to live 
long is like a mountain in labour bringing forth a mouse. The passions must be 
subdued in order that we may attain self-realizatio n. If in the course of that 
discipline we find that life is being shortened ins tead of being lengthened, we 
need not bother about it. Health and longevity are a very insignificant fruit of 
self-control. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 119, 19-5-1932 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 369  Our life should become daily simpler and not more c omplex. We should be 
progressively more self-restrained. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 257, 27-4-1933 
 
Self-control. . . comes only by definite realizatio n that God is with us and looks 
after us as if He had no other care besides. How th is happens I do not know. 
That it does happen I do know. Those who have faith  have all their cares lifted 
from off their shoulders. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 267, 5-6-1933 
 
Voluntary obedience always carries its own convicti on. 
Letters to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur,  p. 85, 30-8-1936 
 
In working our plans of self-restraint, attention m ust not for a moment be 
withdrawn from the fact that we are all sparks of t he divine and therefore 
partake of its nature, and since there can be no su ch thing as self- indulgence 
with divine, it must of necessity be foreign to hum an nature. 
Selected Letters —7, p. 35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 370   
20. SELF-DEVELOPMENT 
Our ultimate capital is not the money we have, but our courage, our faith, our 
truthfulness and our ability. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. VI, p. 302, 28-1-1907 
 
There is only one simple way of winning divine grac e — that of practising truth 
and other virtues, gradually and deliberately, and of concentrating on one 
attachment or devotion to the Supreme! to the exclu sion of all others. 
Eat the whole body, O crow ! 
Peck away at my flesh;  
But pray consume not the two eyes, I still hope to see my beloved. 
This is said of a lover and his beloved; but in tru th it shows the yearning of the 
soul to see the beloved in the form of God. He does  not care if the body is lost. 
If the crow of passion does not eat away the eye of  knowledge, he is bound to 
meet the beloved. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 311, 31-8-1910 
 
It is our duty to obey our elders so long as their orders do not conflict with our 
moral life. Therein lies our ultimate good. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 406, 8-2-1911 
 
We should have compassion on ourselves as on all cr eatures, looking on them as 
one, and draw back in alarm from destruction of lif e for any purpose of ours. 
We should cherish no fond attachment for the body a nd have no fear whatever 
of death. 
We should strive for  moksha  right now, knowing that the body is all too apt to  
let us down. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 371  Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 366, 1-3-1914 
 
If the heart is pure, the grosser impulses of the b ody will have no scope. But 
what do we mean by the heart? And when may we belie ve the heart to be pure 
? The heart is nothing else but the  atman  or the seat of the  atman.  To imagine 
that it is pure is to imply perfect realization of the  atman  and, in the presence 
of such realization, the cravings of the senses are  inconceivable. But ordinarily 
we attribute purity to the heart when we are but st riving after such purity. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 376, 7-3-1914 
 
If I have unceasing love, I should be perfectly enl ightened man, which, indeed, 
I am not. Anyone for whom I have true love will not  misunderstand my 
intentions or words, nor will such a one bear ill-w ill to me. It follows from this 
that, when anyone looks upon us as his enemy, the f ault is primarily ours. This 
is also true of our relations with the whites. Perf ect purity of heart, therefore, 
is the final stage. Before we have reached that sta ge, as we advance towards 
greater and greater purity, the cravings of the sen ses will subside in 
corresponding measure. These cravings do not origin ate in the senses. 
The mind alone is the cause of man's being bound or  free. 
The senses are the points at which impulses in the mind become manifest. 
Through them we come to recognize the impulses as s uch. 
And so, by destroying the senses, we do not do away  with the impulses in the 
mind, Eunuchs, as we observe, are full of desires. Those who are such by birth 
are so full of them that they have been known to be  guilty of unnatural acts. I 
am deficient in the sense of smell; even so, I feel  the desire to enjoy fragrance, 
so much so that, when I find anyone talking about t he fragrance of the rose or 
other flowers, the mind, like the donkey, immediate ly runs after it and is held 
back with the greatest difficulty. 
We have heard of men who, passionate in their convi ctions, cut off their organs 
when they found it impossible to control their mind s. It may possibly be one's Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 372  duty to do so in such circumstances. Supposing my m ind becomes a prey to 
desire and I cast an evil eye on my sister; I am bu rning with lust but have not 
been totally blinded by it. In such a situation, I think, cutting off one's organ 
would be a sacred duty if there is no other remedy.  This will not happen to a 
man who advances gradually. It may perhaps happen t o one who has suddenly 
lost all desire but whose past life was none too go od. To want an 
instantaneously effective method of ensuring freedo m from desire and the 
urgency of the senses is much the same as asking fo r a son of a barren woman. 
Such a result can be achieved only with the utmost patience. A mango tree 
created by magic is only meant for the eye; much th e same is true of mental 
purity brought about with complete suddenness. Yes,  it may happen 
sometimes, that the mind is ready for purification and is merely looking for 
association with holy men which is a kind of a phil osopher's stone. On getting 
this it becomes instantly aware of its purity and t he absence of it earlier 
becomes a dream. Surely, this [change] is no instan taneous occurrence, but the 
simple and the shortest and, to that extent, the qu ickest method is: 
Withdrawal into solitude, seeking association with holy men, singing the names 
of God and telling sacred stories, reading edifying  books, unremitting mortifica-
tion of the body, a spare diet, living on fruits, m inimum of sleep, giving up of 
pleasures; anyone who can practise these things wil l find control of the mind 
quite easy as the ' amalak ' in the hand. 1 Practise these and meditate over the 
rest. Whenever the mind is disturbed with desire, o ne should turn to 
observances such as fasting. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, pp. 376-77, 7-3-1914 
 
One who rises early should make no exception on Sun days. If we do, we shall 
anxiously await the coming of a Sunday. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 409, 17-4-1914 
 
That a sound body carries a sound mind is after all  a truism, but it is to be 
interpreted with many qualifications. Take the cele brated Sandow. His is, as Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 373  you would consider, one of the soundest bodies. I a m not sure that he 
necessarily carries a sound mind with it. To me a s ound body means one which 
bends itself to the spirit and is always a ready in strument at its service. Such 
bodies are not made, in my opinion, on the football  field. They are made on 
cornfields and farms. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIII, p. 49, 17-4-1915 
 
The first and the last thing we have to attend to i s to reform ourselves. In 
trying to reform, we seem to be judging. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIII, p. 452 
 
Don't hide your ignorance out of false shame. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 18, 2-6-1919 
 
Never mind if you are mistaken for a fool, but don' t take the risk of going wrong 
as a result of your ignorance. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 19, 2-6-1919 
 
To express purest love is like walking on the edge of a sword. "None of self and 
all of Thee", is easier sung than practised. We nev er know when we are not 
selfish even when we fancy we are all love. The mor e I think of it, the more I 
feel the Truth of what I have often said. Love and truth are two faces of the 
same coin and both most difficult to practise and t he only things worth living 
for. A person cannot be true, if he does not love a ll God's creatures; truth and 
love are therefore the complete sacrifice. I shall therefore pray that both you 
and I may realize this to the fullest measure. 
My Dear Child,  pp. 53-54, 1920 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 374  If the body is the temple of the Holy, it requires the utmost care—certainly not 
pampering but equally certainly not disregard or ev en indifference. 
My Dear Child,  p. 57 
 
A disciplined conscience is one to obey. It is the voice of God. And undisciplined 
conscience leads to perdition, for the devil speaks  through it. 
My Dear Child,  p. 56 
 
Self-surrender does not mean giving up one's judgme nt. Sincere self-surrender 
is not inertia, it is energy; knowing that there is  someone to whom to turn 
ultimately, the person undertakes, with due regard for his limitations, a 
thousand experiments one after another. But they ar e all undertaken with 
humility, knowledge and discrimination. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XX, pp. 500-1, 13-8-1921 
 
Self-confidence is that which remains unshaken even  amidst disappointment. If 
I have faith in truth and non-violence, I will stic k to them even in adversity. 
Letters to Manibehn Patel,  p. 11, 11-5-1924 
 
Arrogance and firmness are generally found together . The former will gradually 
take a secondary place, if we go on promoting the  sattvic  tendencies in us. The 
best way of overcoming arrogance is to try and refr ain from reacting to 
opposition. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIV P- 87, 20-5-1924 
 
Purity and restraint are virtues to be treasured. 
Letters to Manibehn Patel,  p. 12, 20-5-1924 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 375  The mind itself is our enemy as well as our friend.  It is our duty to keep it 
under control. No medicine from a doctor is require d for this. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXIV p. 284, 23-6-1924 
 
True strength is that of the heart. The intellect s eems to be insignificant. If the 
intellect says, "I love you," but the heart refuses  to do so, what good is the 
intellect's saying that it does? 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXV P- 257, 22-10-1924 
 
We acquire certain habits and then we are unable to  do anything different. This 
is a virtue so far as good habits are concerned. On e who is sincerely devoted to 
non-violence becomes in the end incapable of violen ce. And this not only in 
deed but also in thought. Thought is father of acti on. When thought goes, 
action automatically goes with it. 
Letters to Manibehn Patel,  p. 25, 1926 
 
Devotion means faith—faith in God and in one's self . Such faith will lead one to 
make all sacrifices. Sacrifice for the sake of sacr ifice is difficult, but if it is 
made in the service of others, it is easy. No mothe r would want to sleep in the 
wet for its own sake. But she would gladly do so if  she can thereby find her 
child a dry place to sleep. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 14, 24-1-1927 
 
We must entertain the same regard for others as we have for ourselves. And if 
we did, we would be ashamed to find other people's children dirty as we would 
be if they were our own. So also if we found others  in distress, we would make 
that distress our own and try to relieve it. 
Selected Letters —7, p. 7, Jan., 1927 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 376  We should make up our minds that we will never comm it suicide. The kind of 
people who commit suicide either worry too much abo ut worldly affairs, or try 
to hide their shortcomings from the world. We shoul d never try to appear what 
we are not, or try to do what is clearly beyond us.  
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 39, 1-8-1927 
 
The first step in purifying oneself is the admissio n and eradication of whatever 
bad feelings one might have about others. As long a s we harbour ill-will or 
suspicion against our neighbours and do not strive to get rid of it, we cannot 
learn ever the first lessons of having genuine love  for them. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 48, 3-10-1927 
 
We do not want to deceive ourselves, others, or the  world. So whatever is 
working in our hearts must be brought out into the open. Once the heart is 
purified, it will take long for it to become impure  again. But if any impurity is 
allowed to remain in the heart, even good thoughts will get sullied, just as 
water poured into a dirty vessel gets sullied. If w e begin by having a suspicion 
about someone once, we often end by suspecting ever ything about him. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 49, 10-10-1927 
 
To be generous is having no anger against those who m we consider to be at 
fault, and loving and serving them. It is not the q uality of generosity or love, if 
we have goodwill for others only as long as they ar e united with us in thought 
and action. That might be called merely friendship or mutual affection. The use 
of the word 'love' is wrong in such cases. 'Love' m eans friendly feeling for the 
enemy. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 50, 17-10-1927 
 
There can never be truth where there is no courage.  To do a wrong thing is sin; 
but to hide the wrong is a greater sin. He who admi ts his misdeed with a pure Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 377  heart has his sin washed off, and he can travel onc e again by the right path. 
But he who hides his misdeed out of a false sense o f shame falls into a deeper 
pit. We have seen this to be true every time, and h ence I request all of you to 
avoid a false sense of shame. If you have done wron g, whether knowingly or 
unknowingly, make it known at once and make a resol ution not to do it again. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 71, 84-1929 
 
The optimist is he who continues to hope in the fac e of a multitude of 
disappointments. And he is credulous who reposes tr uth in the sweet words of 
anybody whom he happens to meet. This credulity is not a desirable quality. 
Optimism depends upon the inner voice while creduli ty builds its castles on 
outward circumstances as the basis. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 133, 27-5-1932 
 
Feeling is of the heart. It may easily lead us astr ay unless we would keep the 
heart pure. It is like keeping house and everything  in it clean. The heart is the 
source from which knowledge of God springs. If the source is contaminated, 
every other remedy is useless. And if its purity is  assured nothing else is 
needed. 
My Dear Child,  p. 91, 29-5-1932 
 
You must not lose self-confidence. Evil thoughts ma y enter the mind; but just 
as the house from which the refuse is removed from time to time is clean, so is 
the mind which rejects the evil thoughts just as th ey enter it, and victory is 
bound to attend its effort at self- purification. O ne who is thus vigilant cannot 
be considered a hypocrite. The golden rule for salv ation from hypocrisy is this: 
Do not conceal the evil thoughts but make a public confession of them. This 
need not be made with the beat of drum. But the fau lt must be revealed to a 
friend. And it should not matter if everyone else a lso comes to know about it. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 378  The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, pp. 169-70, 17-6-1932 
 
A fault is a bad thing; therefore we should be asha med of it. But to admit and 
ask pardon for a fault is a good thing; therefore w e should not feel shame in 
doing so. To ask pardon for a fault implies a deter mination not to default any 
more. Is such determination something to be ashamed  of? There can be no 
comparison between truth and non-violence. But if s uch comparison must be 
instituted, I would say .that truth is superior eve n to non-violence. For untruth 
is tantamount to violence. The lover of truth is bo und to make a discovery of 
non-violence sooner or later. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 177, 19-6-1932 
 
Self-confidence means an unflinching faith in one's  work. Once this faith is 
acquired, there is no need to be anxious about the numerous errors we are 
unconsciously bound to commit from time to time. We  must not permit 
ourselves to be paralyzed by the fear that we are p erhaps on the wrong path. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 178, 19-6-1932 
 
We must not make an individual the object of our af fection which should be 
reserved only for his virtues. Every person's virtu es result in some concrete act 
or other. If we admire his virtues, we should promo te the activities which 
constitute their outward expression, 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 262, 31-7-1932 
 
Learning should be acquired only with a view to ser vice. But service is full of 
inexhaustible joy. Therefore we may say that learni ng is an aid to blessedness. 
Mere learning without service has never been known to lead to eternal bliss. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 276, 7-8-1932 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 379  Instead of thinking of improving the world, let us concentrate our attention on 
self-improvement. We can scarcely find out if the . world is on the right or the 
wrong path. But if we take the straight and narrow path, we shall find all 
taking it too or discover the method of inducing th em to take it. To know 
oneself is to forget the body or to reduce oneself to zero. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 276, 7-8-1932 
 
I had adversaries before, and have them now. Howeve r I have never been angry 
with them. Even in a dream I have never been ill-di sposed towards them, with 
the result that many adversaries have become friend s. No opposition to me has 
been successful to this very day. I am still here, three attacks on my person 
notwithstanding. That is not to say that the advers ary will never succeed in 
attaining his object. He may or may not succeed, an d I have nothing to do with 
it. My duty consists in wishing him well and servin g him on a suitable occasion. I 
have practised this doctrine to the best of my abil ity. I believe that it is an 
integral part of my mental constitution. I am worri ed when thousands of people 
revere me. I have never come to believe that I am f it for this reverence which 
leaves me utterly cold. On the other hand I have be en aware of my unfitness. I 
do not remember that I had at any time a craving fo r honour. But I have always 
yearned to work. I have tried to turn those who wou ld honour me into co-
workers. When they have resisted this transformatio n, I have rejected their 
advances. I would be happy as a bird if I reached m y goal, but that is only an 
aspiration at present. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai , Vol. I, p. 284, 12-8-1932 
 
One need not cultivate haughtiness or incivility in  order to stand up against the 
world. Jesus faced the world and so did Buddha, and  Prahlad. But they were all 
the very picture of humility. The essential requisi tes are self-confidence and 
faith in God. Those who opposed the world in their pride have collapsed at last. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai , Vol. I, p. 284, 12-8-1932 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 380  You must not think you are wrong so long as your he art does not say so. After 
all that is our only standard of judgment. We there fore try to keep our hearts 
pure. The sinner thinks sin is a meritorious thing,  because his heart is impure. 
In any case he will persist in his error so long as  he has not acquired knowledge. 
Therefore none else can point out what is good for you. I can only say that we 
have to tread the path of truth and nonviolence, an d keep the observances to 
that end. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 286, 14-8-1932 
 
What to do in order that one never gets angry? For this he has to be generous to 
all and to have a heart grasp of the idea that we a re in all beings, and all 
beings are in us. Every drop and yet they all combi ne to make the ocean. The 
same is the case as regards the ocean that is this universe. Where then is the 
occasion for anyone to be angry with someone else? 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 286, 14-8-1932 
 
Without mental purity external action cannot be per formed in a selfless spirit. 
Therefore mental purity can be measured in terms of  the purity of external 
action. One who tries to attain mental purity witho ut purifying external action 
runs the risk of going astray. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 305, 23-8-1932 
 
Do not seek to prove how thoughts work. Enough for you to believe that they do 
work and produce mighty results. Therefore always c ultivating purity of heart, 
you should be perfectly at peace, whether you are w ell in body or not. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 26, 20-10-1932 
 
Cleanest air, cleanest water, simplest food and cle anest thinking which really 
means communion with God are the four laws, the fir st three flowing from the 
fourth. Hence your English saying, plain, that is, simple living and high thinking. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 381  I would like to simplify that saying into—clean thi nking and clean living. Boils 
are a symptom of unclean living in my sense of the expression. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 25, 13-11-1932 
 
Pure devotion must lead to detachment ( anasakti) and wisdom  (Jnana).  If it 
doesn't, it is not devotion, but mere emotionalism.  Wisdom means the power of 
distinguishing right from wrong. If literary studie s fail to invest a person with 
this power, they are nothing but pedantry. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 52, 6-12-1932 
 
Do not imagine causes but wait patiently for the kn owledge if it is to come and 
in any case never imagine the worst. Since God is a  God of Mercy, if we must 
imagine it is best to imagine the best. Of course a  votary of Gita never imagines 
anything. Good and bad are after all relative terms . He takes not of things as 
they happen and reacts naturally to them, fulfillin g his part as if propelled by 
the great Mechanic, even as a piece of machine in g ood order responds 
automatically to the call of the mechanist. It is t he most difficult thing for an  
intelligent  being to be like a machine. And yet, if one is to become a zero, that 
is precisely what one desiring perfection has to be come. The vital difference 
between the machine and the man is that the machine  is inert, the man is all 
life and consciously becomes like a machine in the hands of the Master 
Mechanic. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 238, 19-1-1933 
 
Well, you have to rejoice in your suffering both me ntal and physical. You must 
now do what satisfied your own inner voice. And the  end will be all right. But 
we are all in God's hands. Not a blade moves but by  His command. If we had all 
our own ways, the world will go to pieces. It is pe rhaps as well that our wishes 
are often frustrated. It is the test of our loyalty  to God that we believe in Him Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 382  even when He refuses to fulfill our wishes. I want you therefore to enjoy 
perfect peace even while things seem to you to be a ll going wrong. 
My Dear Child,  p. 102, 15-12-1933 
 
Very recently I happened to read 'a thought for the  day' in English which in 
effect means that man should brood over his virtues  and not his faults, because 
man becomes what he broods over. This does not mean  that one should not see 
one's own faults. They must be seen. But one should  not become mad by 
constantly thinking of them. A similar dictum can b e found in our scriptures 
also. You should, therefore, have self-confidence a nd feel assured that only 
good deeds are going to be performed by you. 
To A Gandhian Capitalist , p. 105, 26-12-1938 
 
Faith cannot be acquired by force of intellect. It comes but slowly after deep 
meditation and continuous practice. We pray, sing h ymns, read books, seek the 
association of men of God, and perform the spinning  sacrifice in order to attain 
that faith. 
Selected Letters – II, p. 22 
 
Contentment is the best of riches. 
Selected Letters –I, p. 42 
 
Vanity is emptiness: self-respect is substance. No one's self-respect is ever hurt 
except by self, vanity is always hurt from outside.  
Selected Letters —I,  p. 42 
 
Hypocrisy comes easy to those alone who are wedded to untruth. I do not know 
of anything so injurious as hypocrisy. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 383  Selected Letters —I,  p. 46 
 
We are all members one of another, and influence on e another by our actions. 
Actions here include thoughts, so that not a single  thought is without its effect. 
Therefore we must cultivate the habit of always thi nking good thoughts. 
Selected Letters —I, p. 55 
 
Grace is the diction of poetry. Devotion ( bhakti ) is itself poetry. But poetry is 
no improper or inferior or unnecessary thing. On th e contrary it is badly 
needed. Science would tell us that water is a chemi cal compound of hydrogen 
and oxygen, but in the language of poetry water is the gift of God. 
Understanding such poetry is an essential element o f life, while ignorance of 
the chemical composition of water does not matter i n the least. It is perfectly 
logical to say that whatever happens is the fruit o f action. But 'impenetrable is 
the secret of action' (Gita IV, 17). We mortals are  so constituted that we cannot 
know all the causative factors of even a very ordin ary event. We are therefore 
perfectly right in saying that nothing happens exce pt by the will and the grace 
of God. Again the body is a prison for the soul, wh o is like the air enclosed by a 
jar. The air in the jar is ineffective so long as i t thinks itself to be different 
from the atmosphere. In the same way the soul impri soned in the body will be 
unable to draw upon the Reservoir of Power that is God so long as she imagines 
herself to be a doer. Therefore to say that whateve r happens by the will of God 
is to state a matter of fact, and such humility bef its a seeker of truth. 
Selected Letters —I,  p. 54 
 
We should not worry over anything, no matter how im portant it is or how 
profoundly it touches us personally, if it has not been assigned to us. This is the 
teaching of religion in general and the Gita in par ticular. We must train 
ourselves to consider nothing as personal or to loo k upon everything as personal 
or to be absorbed in the allotted task as the only thing personal. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 384  Selected Letters —I,  p. 20 
 
You should make a fixed resolution to be good. Alwa ys pray to God to make you 
good and you will be good. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 31 
 
Rest assured that if we are good ourselves, so is a ll the world besides. You find 
that very few people are bad, and that is a fact. N one is bad by nature. Many 
appear bad because we have not the eye in order to discern the good in them. 
Selected Letters —II,  p. 33 
 
Yes, there is no calm without a storm, there is no peace without strife. Strife is 
inherent in peace. We should not know it without. L ife is a perpetual struggle 
against strife whether within or without. Hence the  necessity of realizing peace 
in the midst of strife. 
My Dear Child,  p. 90 
 
1 A traditional phrase meaning 'as easy as a myroba lan in the grip of hand'. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 385   
21. SELFLESS SERVICE 
Truly is it said that without  yajna  this world would perish. But  yajna  is not 
merely kindling wood and pouring  ghee  and other things into it. This may purify 
the air, but surely it will not purify the spirit. When we offer up our bones to 
burn like wood, pouring out our blood like  ghee  in order that they may burn, 
and sacrifice our flesh to the flames, that alone w ill be true yajna,  and by such 
sacrifice will the earth be sustained. 
Without such  yajna,  such sacrifice of self, it cannot be sustained. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XII, p. 319, 5-1-1914 
 
Work is prayer but it can also be madness. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XXV P- 38, 25-8-1924 
 
To put forth effort is in our hands but not to comm and success. We should rest 
content after we have exerted ourselves to the best  of our capacity, and never 
acknowledge defeat. 
Letters to Manibehn Patel,  p. 23, 11-1-1926 
 
We really live through and in our work. We perish t hrough our perishable 
bodies, if instead of using them as temporary instr uments, we identify 
ourselves with them. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 41, 27-4-1927 
 
Who knows whether we gain more by serving what we h ave or by losing. It may 
be that what has been saved has really been lost an d what has been lost has 
really been saved. But everyone likes to be saved, and we are thankful to God, 
when we are saved. Actually, however, one should th ank God for everything 
that transpires. That is what is meant by the state  of equanimity. Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 386  Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 39, 1-8-1927 
 
He alone who is always absorbed in the performance of his duties can be 
allowed to be indifferent, about other matters. The  stone may be indifferent, 
but it is inanimate, as compared with it, we are an imate. So only if we remain 
indifferent to other things because of our complete  absorption in our 
immediate duties, may be held to have lived success fully. Such steadiness of 
mind does not come about suddenly. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 40, 8-8-1927 
 
One who works to his full capacity does all that ca n be expected. But in our 
work we should develop the Gita attitude which we d esire to have. That 
attitude is that whatever we do, we do it selflessl y in a spirit of service. Spirit 
of service means in a spirit of dedication to God. Such a person no longer thinks 
in terms like, "It is I who am doing this." He feel s no ill-will towards anybody. 
 On the contrary he is generous to others. Even abo ut the smallest bit of service 
you render, you should keep asking yourselves wheth er you fulfill these ideals. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 46, 19-9-1927 
 
Success lies in the effort itself. God has promised  that effort for the good never 
goes fruitless and all of us have had experience of  this fact to some extent. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 52, 31-9-1927 
 
Our joy must lie in our devotion to duty, and not i n the success of our efforts or 
in the circumstances. Narasinh Mehta has said: "If Man had the power to do 
everything, no one would be unhappy, for he would d estroy his enemies and 
allow only friends to live." But Man is a lowly cre ature. He can be great only 
when he gives up pride and becomes one with God. A drop of water in the 
ocean, by itself can serve no useful purpose; but r emaining in the ocean, it can 
share in bearing the heavy burden of this huge ship . In the same way, if we Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 387  learn to merge our identity with the Ashram, and th ereby with the world and 
with God, we may be said to be bearing the burden o f the world. But in such a 
state, the 'I' or 'Thou' is abandoned, and only 'He ' remains. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 53, 7-11-1927 
 
People who sing Gita verses about being steadfast i n wisdom must form the 
habit of working quietly. When we are rolling  chapatis  or cleaning rice, why 
cannot we withdraw into ourselves completely and re main fully absorbed in our 
work. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 60, 6-8-1928 
 
Whatever work you once undertake, carry it out full y, never give up merely 
when you did not feel like it. If at any time you h ave to be absent, you must 
make some arrangement for your work to be done; and  if no arrangement can 
be made, one should never omit doing it oneself. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 61, 26-11-1928 
 
We might not undertake a piece of work at all, but,  once having undertaken it, 
we must stick to it to the last. God always helps t hose who work steadfastly in 
this spirit. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 85, 11-11-1929 
 
Those who think of their own selves and interests w ill surely suffer a fall. Those 
who are devoted to their duties will have no time e ven to fall. I have always 
found that it is only those who are or who become a verse to Truth that fall. A 
sinful act needs secrecy. It is generally done in s ecret. We do find persons who 
have abandoned all sense of shame and act sinfully in the open. There are 
others who regard vice as virtue. We are not thinki ng of such persons at 
present. Most of our activities have fallen back be cause of the regard for 
oneself referred to above. In this selfishness lies  the danger of our fall and the Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 388  fall of society also. Think deeply over this, and l et each of you examine your 
own life from this standpoint. 
Bapu's Letters to Ashram Sisters,  p. 92, 23-12-1929 
 
Had I learnt to use the body merely as an instrumen t of service and His temple, 
old age would have been like a beautiful ripe fruit  with all the qualities of its 
species at their highest. It would be a stroke of g ood fortune if I escape merely 
with such disability. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 177, 8-4-1932 
 
Chivalry is made of sterner stuff. Chivalrous knigh t is he who is exquisitely 
correct in his conduct towards perfect strangers wh o are in need of help but 
who can make no return to him and who are unable ev en to utter a few words 
of thanks. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 102, 6-5-1932 
 
There is a general impression that I am able to mak e men work as hard as they 
can. If this is a fact, the reason is that I never suspect anyone of theft, and I 
am satisfied with what effort each of them puts for th. Some even say that 
people are able to deceive me as they can deceive n o one else. If they are 
right, I am not sorry for it. It is enough if I get  a testimonial that I deceive 
none. If others are not prepared to issue such a ce rtificate to me, I will issue it 
myself. Untruth hurts me as nothing else does. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai , Vol. I, pp. 220-21, 10-6-1932 
 
Where people work in the family spirit and where ea ch has the same sense of 
personal responsibility as the others, it is imposs ible to fix the maximum period 
applicable to all and may even be improper. How can  we frame a rule that one 
who is physically fit and mentally ready and who ha s no other service to 
perform shall not work overtime if he wishes? The l ong and short of it is that if Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 389  there is discrimination and the right spirit in wor k and no bustle, no one would 
feel it to be burden. Things are felt as a burden o nly if they are imposed upon 
us from outside. Work done spontaneously and joyful ly is never oppressive. But 
he who works in a demoniacal spirit will subject hi mself to considerable burden 
from selfishness and suffer a breakdown afterwards.  He does not enjoy mental 
tranquility and we can never take him for our model . 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, pp. 166-67, 16-6-1932 
 
There is nothing like finding one's full satisfacti on from one's daily task however 
humble it may be. To those that wait and watch and pray, God always brings 
greater tasks and responsibilities. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 167, 11-6-1932 
 
The man who loves God does not measure his work by the eight-hour system. 
He works at all hours and is never off duty. As he has opportunity he does good. 
Everywhere, at all times, and in all places, he fin ds opportunity to work for 
God. He carries fragrance with him wherever he goes . 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 169. 17-6-1932 
 
If a man is absorbed in his work, he will not feel the burden of it; it will not 
therefore wear him down. But if he takes no delight  in it, even a little work will 
be too much for him. For a man in prison a day is a s long as a year; for the 
sensualist a year is as a day. I was soon tired of European music when I heard it 
before, but now I understand and appreciate somethi ng of it. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai , Vol. I, p. 169, 17-6-1932 
 
A scientific experimenter has profound confidence i n himself and is therefore 
never down-hearted. At the same time he is so humbl e that he is never 
satisfied with his own work, and is not guilty of d rawing hasty conclusions. On 
the other hand, he measures his progress off and on  and declares emphatically Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 390  that the result of X can be Y only. Our workers are  generally lacking in this 
humility of the real man of science. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol, I, p. 178, 19-6-1932 
 
A detached worker is capable of working very much h arder than one who is 
attached. It seems as if he has nothing to do, and he is the last to be attacked 
by fatigue. As a matter of fact he should be above fatigue, but that is only the 
ideal. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai , Vol. I, p. 189, 22-6-1932 
 
All our philosophy is dry as dust if it is not imme diately translated into some act 
of loving service. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 261, 31-6-1932 
 
This is enough for the man who is true to himself: "Do not undertake anything 
beyond your capacity, and at the same time do not h arbour the wish to do less 
than you can." One who takes up tasks beyond his po wers is proud and 
attached; on the other hand one who does less than he can is a thief. If we 
keep a time-table, we can save ourselves from this last mentioned sin indulged 
in even unconsciously. I do not say 'save' but only  'can save', for if the time-
table is not cheerfully and intelligently adhered t o, it does not yield the 
maximum results. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai,  Vol. I, p. 221, 10-7-1932 
 
I am definitely going to live. Who will say that I am dead, so long as a single 
sister is doing my work? We may leave aside, if we like, the philosophy of the 
Gita about the immortality of the soul. The immorta lity to which I refer here, 
however, is visible to the physical eye. Therefore you are not to be unhinged or 
disturbed. I do hope you will give a good account o f yourself, and thus bring Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 391  credit to yourself as also to others around you. Be  and remain at peace with 
yourself by laying at the feet of God body, mind an d wealth. 
To A Gandhian Capitalist , p. 137, 19-9-1932
 
And why do you think that we can serve only with th e body? The mind is far 
more powerful instrument of service. They serve bes t who have perfect purity 
of heart. Indeed we serve so as to attain perfect p urity. Thoughts of the pure in 
heart can do what bodies with corrupt hearts can ne ver do. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 26 
 
Keep up the habit of writing, and always try to imp rove your hand. But all these 
things are not an end in themselves; they are only means to an end. The end is 
performance of one's allotted duty. The whole duty of man is to wish well and 
to do good to others. And as the first step towards  discharging it, you should 
learn to love one another as your own blood sisters , and share one another's 
sorrows as well as joys. 
Selected Letters— I,  p. 5 
 
Let us do good for its own sake, and not in order t o win a reward. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 56 
 
The Gita first of all points out the  summum bonum of life and secondly tells us 
how we should live so as to make continuous progres s towards it. Its teaching 
may be thus summarized: "Discharge fully whatever d uty comes your way as you 
march to your goal, but be detached from the fruits  of your actions." This is the 
principle we apply in solving the problems which fa ce the Ashram. As for 
thieves, we would certainly invite them to join the  Ashram if we could, but as 
we have not still acquainted the capacity to assimi late such refractory 
material, we deal with them as we think fit in view  of our spiritual poverty. As 
regards stray cattle and insects which damage our c rops, we have not still been Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 392  able to devise non-violent methods of dealing with them. We therefore do some 
violence to them out of sheer helplessness. To driv e out stray cattle by 
shouting at or beating them, to frighten birds away  by throwing or pretending 
to throw stones at them, to destroy insects in cour se of ploughing operations or 
otherwise, to catch hold of snakes and carry them o ut of harm's way or to 
permit people to kill if that is impossible,—all th ese things are, I am aware, a 
negation of the Ashram ideal. But the Ashram and it s members are far from 
perfect. Therefore they take such action, although it is wrong. Thus alone can 
they find out the way to the Eternal City. I have n ot the shadow of a doubt that 
to give up all activity is very much worse than to act as we are doing. The 
author of the Gita says: "All action is clouded by defects as fire by smoke" 
(XVIII, 48). Therefore, we should be humble, do our  allotted duty in a spirit of 
service and realize that we are mere tools in the h ands of the 'Great 
Carpenter'. 
Selected Letters—II,  pp. 16.17 
 
To strive is the whole duty of man. And if the enem y floors us while we 
continue the struggle to the best of our ability, l et us not be down-hearted in 
the least. We must be on our legs again and resume the struggle. There is no 
reason to be ashamed so long as we have not contrib uted to our defeat, for it is 
not a defeat at all. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 32 
 
Faith is either derived or revealed from within. Yo u should derive it from the 
testimony without exception of all the teachers and  seers of all climes, 
countries and times. A true prayer is not a mere li p expression. Selfless service 
is prayer. 
Selected Letters—II,  p. 33 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 393   
22. VOLUNTARY POVERTY 
Remember please that henceforth our lot is poverty.  The more I think of it, the 
more I feel that it is more blessed to be poor than  to be rich. The uses of 
poverty are far sweeter than those of riches. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. IX, p. 206, 25-3-1919 
 
It will never happen that all are equally rich or e qually poor at the same time. 
But if we consider the good and evil aspects [of th e various professions] it 
seems that the world is sustained by farmers. Farme rs are of course poor. If a 
lawyer would boast of his altruism or spirituality,  let him earn his livelihood 
through physical labour and carry on his legal prac tice without charging 
anything for it. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. X, p. 206, 2-4-1910 
 
Good men have no desire for worldly pursuits. They desire withdrawal from 
them, that is,  moksha.  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIII, p. 34, 4-3-1915 
 
A person who has embraced poverty in the cause of t he country and has 
dedicated himself to service of others can never lo se his mother by death, 
because all women, old enough to be so, are his mot hers. The father also does 
not die because every eider is like a father to him . Service is his wife; can she 
ever know death? The rest of the world is like brot hers and sisters to him. To go 
on a mourning visit on the death of one's mother is  only a formality. Should 
money be wasted to follow it out of deference to th e world? 
Collected Work, of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XIV PP- 466-67, 2-7-1918 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 394  Spinning for me is an emblem of fellowship with the  poorest of the land and its 
daily practice is a renewal of the bond between the m and ourselves. Thus 
considered, it is for me a thing of beauty and joy forever. I would prefer to go 
without a meal than without the wheel and I would l ike you to understand this 
great implication of the wheel. 
My Dear Child,  p. 79, 10-2-1926 
 
The ideal of voluntary poverty is most attractive. We have made progress, but 
my utter inability to realize it fully in my own li fe has made it difficult at the 
Ashram for the others to do much. They have the wil l but no finished object 
lesson. 
Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 182, 6-5-1932 
 
From day to day I realize the fact that nature prod uces every moment the 
amount needed at that moment and no more. We fail t o take count of this fact 
consciously or unconsciously. This failure is respo nsible for the universal 
spectacle of men suffering from surfeit here and fr om want there. We are 
devising a corrective for the present situation in which there is starvation on 
the one hand and the burning of so-called surplus w heat by producers in the 
U.S.A. on the other. Perfect obedience to nature's law is indeed impossible at 
present, but that need not worry us. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai , Vol. I, p. 168, 17-6-1932 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 395   
GLOSSARY 
Abhanga :  devotional metrical poetry in Marathi  
Advaita :  Vedantic concept for Monism  
Aduaitavadins :  believers in Advaita  
Aman :  freedom from desire of respect 
Ashram :  one of the four stages of the Hindu way of life; a  place for 
renunciation; a place for disciplined community lif e 
Asuri Sampat :  mind's propensities leading to evil darkness  
Avatar :  incarnation 
 
Bhagawadgita :  The celestial poem containing cream of the deepest  Hindu 
thought—specially highlighting the doctrine of Karm a—selfless action  
Bhagawat :  mythological work of divine glory  
Bhakta :  a devotee  
Bhakti :  devotion 
Brahma :  The Supreme 
Brahmabhuta :  one immersed in the spirit of Brahma 
Brahmacharya :  chastity, continence; literally conduct to God-rea lization  
 
Chitta :  enlivened mind 
Charvaka :  materialistic school of thought known by the name of its preacher 
 
Daivi Sampad :  divine-higher propensities of mind leading to man' s upliftment  
Daya :  compassion 
Dharma :  one's path of duty; religion Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 396  Dwadasha Mantra :  the sacred verse of 12 syllables dedicated to Lord  Krishna  
 
Gayatri :  consecrated Vedic mantra of immense potency  
Guru :  a spiritual guide; teacher 
Gurudev :  a reverential term for  guru, guru  hailed as god 
 
Jay Rama :  Glory to Rama 
 
Khadi, Khaddar :  hand-spun & hand-woven cloth-in 
Kshatriya :  a warrior; one belonging to the second division of  the pristine Hindu 
society 
 
Lok-sangraha :  that leading to conservation of society 
 
Mantra :  a sacred and pithy verse 
Maya :  denoting illusive nature of the transient world 
Moksha :  salvation; liberation from birth & death 
Muni :  a recluse; one keeping silence to meditate on the Divine 
Mauna :  silence 
 
Punya :  accrued merit from service & devotion, etc.  
 
Rakshasas :  demons; evil-doers 
Ramanama :  the name of Rama; recitation of His name 
Ramayana :  the Epic of Rama by Valmiki Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 397  Rishis :  those given to deep austerity & penance to explore  Eternity; men of 
wide vision 
 
Sadhana :  spiritual practice 
Sattvic :  denoting the divine qualities of mind 
Satyagraha :  clinging to truth; soul-force; Gandhi's weapon of non-violent 
resistance 
Satyagrahi :  one wedded to Satyagraha doctrine 
Shastras :  scriptures 
Shloka :  metrical verse of devotion  
Sirkar :  Governmental or local authority 
Sthitaprajna :  man of steady mind; one risen above dualities 
 
Tamas & Rajas :  mind's propensities leading to darkness and self a ctivity 
respectively 
Tapas :  penance; austerity 
Tapascharya :  one given to practising penance Thana :  police station 
 
Vaishnauas :  devotees of Vishnu—the Divine Dispenser 
Vedas :  the Earliest Hindu scriptures in lyrical form eman ating perennial 
wisdom. They are Rigveda, Samveda, Yajurveda and At harvaveda  
 
Yajna :  a ritual at the altar of God; sacrifice  
Yamas :  injunctions for religious life  
Yoga :  practice of body, mind & soul for realization Yogi :  one practising Yoga 
 Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 398   
SOURCES 
ABDUL GAFARKHAN , D.  G. Tendulkar, (published for Gandhi Peace Foundatio n) 
Popular Prakashan, Bombay, (1967). 
A BUNCH OF OLD LETTERS , Jawaharlal Nehru, Asia Publishing House, Bombay, 
(1960). 
BAPU 'S LETTERS TO ASHRAM SISTERS , M.  K. Gandhi, Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, (1960). 
BAPU 'S LETTERS TO MIRA , M.  K. Gandhi, Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 
(1959). 
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI , Vols.  I,  IY  VII, VIII, IX to XX, XXII to 
XXVIII, Publications Division, Govt, of India, Delh i. 
FAMOUS LETTERS OF MAHATMA GANDHI , Compiled and Edited by R. L. Khipple, Indian 
Printing Works, Lahore, (1947). 
GANDHI -JINNAH TALKS , The Hindustan Times , New Delhi, (1944). 
GANDHIJI 'S CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE GOVERNMENT (1942-'44)  Navajivan Publishing 
House, Ahmedabad,  (1957). 
MAHATMA GANDHI —CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE GOVERNMENT , (1944-'47). Navajivan 
Publishing House, Ahmedabad, (1959). 
LETTERS TO SRINIVAS SASTRI , Edited by T. N. Jagadisan, Rochouse & Sons Ltd., 
Madras, (1944). 
LETTERS TO MANIBEHN PATEL , M.  K Gandhi, Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 
(1963). 
LETTERS TO RAJKUMARI AMRIT KAUR , M.  K. Gandhi, Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, (1961). 
LETTERS TO SARDAR VALLABHBHAI PATEL , M. K. Gandhi, Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, (1957). Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 399  THE DIARY OF MAHADEV DESAI —Vol.  I, Translated and Edited by Valji Govindji Desai, 
Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, (1953). 
MAHATMA (L IFE OF MOHANDAS KARAMCHAND GANDHI ), Vols. 1, 3 & 5, D.  G. Tendulkar, 
Published by Vithalbhai  K. 
Jhaveri and D. G. Tendulkar, Bombay, (1952). 
MY DEAR CHILD , M. K. Gandhi, Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedab ad, (1959) 
NETAJI SUBHASHCHANDRA BOSE —His  LIFE AND WORK , Sopan, Bombay, (1946). 
NON -VIOLENCE IN PEACE AND WAR , Vol. 1,  M.  K. Gandhi, Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, (1962). 
THE STORY OF MY LIFE , Vol. 1,  M.  R. Jayakar, Asia Publishing House, Bombay, 
(1958). 
SELECTED LETTERS , I,  II, M. K. Gandhi, Chosen and Translated by V G. Des ai, 
Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad. 
To  A GANDHIAN CAPITALIST , M. K. Gandhi, Edited by Kakasaheb Kalelkar, Jamna lal 
Seva Trust, Wardha, (1951). 
TOLSTOY AND GANDHI , Dr. Kalidas Nag, Pustak Bhandar, Patna, (1950). 
TRUTH CALLED THEM DIFFERENTLY , M. K. Gandhi, Compiled and Edited by R. K. 
Prabhu, Ravindra Kelekar, Navajivan Publishing Hous e, Ahmedabad, (1961). 
PHOTOSTAT COPIES OF THE LETERS OF THE FOLLOWING NUMBERS AND DATES ; (Collected 
from Gandhi Sangrahalaya Museumn Sabarmati) 
Nos.  Dat e Nos.  Date  
1536 -37  19 -2-'40  14378  7-9-'28  
7973  4-3-'22  14942  15 -2-'28  
7977  4-3-'22  15663  12 -10 -'29  
12350  13 -5-'27  16424  2-2-'30  
13197  20 -4-'28  16948  23 -2-'31  
13275  l-9-'27  17023  29 -4-'31  
14120  28 -4-'27  18565  30 -9-'32  Selected Letters of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 400  14130  28 -5-'27  18622  15 -ll -'32  
18622  24 -11 -'32 23905  9-10 -'32  
19127  24 -11 -'32 23961  29 -11 -'47  
20348  24 -2-'33  26400  20 -9-'32 
21535  26 -7-'33  26409  15 -11 -'34  
22641  10 -12 -'34  26412  19 -2-'37  
21642  3-1-'35  26413  9-4-'37  
22663  25 -1-'41  26415  23 -9-'37  
22666  26 -7-'47  29503  30 -9-'33  
23126  23 -7-'39    
 
1. Gandhi Nidhi Nos. 
2. Sabarmati (Ashram) 
 
 