Selected Letters
by
M. K. Gandhi
Chosen & Translated By Valji Govindji Desai.TO ASHRAM SISTERS01. Punctuality
Wardha,
Day of silence (Monday)
Sisters, The first thing for me to do after breakfast is to write y ou a letter . It is now
five to sev en; y ou are therefore all on y our w ay to the pr ayer hall. Y ou ha ve to be
punctual in reaching the hall at the fixed time. Those of you who have promised to
attend the prayer daily should make it a point to be present except in circumstances
beyond your control. I have suggested to Ramniklal that he should explain one or two
verse from the Gita ev ery Da y. But y ou are of course free to read something of y our own
choice. Keep up the habit of writing, and always try to improve your hand. But all these
things are not an end in themselves; they are only means to an end. The end is
performance of one’ s allotted dut y. The whole dut y of man is to wish well and to do
good to others. And as the first step towards discharging it, you should learn to love
one another as your own blood sisters, and share one another’s sorrows as well as joys.
Bapu’s blessing
02. The Whole Duty Of Man-Prayer
Wardha,
Magshar shudi 11 [1983]
Today also I remember y ou after breakfast. It is just 6:50, time for y our pr ayer. We
may miss man y things in life but not pr ayer, which implies our co-oper ation with God and
with one another . Prayer should be a bath of purification for the spirit of man. Ph ysical
health suffers if we do not wash our bodies; similarly the spirit becomes unclean if the
heart is not w ashed with pr ayer. Please therefore nev er be negligent in pr ayer.The life of … pro vides an object lesson for y ou…. she fills up ev ery second of her time
with purposeful activit y. All of y ou should try to reach the same height of dev otion,
renunciation, and purit y. Is it too much to ex cept that y ou will spread all o ver India after
you have finished your training for service? I realize our lack of sisters of mercy every
moment. V ery few women come out to serv e their fellow countrymen. W omen are the
very incarnation of service, but at present they minister only to their own families. Why
should they not extend the field of their ministry so as to embrace the whole of India? A
truly religious person becomes a citizen of the world, but the service of one’s own
country is the stepping-stone to the service of humanit y. And where service is rendered
to the country consistently with the welfare of the world, it finally leads to self-
realization (moksha).
03. Sisters Of Mercy
[January 1927]
…At the women’ s meeting y esterda y, I started a fresh piece of propaganda. W omen
here [in North Bihar] wear hea vy ornaments of silv er, do not comb their hair , and k eep
their children dirt y. I therefore condemned the wearing of jewellery , with the result that
some of the sisters gave away their anklets and necklaces on condition that an on
account should the jewellery donated be replaced. While receiving these gifts, I remem-
bered all of you down there, for you could do this kind of work very much more effec-
tively than I. And you must equip yourselves for it by renunciation and devotion. Ba has
been very helpful to me these days.
Atmavat Sarvabhuteshu! That is, we must entertain the same regard for others as
we have for ourselves. And if we did, we would be ashamed to find other people’s
children dirt y, as we would be if they were our own. So also if we found others in
distress, we would make that distress our own and try to relieve it.
Paush shudi 1404. Wearing Of Jewellery
[January 1927]
It is in the fitness of things that you have elected Gangaben as your president. But
may I suggest that after electing your president you have to help her to fulfill the duties
of her office? Gangaben is illiterate; still you have rightly appointed her president out of
regard for her char acter. Rest assured that liter ary education is no good without char -
acter. President means chief serv ant. A ruler can issue orders only if he has acquired the
highest qualification for service. His orders should be intended not to advance his own
interest but the welfare of societ y. Rulers now adays ha ve lost sight of their dut y, so
that instead of setting an example of self-less ness and devotion they give themselves
up to pleasures and use their powers as an instrument of self-indulgence. But you have
therefore resolved that Gangaben should be your leader in your endeavour to qualify as
sisters of mercy .05. Character
Betia,
1983 Paush vadi 6
If at the Ashr am we cannot tr ain sisters for lifelong service to the country , where
else can we hope to do so? It is true that you have not health and strength, self-
confidence, or the literary education requisite for the purpose. But if you have true
bhakti (devotion), all these things will be added unto you. Bhakti means faith in God and
in ourselves as His instruments, and it enables us to renounce for the mere sake of
renunciation. A mother would never by choice sleep in a wet bed to spare the dry bed
for the child.
06. Devotion
Malvan,
Magh W adi 11
There is always a women’ s meeting during the tour . I am therefore gathering fresh experience
everyday . I feel that women hold the keys of Swaraj in their hands. But who will bring about an
awakening among them? Multitudes of women live in idleness; who will induce them to take to
industry? Mothers spoil their children from their infancy , and load them with ornaments and super -
fluous clothes. They marry their young girls to old men. I am deeply painted when I see women
heavily bedecked with ornaments. Who will explain to them that these tinkers are no aid to beauty?
Real beauty is the beauty of the soul. And so on. But what is the remedy? The remedy will be
readily found when some strong-willed Draupadi is thrown up by our people. You should resolve
and try to acquire such capacity . Patience and perseverance overcome mountains.07. Wanted A Woman
Chaitr a Wadi 9
There are men in the Ashram as well as women, but supposing that the men were out one day
and thieves came to the Ashram, what would all of you do? Have you ever thought about this? If
you haven’t, think of it now and let me know what you would do. How I wish you would falsify
epithets like abala [the weaker sex] and bhiru [the timid one], which are applied to women!
08. Neither Male Nor Female
[Vaishakha shudi 1]
These epithets cannot properly be applied to all women, as for instance to women
among the Raniparaj or to the women in the west are doing much work that was
supposed to be reserved for men. I do not mean that all their activities are worthy of
imitation, but they have certainly upset many calculations of mere men. In Burma
women manage everything. At the Ashram we are striving for self-realization. The soul
is neither male nor female, neither young nor old. These attributes belong to the body
alone, as both scripture and experience testif y. The soul is the same in both y ou and
me. Therefore who am I to protect y ou? Only , if I ha ve mastered the art of life, I
have to teach it to you.09. Fear And Faith
Nandi,
Vaishakha shudi 15
I am v ery glad to know that y ou are not subject to fear . Why should one who knows
that God is there to protect us all be afraid? But His protection does not mean that we
may not be robbed or that we may not be bitten by a snake. Such incidents do not
show that He protects us any the less but that we had not enough faith in Him. The
river is always willing to give its water to all, but how is the river to be blamed if or does
not go near it believing the water to be poisonous? All fear is a sign of want of faith. But
faith cannot be acquired by force of intellect. It comes but slowly after deep meditation
and continuous pr actice. W e pray, sign h ymns, read books, seek the association of men
of God, and perform the spinning sacrifice in order to attain that faith.
10. Work Among Women
Nandi,
Vaishakha W adi 13
Does Miraben write to you occasionally? I can see from her letters that she is doing
a great deal of work among the women as well as men. I will let you know one of the
points in her letters. She writes that she finds all the sisters she meets very goodhearted,
but their ignorance is terrible. These sisters do not know even the simplest thing. If she
talks to them about the spinning wheel, they are surprised, and they do not understand
the idea of plying it for the poor . Religion for them is only worship in the temple. They
hardly know what service means. This impression may be due to her not understanding
them fully . But we do know how our womenfolk are ignor ant of ev en ordinary things.
Though the responsibility for this ignorance rests with men, women must prepare to
cure this evil. This is the task before you. I want all of you sisters to fit yourselves for it
according to y our capacit y.11. Sanskrit With Music
Jyeshtha shudi 14
I hope y ou are pronouncing the shlokas correctly , though we shall not be called to
account for reciting the name of God incorrectly . God is a searcher of hearts only . If our
hearts are pure, we will get full marks even if we stutter in our speech. Writing about
this, I may describe the pleasant experience we are having here. Mysore is a part of
Karnatak which has given us Kaka Saheb. Sisters here know Sanskrit and music very
well. I heard their songs at Nandi, and the day before yesterday two sisters here sang in
correct Sanskrit pronunciation a summary of the Ramayana. I think there were more
than 100 shlokas. I could not detect a single mistake in them. One of them is still a
student, and she knows the meaning of the verse also. But why am I writing to you
about this? I value the work you are doing at present more than the study of Sanskrit.
Become sisters of mercy , fearless and pure, and work as a team. This is a better
education than an y other . If a study of Sanskrit and music could be added on to it, of
course so much the better .
12. Contacts With Labourers
Bhadrapada vadi
I am sure you have understood why I want you to make contacts with the labourers
at the Ashr am. T o collect a few coppers from each of them for the relief fund is merely
an occasion for making them kinsmen. Y ou should work for mutual good understanding
and share one another ’s joys and sorrows. Y ou need not giv e much of y our time for this.
What is w anted is a change of heart. W e should aim at feeding them with the kind of
food we eat, and clothing them with the same dress as we wear . We should wish that
they had a share in all the good things that we like and obtain for ourselves, and work
for such a consummation.
Do not be frightened by the wide implication of these views of mine. There arealways two meaning to ev erything, one wider and the other narrower . We shall not be
put out if we understand the wider implications but start with the narrower .
13. The Principle Of Action
Trichinapalli
I visualize from here the work you are doing. Whoever works according to her
capacity has fulfilled her mission. But in your work you must cultivate that attitude of
mind which is inculcated in the Gita. That is to do everything with a view to serve or as
an offering to God, y ou will nev er have the feeling “I am doing this. ” You will not then
have ill-will for an ybody and y ou will be generous to others. Y ou should alw ays ask
yourselves whether your smallest action is guided by these principles.TO ASHRAM CHILDREN14. Watch Your Friends
Hardv ar,
Phalgun shudi 3, Monday
Boys and girls,
Children are innocent, loving and benevolent by nature. Evil comes in only when
they become older . They are innocent ev en in their mischief . If this holds good in y our
case, each of you should serve others, helping them to rise higher and saving them from
a fall. Y ou should w atch and if necessary w arn one another . Your w atch should not be
like that of a policeman but of God. God watches us all not with a view to punish but to
chasten. Such should be the nature of y our w atch also . You must teach others what
they do not know. Whoever speaks an untruth should be lovingly turned away from it.
Remember , you must k eep the promise y ou ha ve made.
15. Life And Death
You are all students of the Gita. Ev eryday you recite a portion of it at the morning
prayers. If therefore you are troubled in mind upon hearing of my illness, you must have
recourse to the Gita for relief . I fell ill just while I w as translating the second chapter . I
recall the lesson it teaches us and k eep m yself in good cheer . You too should cheer up in
the same fashion. The body must suffer for its ill deeds. W e die o liv e once more, ev en
as we live only to die at last. Life therefore is not an occasion for sorrow. But there is
one thing needful. W e must ascertain our dut y in life and continue to discharge it till we
die. Y ou know what is y our dut y either b y faith or b y con viction. See that y ou are not
remiss in your performance of it. And having done your duty you will play your usual
game of tipcat and dance in rasa as well even if you hear that I am no longer in the land
of the living. Continue to do your duty as if nothing had happened and thus falsify the
news of m y passing a way. I depend upon y ou.16. Qualifications Of Students
Nandi
Your secretary has this time honoured me b y writing a letter .
What have you all understood from the book which you are now reading as a text? I
would enjoy it very much if each of you would, without consulting others, write it to me
in clear handwriting on a good sheet of paper . It will also be y our examination.
XVIII
Vaishakha Purnima
You ha ve flown a way from the nest. So really speaking I should not write to y ou. But
I am writing this to tell you that you may fly away wherever you like, but I still remember
you and follow you with my eyes.
17. Organization
Nandi,
Vaishakha W adi 13
It is true that Kanti is out. But you have formed an association. So you have built up
an organization. It continues to exist whether the number of its members increases or
decreases. Mahajan, panch, nation, communit y, an organization – all these nev er die. If
all the members whom we know today die, even then the organization continues to
exist. There are man y such organizations in the country ev en toda y. Your small organi-
zation must also become like that. A king may die but Government never dies. It lives for
ever. So in Fr ance when the king died, it w as said, “The king is dead, long liv e the king. ”
This means that the throne of the king never remains vacant. So should it be with your
association. I have continued to write to you every week as far as I could, in spite ofyour holidays so that you may acquire such a habit. I will ask you to account for all the
letters I have written during the holidays.
18. Contentment
I remember you all very much during my Mysore tour because there were many more
things which y ou could ha ve seen than I could. My time for site-seeing is o ver. I can liv e
only for the work I have in hand. It would be a sin for me to take a single breath of
Mysore, her various institutions, her gardens, music and paintings are things for you to
see. But we are helpless in the matter . We can hardly do all that we wish to do . If we
could do everything at will, goodness knows how many worlds would already have been
created and destroyed. Contentment is therefore the best of riches.
19. How to Serve
I understand wh y I cannot ha ve any letters from y ou regularly . You are all v ery busy
nowadays. If your work is real service I am ready to take your letters as written. If the
body serves but the mind is absent, our service can bear no fruit at all. There can be no
self-indulgence in service will spread itself . A serv ant does not ask to become a leader .
He excepts no service from others. He is satisfied with what he gets and has no
complaints at all. He has only the right to serve. What matters if he does not get food or
shelter in return? It is God’s grace that there are undistressed persons even in the areas
of distress. When all are in distress, who can serve the nurses? So we must fend for
ourselv es when we go out to serv e. We must only reply on others, but should be
thankful to them for such help as they can afford to give.
20. Humility
I would sa y that only now y our classes are functioning in the right w ay. For you are
having an object lesson in service. Literary education is intended only to quicken our
spirit of service. Now that you have the opportunity to render service, pour your soulinto it and learn to enjo y it thoroughly . When y ou serv e, do not y ourself up to spiritual
pride and sa y, “I do it. ” The service of the proud is nothing worth. The Gita is there to
teach us that we do nothing, that we can do nothing. W e are only the instruments of
God’s will. What is the different between a watch and a human being? A watch does not
work b y itself; it is set going b y a man. In the same w ay, we do not mo ve, we do not act
by ourselves. The power that moves us is God. Just as a watch stops when its wound
up spring has run out, so also when our spring is done, our cart comes to a dead halt.
While it is still on the move, we feel that a certain freedom of action is granted to us.
Let us use that freedom to learn and do the will of the great Carpenter .TO WORKERS21. Fear of Death
There is no remedy except patience in such an ugly situation as described by C.I.
have no doubt in my mind that the approach should be same in the mother country as in
the Transvaal. But C’ s letter shows that we can prepare ourselv es for it only in the
place like Phoenix. A man should be free from fear even when he has to sleep in the
cemetery , but if in the process of mastering fear he sleeps in the cemetery on the v ery
first da y, it is possible that he will only lose his life. India now adays for y ou and me is a
cemetery . We must prepare ourselv es here to mak e our beds there and sing Mir abai’s
hymn, “T ake thought of nothing ex cept the name of God. ”
To be afr aid of death is lik e being afr aid of discarding an old and worn out garment.
I have often thought of death and have the intellectual conviction that it is sheer
ignorance which makes us afraid of death. I am however not sure that this conviction
has become part and parcel of my spiritual being. I say this in view of my reactions
when I see a snake for instance. And yet I feel that I will acquire the necessary
strength to welcome death whenever and however it comes. I wish every one at
Phoenix become equally fearless.
22. Stick To One Thing
I have been thinking about the matter ever since you talked to me about it. The
more I think of it, the more I con vinced that y ou should not tak e up that new activit y.
I see agreed in it. I wish you would not take it up even in the manner I had suggested.
If you have the energy to conceive new ideas, - and you must have it, as you look upon
yourself as young,- utilize that energy in opening up fresh avenues in your service of
Harijans and Bhils. Even so you will not have time enough not only for the life of a man
like you but of many more besides. Greed for service has its limits. There is no end of
misery in the world if we look for it. At every step we find there is scope for reform.
Surely God does not except us to redress all these wrongs. But if He has any such
expectations, He has also taught us the art of doing it, and it is this : we must pick upeven a little bit from that mountain of misery , apply our whole mind to the task of
removing it and refuse to do anything else. Having done this we have as good as lifted
the whole of the mountain. This is a simple principle, and if I have succeeded in impress-
ing it upon your mind, I would ask you take a vow that you will undertake nothing else
but this twofold service even if the kingdom of the earth is offered to you. If ever an
occasion arises that in spite of engaging yourself in this service, you have time on your
hands, come to me, and I undertake to show you that you have forgotten to do many
things in the field you have chosen.
23. Art
I, enjoyed the visit to art galleries in Rome and took great interest in the art, but
what would be the value of an opinion expressed after a brief visit lasting only two
hours? I am hardly qualified as an art critic. I liked immensely some of the things there.
If I could live there for two or three months, I could observe the paintings and statues
everyday and make a study of them. I saw the statue of Christ on the cross. It
attracted me most. But I did not think that European art was superior to Indian art.
Both these arts have developed on different lines. Indian art is entirely based on the
imagination. European art is an imitation of nature. It is therefore easier to understand,
but turns our attention to the earth; while Indian art when understood tends to direct
our thoughts to Heaven. This is only for a person like you. I attach no importance o
these views. It may be that my unconscious partiality for India perhaps my ignorance
makes me sa y so. Take me for a parent who narr ates stories from the R amayana and the
Mahabhar ata, as he knows them, to his children who know much less. Y ou will see that
I do enjoy art. But I have given up or have had to give up many such pleasures. I drank
deep of these pleasures which ha ve been incidental to m y quest of the T ruth, and am
ready to partak e of new pleasures of the same t ype. T o a dev otee of T ruth his activities
come in the natural course of things; he is therefore a follower of the third chapter of
the Gita without an effort. I believe I was an aspirant of kamayoga even before I read
the third chapter , but this is a digression.24. Ashram As An Institution
I Like your question about the Ashram. Labour is a prominent feature of the Ashram,
because it is our duty to engage ourselves in the physical work. Any one who avoids
such work lik e as a thief . Besides the work in the Ashr am is not only for ourselv es but for
others also. The spinning wheel is the focal point of such work, because it alone can be
conceived as a subsidiary occupation besides agriculture for the millions in India. Its
value is economic as well as spiritual. The Ashram exists not only for service to our
country but also for service to humanit y, and self -realization through such service.
Every one cannot join the Ashram. The Ashram is not an infirmary or orphanage. It is
for those men and women who wish to become brothers and sisters of mercy . Therefore
it is not for those who are unable to do physical work. However we may take a few of
those who are disabled in body but have a keen desire for service. And we must not
drive away those who have joined the Ashram and have subsequently been disabled.
Many activities of the Ashr am ma y outw ardly appear contr adictory , but this contr adic-
tion will disappear once you see their inner meaning.
25. Tolerance
It is not at all necessary that all those who have come in contract with me should be
like me. It is even undesirable. That would be mere imitation. It would be worth while to
adopt what is good in me only to the extent that they can assimilate it. For instance,
the Sardar takes tea, but no one thinks of stopping him. It may be that tea may be a
necessity for him on medical grounds. Then what about some of those who stay with me
and are my companions and who are meat-eaters? Only those who know that tea does
not suit them or have thought about how tea is grown with sweated labour should give
up tea. Ba takes tea in spite of the facts that she lives with me. She also takes coffee.
I would ev en lovingly prepare it for her . Why is that so? I know y our question w as put
only in fun. But we are prone to misunderstanding and intolerance in these matters and
we must correct these errors.26. To Lakshmidas Gandhi
27. V. 1906
Johannesburg
Respected brother ,
I have your letter of the 17th April. I do not what to sa y. You are prejudiced against
me. There is no remedy against prejudice. I am helpless. I can only reply to your letter
in full.
1. I have no idea of separating from you.
2. I claim nothing there.
3. I do not claim anything as mine.
4. All that I have is being utilized for public purposes.
5. It is available to relations who devote themselves to public work.
6. I could have satisfied your desire for money if I had not dedicated my all public
use.
I have never said that I have done much for brothers or other relations. I gave them
all that I could save; and this I have mentioned not out of pride, and only to friends.
Rest assured that I will cheerfully assume the burden of supporting the family in
case y ou pass on before me. Y ou need ha ve no fear on that score.
I am not now in a position to send you money as you desire.It is well if Harilal is married; it is also well if he is not. For the present at any rate I
have ceased to think of him as a son.
I am willing to go to India to attend Mani’s wedding if at all possible. But I cannot
give you any idea of my present condition. I am so hard pressed for time that I scarcely
know what to do. Please cable the date of marriage, so that if possible I might hold
myself in readiness to go.
I might perhaps inform you that I am in debt to Revashankarbhai.
You ma y repudiate me, but still I will be to y ou what I ha ve always been.
I do not remember that I expressed a desire to separate from you when I was there.
But ev en if I did, m y mind is now quite clear , my aspir ation are higher and I ha ve no
desire for worldly enjo yments of an y type whatev er.
I am engaged in my present activities as I look upon them as essential life. If I have
to face death while thus engaged, I shall face it with equanimit y. I am now a str anger to
fear.
I like those who are pure in heart. Y oung K alyandas, Jagmohandas’ s son, is lik e
Pralhad in spirit. He is therefore dearer to me than one who is a son because so born.27. To Kallenbach
[This letter w as written in English. V .G.D.]
7, Buitensingle, Cape town,
March 16, 1914
The greatest grief imaginable has befallen me. My brother died y esterda y, I suppose
simply thinking up to his last breath of me. What a passionate wish it was on his part to
meet me. I was hurrying everything on so that I could go to India with the quickest
dispatch and fall down at his feet and nurse him. But it was not to be. Now I must go to
a family of widows with m y poor self as the head. Y ou who do not know the Indian
patriarchal family system do not quite realize what this may mean. Anyway my desire to
get to India is k eener than ev er. And y et who knows? I doubt v ery much whether I shall
ever realize that desire. However I must prepare for the pilgrimage, and then leave it
calmly in the hands of Him, who wields the almight y power .
28. On Death
[To Mrs. Hor ace Alexander . Recorded b y M.D . under No vember 24, 1932]
I have personally ceased for years to grieve over death at all. The shock is felt when
a comrade is torn away from me, but that is purely due to personal attachment which in
other words is selfishness. But I immediately recover and realize that death is a deliver-
ance and has to be welcomed, even as a friend is welcomed, and that it means dissolu-
tion of the body , not of the indwelling spirit. But I must not philosophiz e. To be true to
you and to myself I had to declare my faith and at the same time to let you know that
Mahadev and I and your other friends here were not so indifferent as not to take note of
the happenings in your circle.29. Letters From Yeravda Mandir
Gandhiji used to call his prison a mandir for to him it was a temple of liberty spiritual
as well as political. When he w as in Y eravda Mandir in 1932, Shri. Mahadev Desai joined
him in March, and kept a dairy in which besides entering the events of the day he copied
in extensor or in part the numerous letters Gandhiji wrote to the members of the Ashram
as well as to outsiders. For instance he noted that on the 14th of March Gandhiji wrote
as many as 42 letters to Ashramites besides half a dozen letters to others. In the
course of an English letters to an Ashramite, he wrote the following.
V.G.D.
30. Sparks Of The Divine
In working out plans of self-restraint, attention must not for a moment be withdrawn
from the fact that we are all sparks of the divine and therefore partake of its nature,
and since there can be no such thing as self-indulgence with divine, it must of necessity
be foreign to human nature. If we get a heart-grasp of that elementary fact, we should
have no difficulty in attaining self-control, and that is exactly what is implied in the Gita
verses we sing ev ery ev ening. Y ou will recall that one of the v erses sa ys that the
craving for self-indulgence abates only when one sees God face to face.
31. How To Mark Auspicious Event
[To a couple who sent a printed letter to him, mentioning the fact of their marriage
and asking for his blessing].
We wish y ou would both render disinterested service. That the request for blessing
should have been made on a printed card detracts from its value. If you seek blessings
you should write in your own hand and state some good resolutions you have made to
mark the auspicious event ( Translated from Gujarati ).32. Enjoyment of Beauty
Beauty must be praised, but the praise should be mute. And you must enjoy it by
giving it up (tain tyacten bhujjiya. A man who is not moved by the beauty of the sky is
incapable of being moved by anything at all. But one would prove himself to be a fool if
he began to build a flight of steps in a v ain attempt to reach the hea vens (T ranslated
from Gujarati)  .
33. Brahmacharya
Brahmacharya is a mental statue. It is undoubtedly helped by abstemiousness in all
respects. But diet plays the least part in giving one the necessary mental statue. Not
that wrong diet will not hinder progress. What I want to say is that the right diet taken
in moderation is not the only thing in the observance of brahmacharya though it is
undoubtedly one of the necessary thing. Indulgence of the palate will be the surest sign
of a weak mental state which is repugnant to brahmacharya. The sovereign remedy for
the observance of brahmacharya is realization that the soul is a part of the Divine and
that the Divine resides within us. A heart grasp of this fact induces mental purity and
strength. Y ou should therefore read such books as would enable y ou to gr asp the
central fact, cultivate such companionship as would constantly make you think of the
Divine presence and follow all the directions giv en about fresh air , hip-baths etc. in m y
book entitled Self -restr aint v . Self-indulgence. And when y ou are doing all these things
regularly and industriously , do not brood o ver all that happens, but ha ve confidence
that success is bound to attain your effort.
34. Who Is The Enemy?
The passions are our real enemies, with whom we must w aged eternal w ar. This w ar
alone is the theme of the Mahabhar ata (T ranslated from Hindustani).
The six internal enemies of man are enumerated in the following verse :Kam kradhasthatha lobho madmohhow che matsar:
‘Lust, anger , greed, pride, delusion and en vy.’
Christianit y lists these as the sev en deadly sins: pride, wr ath, en vy, lust, glutton y,
avarice and sloth.
V.G.D.]
35. Truth Is God
[To the children in the Ashr am. W ritten on March 21, 1932]
Do you remember m y definition of God? Instead of sa ying that God is T ruth, I sa y
that truth is God. This was not always clear to me. I realized it only 4 years ago, but my
conduct has been unconsciously based on that realization. I have known God only as
Truth. There w as a time when I had doubts about the existence of God, but I nev er
doubted the existence of T ruth. This truth is not something material but pure intelli-
gence. It rules over the universe; therefore it is Ishwara (the Lord)..... This is for me
almost a matter of experience. I sa y almost, because I ha ve not seen T ruth face to
face. I ha ve had only glimpses of it. But m y faith is indomitable (T ranslated from Gujar ati).
36. Seeing God
[To a co- worker who ask ed if one could see God face to face while still living].
This question never worries a liver of the Gita life, for he is entitled only to strive and
must not bother about the consequences. Still I am inclined to think that perfect
realization of the Supreme is impossible so long as one is subject to the limitations of
life. He might reach the door but cannot enter as he still bears his body like chains.
However he should b ever conscious of pain due to separation from God; if this pain is
not felt he will be negligent in his effort and might ev en stop it altogether . The pain mustnot cause despondency but must be spring of hope everlasting and a spur to stronger
effort. Remember the Gita promise that the least little effort never goes in vain. There-
fore the pain of separation too must be a source of joy for the aspirant, his goal sooner
or later . (Translated from Gujar ati).
37. Asthma
[To a sufferer from asthma]
Write to Dr .... But I ma y suggest that y ou must fast for three da ys and break the
fast with milk and or ange juice (T ranslated from Gujar ati).
[After dictating this letter Gandhiji said, ‘I have made this experiment on my clients
who besides legal advice received medical advice also. There was one Lutavansinh who
observed a fast and lived on rice, milk, and marmalade for a month. At the end of the
month he w as free from asthma. I also induced him to giv e up tobacco .’ ]
[V. G. D .]
38. God - The Only Friend
We may have any number of co- workers but God alone can be our friend. Friendship
with men comes in the way of our friendship with God, as I have found from experience.
39. Miraculous Powers
I do not believe that Krishna had the power of going from one place to another by
supernatural means. Real yogis never go in for the acquisition of the miraculous powers,
for their yoga is solely an instrument of salvation, and they would never sell their
birthright for a mess of pottage (T ranslated from Gujar ati).40. Brahmacharya
Real brahmacharya must persists at all times and in all conditions. It is certainly
difficult to reach this stage, and no wonder , for our v ery birth is due to an act of self -
indulgence. W e are deeply attached to the body which owes its existence to that act.
It must be difficult to overcome the inherited tendency to indulgence. However the
body is also the temple of the Holy Spirit, and when we have seen the Supreme face to
face, brahmacharya becomes a natural state, and remains undisturbed even if the
celestial nymph Rambha comes down from the sky and tempts us. Our mother is the
paragon of beaut y for ev ery one of us. P assion is stilled as we contemplate her beaut y.
So should it be when we think of every other women.....
41. Why India Is Dear?
India is to me the dearest country in the world, not because it is my country but
because I have discovered the greatest goodness in it. It has been subject to foreign
rule, it is true, but its subjection too is a proof of its goodness. The status of a slave is
prefer able to that of a sla veholder (T ranslated from Gujar ati).
42. School Theatricals
[Shri. Indu P arekh, an Ashr am bo y, asked, ‘Shri Krishna got Bhishma killed b y placing
Shikhandi in front of him and prevented Jayandrath from seeing the sun by covering it
up with the sudarshan chakr a. Was his conduct on this occasions justified? And if it w as
not, can we enact such senses as a part of our school theatricals?’ Gandhiji replied to
him on a slip of paper of the usual size for children, 4 inches board.]
It is an ex cellent question. The Mahabhar ata is poetry , not history . The poet tries to
show that if man resorts to violence, untruth too is too sure to come in, and even
people like Krishna cannot escape it. A wrong is a wrong, no matter who the wrongdoer
is. Krishna was in fault in both the cases, and if my memory serves me right, Vyasa tootake an unfavourable view of these incidents. There may be no harm in enacting these
scenes if such conduct is clearly shown as un worth y of imitation (T ranslated from
Gujarati).
43. Vanity And Self Respect
[To Shri Nar andas Gandhi, the secretary of the Ashr am]
I have my doubts about the propriety of enacting such scenes. I do not think we
derive any benefit from scenes in which big people ha ve acted un worthily . Children are
apt to draw the moral that if big people behave like that, so can we. I therefore think
that our theatricals should be of a different kind altogether like say Rabindranath’s
Muktadhara or Maithilisharan Gupta’s Anagha, which is very good indeed and fit to be
presented to the children there. The Hindi is simple and sweet, and the subject-matter
leaves nothing to be desired (T ranslated from Gujar ati).
XXXVIII
Vanity is emptiness : self -respect is substance. No one’ s self -respect is ev er hurt
except b y self, vanity is alw ays hurt from outside.
44. Faith and Understanding
....The intelligence becomes k eener as faith grows deeper . Indeed the Gita teaching
seems to be this that it is for God to endow us with understanding, while it is for man to
become richer and richer in faith. W e have to gr asp the implication of faith (shr addha)
and understanding (buddhi), but this grasp too is obtained not by study of definition but
by real humilit y. He who thinks that he knows nothing. He who thinks that he knows
nothing acquires knowledge in God’s time. Even Almighty God cannot pour a single drop
of water into a pitcher that is full to the brim. W e have therefore ev ery da y to stand
before God as beggars with empty hands. This is covered by our observance of aparigraha,
that is non-possession or po verty. (Translated from Gujar ati)45. Tell The Truth
[To a correspondent who ask ed whether we should tell the truth or tell a lie, when
telling the truth is likely to cost some one his life, while telling a lie might save him from
death]
The T ruth, where it is relev ant, must be told at an y cost. (T ranslated from Gujar ati).
46. Christian Science
I have met many Christian Science friends. Some of these have sent me Mrs. Eddy’s
work. I was never able to read them through. I did however glance through them. They
did not produced the impression the friends who sent them to me had excepted. I have
learnt from childhood, and experience has confirmed the soundness of the teaching,
that spiritual gifts should not be used for the purpose of healing bodily ailments. I do
however believe in abstention from use of drugs and the like. But this is purely on
physical, hygienic grounds. I do also believe in utter reliance upon God, but then not in
the hope of that He will heal me, but in order to submit entirely to his will, and to share
the fate of millions who, even they wished to, can have so scientific medical help. I am
sorry to say however that I am not always able to carry out my belief into practice. It is
my constant my endeavour to do so. But I find it very difficult, being in the midst of
temptation, to enforce my belief in full.
47. Hypocrisy
I have discovered one great defect in our women, namely that they hide their
thoughts from the world. They thus become hypocritical. Hypocrisy comes easy to
those alone who are wedded to untruth. I do not know of anything so injurious as
hypocrisy , but the h ypocrisy of our middle class women who are alw ays subject to
pressure eats into their vitals lik e a veritable cancer . Every now and then they do things
which they do not like, and believe that they must do so. If they apply their mind to thesubject a little, they will see that there is no reason why they should yield to outside
pressure, no matter from what quarter . Let them master this first lesson that they must
cultivate the courage to stand before the world just as they are, and everything else
will be added unto them (T ranslated from Gujar ati).
[To granddaughter Manu]
48. Purify Thyself
It is good that you saw Harilal’s sorry plight with your own eyes. I knew everything
already . Howev er let us not giv e up hope. F or with God all things are possible. If there is
any merit still to Harilal’ s credit, it will mak e itself felt. W e must not pamper him nor feel
false pity for him. If only we become purer ourselves, our purity is bound to exercise a
beneficial influence o ver him. Y ou must be tough and write to Harilal that y ou cannot
have anything to do with him so long as he has not given up drink. He might rise from his
stupor if all of us adopted such a strong attitude. A drunkard often gives up drink if he
feels a severe shock.
49. Age Of Marriage
I appro ve of y our views on y our marriage. Y ou were dangerously ill as a little child
and there w as no hope that y ou would reco ver. But y our life w as saved thanks to Ba’ s
devoted nursing and skilled medical treatment. But that illness was so severe that your
growth was arrested for the best part of five years, and you are weak even now, so
that you might fall ill but for Bali’s excellent care. Therefore I always consider you to be
at least 5 years younger than you actually are. For us in the Ashram the earliest age at
which a girl should think of contracting marriage is twenty-one. At this rate you will
hardly be ready for marriage at 25. However I have no intention of binding you down.....
For the present you must attend to your studies, build up a good constitution and
understand as well as discharge y our duties in terms of the Gita doctrine. (T ranslated
from Gujarati).50. How To Finance Service
[To Shri Nanabhai Bhatt]
Why are you worrying over Dakshinamurti finance? Here you can by all means take a
leaf from my book, for I am in except in the subject. I had mastered one lesson long
before the country made a mahatma of me. Just as one may not carry on trade with
borrowed capital, one may not conduct a public institution has to send out the ablest
members of its staff in order to collect the necessary funds, I had mastered one lesson
before the country made a mahatma of me. Just as one may not carry on trade with
borrowed capital, one may not conduct a public institution has to send out the ablest
members of its staff in order to collect the necessary fund, I would say that it operates
on a credit basis. Instead of pitching upon a certain sum of money as your target, you
should limit the number of admissions so as to be able to manage with the funds actually
collected. It is the easiest thing in the world to carry out m y suggestion. Y ou ha ve only
to make up your mind; that is all. At the beginning of the year you should fix the amount
of money you will need. If you get that amount without leaving your post of duty at the
school, y ou carry on. If y ou don’ t, you close the school down. Y our school has an
excellent record and efficient teachers. Why then don’t you have faith? Dedicate the
whole thing to God who will conduct it if He so wills. ‘He has never been known to let
down his serv ants’, as the Gujar ati poet puts it. Y ou say you could ha ve surmounted the
difficulty if the Sardar or I had been available. But where is the difficulty? And who are
we to help y ou forw ard? One blind man cannot lead another . Therefore cast y our burden
on Him alone. (T ranslated from Gujar ati).
51. Parayan Of Sacred Books
If learned brahmans are also good men, it would be a desirable thing for them to
spread the knowledge of the Upanishads among the people. But nowadays learning and
goodness hardly ev er go together . Therefore I am indifferent as regards the par ayan* of
the Gita or the Ramayan in public. A parayan undertaken by one who does not under-stand the meaning, or understanding the meaning, read scriptures aloud for show or for
fame as if there were anything meritorious in merely reading them aloud, is nothing
worth. I would go even further and say that it does harm. 
(Translated from Gujar ati)
52. Belief In God
We must believ e in the existence of God, inasmuch as we believ e in our own. Living
being exist and so does God Who is the sum-total of all life.
By a disbelief in God we injure ourselves in the same way as if we disbelieved in
ourselv es. That is to sa y, not to believ e in God is something lik e suicide. But it is one
thing to believe in God, and quite another thing to conduct ourselves as if we had such
a living faith. As a matter of fact there is no atheist in the world; atheism is a mere
pretence.
53. Realization
A man realizes the Supreme by becoming absolutely free from likes and dislikes and
never otherwise. I hold that he who sa ys that he has attained realization is far , far a way
from his destination. Realization is a matter of experience but does not lend itself to
description in language.
I can live only in virtue of my faith in God. In my view there is no God different from
truth. T ruth is God.
(Translated from Hindustani).54. Fasting
It [the fast] can do you no harm whatsoever if it is properly taken. As much water
you can drink, hot or cold, should be tak en. You know the best and cheapest method of
keeping w ater cold. W rap the v essel in which it is k ept with wet cloth. Y ou ha ve to tak e
a full enema daily , and if there is a feeling a full nausea y ou will tak e a full drops of lemon
with water and even honey if you have a sweet tooth. (April 6, 1933).
55. Jain Atheism And Gita Theism
[Purushottam Gandhi writing from Rajkot asked Gandhiji three questions : (1) What
is the difference between the so-called atheism of the jains and the theism of the Gita?
(2) If God is not doer , who dispenses gr ace? Is pr ayer anything more than the expres-
sion of a person’ s wishes? (3) What do y ou mean when y ou say the T ruth is God? T o him
Gandhiji replied as follows:]
I do not think there is an y contr adiction between the Jain and the V edic doctrine.
They are only different ways of looking at a same thing. The God of Hinduism is doer as
well as non-doer . God perv ades the univ erse and is therefore a doer , but He is a non-
doer inasmuch as action does not affect Him, and He has not to enjoy the fruit of
action. The universe is not the result of any karma (action) of God in the sense in which
you use that word. Therefore there is no discrepancy in the Gita verses quoted by you.
Remember that the Gita is a poem. God neither says nor does anything. He did not say
anything to Arjuna. The con versation between the Lord and Arjuna is imaginary . I do not
think there w as an y such con versation between the Krishna and the Arjuna of history .
There is nothing improper or untruthful in the setting of the Gita. There was a custom of
casting religious books into such a shape, and we cannot find a fault with any cultured
individual ev en toda y who emplo ys such a v ehicle for his ideas. The Jains put it logically ,
unpoetically and dryly and said that there is no Creator of the universe. There is nothing
wrong in sa ying so . Howev er, mankind cannot liv e by logic alone, but needs poetry .
Therefore even the Jain rationalists found it necessary to have temples, images and
similar aids for the spirit of man, which are ruled out by mere logic.56. The Will And The Grace Of God
In answering your first question I have in effect also answered the second. Grace is
the diction of poetry . Dev otion (bhakti) is itself poetry . But poetry is no improper or
inferior or unnecessary thing. On the contrary it is badly needed. Science would tell us
that water is a chemical compound of hydrogen and oxygen, but in the language of
poetry water is a gift of God. Understanding such poetry is an essential element of life,
while ignorance of the chemical composition of water does not matter in the least. It is
perfectly logical to say that whatever happens is the fruit of action. But ‘Impenetrable
is The Secret of Action’ (Gita IV , 17).W e mortals are so constituted that we cannot
know all the causativ e factors of ev en a v ery ordinary ev ent. W e are therefore perfectly
right in saying that nothing happens except by the will and the grace of God. Again the
body is a prison for the soul, who is lik e the air enclosed b y a jar . The air in the jar is
ineffective so long as it thinks itself to be different from the atmosphere. In the same
way the soul imprisoned in the body will be unable to draw upon the Reservoir of Power
that is God so long as she imagines herself to be a doer . Therefore to sa y that whatev er
happens happens by the will of God is to state a matter of fact, and such humility befits
a seeker of truth. A lover of truth entertains only righteous wishes which are bound to
be fulfilled. Our prayers bear fruit for the world to the extent that our soul is grounded in
truth. The universe is not different from us, and we are not different from the universe.
We are all members one of another , and influence one another b y our actions. Actions
here include thoughts, so that not a single thought is without its effect. Therefore we
must cultivate the habit of always thinking good thoughts.
57. Truth Is God
I say that truth is God not because truth is the only comprehensive attribute of God.
Other attributes are only partial expression of the reality that is God. The Gujarati word
Ishwara (the Lord) is also a descriptiv e epithet of God, but as it liter ally means ruler , it
sounds quite insipid. Thinking of God as the Kings of Kings does not satisfy the intellect.
Such a line of thought may generate a kind of fear in our committing sin and areencouraged in doing meritorious deeds. But merit acquired out of fear almost ceases to
be merit. Let us do good for its own sake, and not in order to win a reward. Pondering
over the matter lik e this, I found that ‘God is truth’ is an incomplete sentence. ‘T ruth is
God’ is the fullest expression of our meaning in so far as it can be set forth in human
speech. W e arriv e at the same conclusion if we consider the et ymology of the word
satya (truth), which is derived from sat. Sat means eternal. That which exists at all
times is truth, we must not allow our faith to weaken. On the other hand it should go
stronger . Such at an y rate is m y experience. By looking upon truth as God we steer clear
of quite a number of dangers. W e lose all interest in seeing or hearing about mir acles.
Seeing God is difficult to understand; but seeing truth is indeed a hard task, but as we
approach nearer and nearer to truth, we catch a glimpse of the God of truth, so that we
hope to ha ve a full view in His good time and our faith also burns brighter and brighter .
(Translated from Gujar ati).
/dodecastar4  /dodecastar4  /dodecastar4  /dodecastar4