 
Selections From Gandhi 
(Encyclopedia of Gandhi’s Thoughts) 
 
Written By  : Nirmal Kumar Bose 
 
Rs. 75/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Mudranalaya 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
PREFACE 
Gandhiji perhaps never wrote merely for the pleasur e of writing. Thought and 
writing were always tools with him for more efficie nt action. They were used 
either to clear up a knotty problem in his own mind  or in that of his co-workers. 
His writings therefore do not exactly give a correc t representation of what he 
actually was but what he always tried to be. It is a record of ideals and 
aspirations and of criticism of events and situatio ns in the light of those ideals. 
By their very nature they reflect the difficulties which confronted him from 
time to time and also how he was able to met them m ore or less successful in 
the course of life's experiments. The reader should  approach this book of 
selections with that reservation in mind then he wi ll be able to gather whatever 
help he can in the pursuit of his own ideal. 
A word is now necessary to explain the arrangement followed in the 
presentation of the selections. The foundation of G andhiji's life was formed by 
his living and growing faith in God, and in the one ness of the whole human 
family. So his ideas about God have been given the first place in the first 
chapter. The discipline which every man should foll ow in order to realize his 
highest ideal, whether we call it God, or Truth, or  Humanity, is common to all; 
and it comes in the second chapter. The third conta ins a summary of Gandhiji's 
views on various philosophical, social and politica l questions, and may thus be 
regarded as practically a summary of the rest of th e book. In fact, this is why a 
few passages occurring elsewhere, have also found p lace in this chapter on 
fundamental ideas. 
Chapters four to eight contain his views on the pro duction and distribution of 
wealth, his criticism of existing arrangements in s ociety, and the means he 
suggested, from time to time, for bringing about a more desirable 
transformation. Chapters nine is an explosion of hi s political idealism; while ten 
gives us his practical programme for securing econo mic as well as political 
independence for India. 
Gandhiji's message is however significant not for I ndia alone. He proposed the 
nonviolent technique, not only as a substitute for violent conflicts within a Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3  narrow social group, but in that of international r elations as well. But 
nonviolence cannot be suddenly forced upon an unpre pared humanity, and in a 
hostile social environment. There the man of nonvio lence has to move 
cautiously, adapting his step to the exigencies of every special set of 
circumstances. The chapter on satyagraha details ho w the technique has 
developed and actually taken shape on the Indian so il. Others may profit by the 
experiences of India in this direction. This satyag raha has moreover demanded 
from the Indian political worker a measure of ideal ism and of discipline, which 
the reader will find described in the following cha pter. 
The remaining portion of the book is a record of Ga ndhiji's opinion on various 
subjects. The seventeenth contains his views on rel igion, in its institutional 
aspect; while the eighteenth gives his ideas on mar riage and related topics. His 
opinion regarding the future role of women in socie ty has also found a place in 
this chapter. Education comes next; and this is fol lowed by the last chapter 
covering subjects like Art, Music, Swadeshi, the ma nagement of public 
institutions and so on. 
The book thus covers, in brief, a wide range of sub jects and as one progresses 
in its study, one is often left with a thirst for f uller information on the subject 
of his interest. The Navjivan Publishing House has been issuing, for sometime 
past, a series of volumes, each containing Gandhiji 's writings on one specific 
topic or another; and the interested reader must tu rn to them for fuller 
information, when the files of the young India or t he Harijan are not available 
to him. The present selection does not pretend to d o anything more than a 
glimpse of what he can gather if he ventures throug h the forest of writings 
contained in those two journals. 
The index at the end of the book has been prepared with some care; and we 
should advise the reader to use it frequently, so t hat he may profit by similar 
passages occurring elsewhere in the body of the boo k. 
NIRMAL KUMAR BOSE 
37,Bosepara Lane, Calcutta 3 26-1-1950 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4   
01. GOD 
 
My own experience has led me to the knowledge that the fullest life is 
impossible without an immovable belief in a Living Law in obedience to which 
the whole universe moves. A man without that faith is like a drop thrown out of 
the ocean bound to perish. Every drop in the ocean shares its majesty and has 
the honour of giving us the ozone of life.- H, 25-4 -36, 84. 
 
God as Truth and Love  
1. There is an indefinable mysterious power that pe rvades everything. I feel it, 
though I do not see it. It is this unseen power tha t makes itself felt and yet 
defies proof, because it is so unlike all that I pe rceive throughout the existence 
of God to a limited extent.— YI, II-10-28, 340.  
 
2. I have made he world’s faith in God my own, and as my faith is ineffaceable, 
I regard that to describe faith as experience is to  tamper with Truth, it may 
perhaps be more correct to say that I have no word for characterizing my belief 
in God. – Auto, 34I.  
 
3. God is that indefinable something which we all f eel but which we do not 
know. To me God is Truth and Love, God is ethics an d morality. God is 
fearlessness, God is the source of light and life a nd yet. He is above and beyond 
all these. God is conscience. He is even the atheis m of the atheist. He 
transcends speech and reason. He is a personal God to those who need His 
touch. He is purest essence. He simply Is to those who have faith. He is long 
suffering. He is patient but He is also terrible. H e is the greatest democrat the 
world knows. He is the greatest tyrant ever known. We are not, He alone Is.—
YI,5-3-25, 81.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  4. You have asked me why I consider that God is Tru th. In my early youth I was 
taught to repeat what in Hindu scriptures are known  as one thousand names of 
God. But these one thousand names of God were by no  means exhaustive. We 
believe and I think it is the truth that God has as  many names as there are 
creatures and, therefore, we also say that God is n ameless and since God many 
forms we also consider Him formless, and since He s peaks to us through many 
tongues we consider Him to be speechless and so on.  And when I came to study 
Islam I found that Islam too had many for God. I wo uld say with those who say 
that God is Love, God is Love. But deep down in me I used to say that thought 
God may be, God, God is Truth, above all. If it is possible for the human tongue 
to give the fullest description, I have come to the  conclusion that for myself 
God is Truth. But two years ago, I went a step furt her and said Truth is God. 
You will see the fine distinction between the two s tatements, viz. That God is 
Truth and Truth is God. And I came to that conclusi on after a continuous and 
relentless search after Truth which began nearly fi fty years ago. I then found 
that the nearest approach to Truth was love. But I also found that love has 
many meanings in the English language at least and that human love in the 
sense of passion could become a degrading also. I f ound, too, that love in the 
sense of never found a double meaning in connection  with truth and not even 
the atheists had demurred to the necessity or power  of truth. But in their 
passion for discovering truth the atheists have not  hesitated to deny the very 
existence of God-from their own point of view right ly. And it was because of 
this reasoning that I saw that rather than say God is Truth I should say Truth is 
God. I recall the name of Charles Bradlaugh who del ighted to call himself an 
atheist, but knowing as I do something of, I would never regard him as an 
atheist. I would call him a God-fearing man though I know he would reject the 
claim. His face would redden if I would say, "Mr. B radlaugh, you are a truth-
fearing man and not a God-fearing man." I would aut omatically disarm his 
criticism by saying that Truth is God, as I have di sarmed the criticism of many a 
young man. Add to this the difficulty that millions  have taken the name of God 
and in His name committed nameless atrocities. Not that scientists very often 
do not commit cruelties in the name of truth. I kno w how in the name of truth 
and science inhuman cruelties are perpetrated on an imals when men perform Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6  vivisection. There are thus a number of difficultie s in the way, no matter how 
you describe God. But the human mind is a limited t hing and you have to labour 
under limitations when you think of a being or enti ty who is beyond the power 
of man to grasp. And then we have another thing in Hindu philosophy, viz. God 
alone is and nothing else exists, and the same trut h you find emphasized and 
exemplified in the  kalema of Islam. There you find it clearly stated-that God  
alone is and nothing else exists. In fact the Sansk rit word for Truth is a word 
which literally means that which exists-Sat. For th ese and several other reasons 
that I can give you I have come to the conclusion t hat the definition-Truth is 
God-gives me the greatest satisfaction. And when yo u want to find Truth as God 
the only inevitable means is Love, i.e. nonviolence , and since I believe that 
ultimately means and end are convertible terms, I s hould not hesitate to say 
that God is Love. 
 
‘What then is Truth?’  
A difficult question, but I have solved it for myse lf by saying that it is what the 
voice within tells you. How, then, you ask, differe nt people think of different 
and contrary truths? Well, seeing that the human mi nd works through 
innumerable media and that the evolution of the hum an mind is not the same 
for all, it follows that what may be truth for one may be untruth for another, 
and hence those who have made experiment have come to the conclusion that 
there are certain conditions to be observed in maki ng those experiments. Just 
as for conduction scientific experiments there is a n indispensable scientific 
course of instruction, in the same way strict preli minary discipline is necessary 
to qualify a person to make experiments in the spir itual realm. Everyone 
should, therefore, realize his limitations before h e speaks of his inner voice. 
Therefore, we have the belief based upon experience , that those who would 
make individual search after truth as God, must go through several vows, as for 
instance, the vow of truth, the vow of Brahmacharya  (purity)-for you cannot 
possibly divide your love for Truth and God with an ything else-the vow of 
nonviolence, of poverty and non-possession. Unless you impose on yourselves 
the five vows, may not embark on the experiment at all. There are several Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  other conditions prescribed, but I must not take yo u through all of them Suffice 
it to say that who have made these experiments know  that it is not proper for 
everyone to claim to hear the voice of conscience a nd it is because we have at 
the present moment everyone claiming the right of c onscience without going 
through any discipline whatsoever that there is so much untruth being delivered 
to a bewildered world. All that I can in true humil ity present to you is that 
truth is not to be found by anybody who has not got  an abundant sense of 
humility. If you would swim on the bosom of the oce an of Truth you must 
reduce yourselves to a zero. Further then this I ca nnot go along this fascinating 
path. 
–YI, 3I-I-I2-3I, 427 . 
 
God as Truth and the Law  
5. I do not regard God as a person. Truth for me is  God, and God’s Law and God 
are not different things or facts, in the sense tha t an earthly king and his law 
are different. Because God is an Idea, Law Himself.  Therefore, it is impossible 
to conceive God as breaking the Law; He therefore, does not rule our actions 
and withdraw Himself. When we say He rules our acti ons, we are simply using 
human language and we try to limit Him. Otherwise, He and His Law abide 
everywhere and govern everything. Therefore, I do n ot think that He answers in 
every detail every request of ours, but there is no  doubt that He rules our 
action. And I literally believe that not a blade of  grass grows or moves without 
His will. The free will we enjoy is less than that of a passenger on a crowded 
deck. 
"Do you feel a sense of freedom in your communion w ith God?" 
I do. I do not feel cramped as I would on a boat fu ll of passengers. Although I 
know that my freedom is less than that of a passeng er, I appreciate that 
freedom as I have imbibed through and through the c entral teaching of the Gita 
that man is the maker of his own destiny in the sen se that he has freedom of 
choice as to the manner in which he uses that freed om. But he is no controller 
of results. The moment he thinks he is, he comes to  grief.-H, 23-3-40, 55.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8   
6. Man was supposed to be the maker of his own dest iny. It is partly true. He 
can make his destiny only in so far as he is allowe d by the Great Power which 
overrides all our intentions, all our plans and car ries out His Own plans. 
I call that Great Power not by the name of Allah, n ot by the name of Khuda or 
God but by the name of Truth. For me, Truth is God and Truth overrides all our 
plans. The whole truth is only embodied within the heart of that Great Power- 
Truth. I was taught from my early days to regard Tr uth as unapproachable- 
something that you cannot reach. A great Englishman  taught me to believe that 
God is unknowable. He is Knowable to the extent tha t our limited intellect 
allows. -H, 20-4-47, II3.  
 
The Character of Truth  
7. Truth is by nature self-evident. As soon as you remove the cobwebs of 
ignorance that surround it, it shines clear.-YI, 27 -5-26, I89 
 
8. Every expression of truth has in it the seeds of  propagation, even as the sun 
cannot hide its light.-MR, I935, 4I3. 
 
The Way of realizing Truth  
9. Life is a very complex thing, and truth and nonv iolence present problems, 
which often defy analysis and judgment. One discove rs truth and the method of 
applying the only legitimate means of vindicating i t, i.e. Satyagraha or soul-
force, by patient endeavour and silent prayer. I ca n only assure friends that I 
spare no pains to grope to my way to the right, and  that humble but constant 
endeavour and silent prayer are always my two trust y companions along the 
weary but beautiful path that all seekers must trea d. YI, 1-6-21, 174.  
 
10. You cannot realize the wider consciousness, unl ess you subordinate 
completely reason and intellect, and the body, too.  –H.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9   
11. It is unnecessary to believe in an extra mundan e Power called God in order 
to sustain our faith in ahimsa. But God is not a Po wer residing in the clouds. 
God is an unseen Power residing within us and neare r to us than finger-nails to 
the flesh. There are many powers lying hidden withi n us and we find this 
Supreme Power if we make diligent search with the f ixed determination to find 
Him. One such way of ahimsa. It is so very necessar y because God is in every 
one of us and, therefore, we have to identify ourse lves with every human being 
without exception. This is called cohesion or attra ction in scientific language. 
In the popular language it is called love. In the p opular language it is called 
love. It binds us to one another and to God. Ahimsa  and love are one and the 
same thing. I hope this is all clears to you. 
- (From a private letter, dated Sevagram, 1-6-42). 
 
Confession of Faith  
12. I am but a poor struggling soul yearning to be wholly good-wholly truthful 
and wholly non-violent in thought, word and deed; b ut ever failing to reach the 
ideal which I know to be true. It is a painful clim b, but the pain of it is a 
positive pleasure to me. Each step upward makes me feel stronger and fit for 
the next.- YI, 9-4-25, I26 . 
 
13. But I know that I have still before me a diffic ult path to traverse. I must 
reduce myself to zero. So long as one does not of h is own free will put himself 
last among his fellow creatures, there is no salvat ion for him. Ahimsa is the 
farthest limit of humility.— Auto, 6I6 . 
 
14. I am impatient to realize the presence of my Ma ker, Who to me embodies 
Truth and in the early part of my career I discover ed that if I was to realize 
Truth, I must obey, even at the cost of my life, th e law of Love.- NV, 3I9.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  15. I have but shadowed forth my intense longing to  lose myself in the Eternal 
and become merely a lump of clay in the Potter’s di vine hands so that my 
service may become more certain because uninterrupt ed by the baser self in 
me. –YI, 17-11-21, 377 . 
 
Realization of God  
16. God as Truth has been for me a treasure beyond price; may He be so to 
every one of us. -YM, 6 . 
 
17. Devotion to this Truth is the sole justificatio n for our existence.- YM,  2. 
 
18. But He is no God who merely satisfies the intel lect, if He ever does. God to 
be God must rule the heart and transform it. He mus t express Himself in every 
the smallest act of His votary. This can only be do ne through a definite 
realization more real than the five senses can ever  produce. Sense perceptions 
can be, often are false and deceptive, however real  they may appear to us. 
Where there is realization outside the senses it is  infallible. It is proved not by 
extraneous evidence but in the transformed conduct and character of those 
who have felt the real presence of God within. Such  testimony is to be found in 
the experiences of an unbroken line of prophets and  sages in all countries and 
climes. To reject this evidence is to deny oneself. -YI,11-10-28, 340.  
 
Perfection not possible  
19. But it is impossible for us to realize perfect Truth so long as we are 
imprisoned in this mortal frame. We can only visual ize it in our imprisoned in 
this mortal frame. We can only visualize it in our imagination. We cannot, 
through the instrumentality of this ephemeral body,  see face to face Truth 
which is eternal. That is why in the last resort on e must depend on faith.-
 YM,7.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  20. No one can attain perfection while he is in the  body for the simple reason 
that the ideal state is impossible so long as one h as not completely overcome 
his ego, and ego cannot be wholly got rid of so lon g as one is tied down by the 
shackles of the flesh.- YI, 20-9-28, 3I9.  
 
21. Man will ever remain imperfect, and it will alw ays be his part to try to be 
perfect. So that perfection in love or non-possessi on will remain an 
unattainable ideal as long as we are alive but towa rds which we must 
ceaselessly strive.- MR, I935, 4I2.  
 
Self-surrender  
22. Our existence as embodied being is purely momen tary; what are a hundred 
years in eternity? But if we shatter the chains of egotism, and melt into the 
ocean of humanity, we share its dignity. To feel th at we are something is to set 
up a barrier between God and ourselves; to cease fe eling that we are 
something is become one with God. A drop in the oce an partakes of the 
greatness of its parent, although it is unconscious  of it. But it is dried up as 
soon as it enters upon an existence independent of the ocean. We do not 
exaggerate, when we say that life is a mere bubble.  
A life of service must be one of humility. He; who could sacrifice his life for 
others, has hardly time to reserve for himself a pl ace in the sun. Inertia must 
not be mistaken for humility, as it has been in Hin duism. True humility means 
most strenuous and constant endeavour entirely dire cted towards the service of 
humanity. God is continuously in action without res ting for a single moment. If 
we would serve Him or become one with Him, our acti vity must be as 
unwearied as His. There may be momentary rest in st ore for the drop which is 
separated from the ocean, but not for the drop in t he ocean, which knows no 
rest. The same is the case with ourselves. As soon as we become one with the 
ocean in the shape of God, there is no more rest fo r us, nor indeed do we need 
rest any longer. Our very sleep is action. For we s leep with thought of God, in 
our hearts. This restlessness constitutes true rest . This never-ceasing agitation Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  holds the key to peace ineffable. This supreme stat e of total surrender is 
difficult to describe, but not beyond the bound of human experience. It has 
been attained by many dedicated souls, and may be a ttained by ourselves as 
well. This is the goal which we of the Satyagraha A shram have set before 
ourselves; all our observances and activities are c alculated to assist us in 
reaching it. We shall reach it someday all unawares  if we have truth in us.  
–YM, 68 . 
 
23. No niggardly acceptance of the inevitable will appear pleasing to God. It 
must be a thorough change of heart. – YI, 2-2-22, 74.  
 
24.I must go with God as my only guide. He is a jea lous Lord. He will allow no 
one to appear before Him in all one’s weakness, emp ty-handed and in a spirit 
of full surrender, and then He enables you to stand  before a whole world and 
protects you from harm.- YI, 3-9-3I, 247 . 
 
Regarding himself  
25. I have no special revelation of God’s will. My firm belief is that He reveals 
Himself daily to every human being but we shut our ears to ‘the still small 
voice’. We shut our eyes to the Pillar of Fire in f ront of us. I realize His 
omnipresence. –YI, 25-5-2I, I62.  
 
‘One step enough for me’  
26. I do not want to foresee the future; I am conce rned with taking care of the 
present. God has given me no control over the momen t following. 
–YI, 26-I2-24, 427.  
 
27.The impenetrable darkness that surrounds us is n ot a curse but a blessing. 
He has given us power to see only the step in front  of us, and it should be 
enough if Heavenly light reveals that step to us. W e can then sing with Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  Newman, ‘One step enough for me’. And we may be sur e from our past 
experience that the next step will always be in vie w. In other words, the 
impenetrable darkness is nothing so impenetrable as  we imagine. But it seems 
impenetrable when, in our impatience, we want to lo ok beyond that one step. 
-H, 20-4-34, 78 . 
 
Life and Death  
28. We are living in the midst of death. What is th e value of ‘working for our 
own schemes’ when they might be reduced. 
To naught in the twinkling of an eye, or when we ma y equally swiftly and 
unawares be taken away from them? But we may feel s trong as a rock, if we 
could truthfully say ‘we work for God and His schem es’. Then nothing perishes. 
All perishing is the only what seems. Death and des truction have them, but only 
then no reality about them. For death and destructi on is then but a change. 
-YI, 23-9-26, 333.  
 
The Desire for Moksha  
29. This led the interviewer on to a fundamental qu estion. From a reading of 
Gandhiji’s writings the friend had gathered that th e root of all of Gandhiji’s 
activities was the desire for moksha, emancipation.  But why was not this aspect 
emphasized sufficiently? 
Gandhiji replied by taking recourse to a simile. He  said the desire for moksha 
was indeed there, but it was not meant for anyone o ther than the individual 
himself. The world was interested in the fruits, no t root. For the tree itself, 
however the chief concern should be not the fruit, but the root. It was in the 
depth of one’s being that the individual had to con centrate. He had to nurse it 
with the water of his labour and suffering. The roo t was his chief concern. 
-H, 28-9-47, 340 . 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14  Prayer  
30. Prayer is the very soul and essence of religion , and therefore, prayer must 
be the very core of the life of man, for no man can  live without religion. 
-YI, 23-I-30, 25 . 
 
31. When a man is down, he prays to God to lift him  up. The appalling disaster 
in Quetta paralyses one. It baffles all attempt at reconstruction. The whole 
truth about the disaster will perhaps never be know n. The dead cannot be 
recalled to life. 
Human effort must be there always. Those who are le ft behind must have help. 
Such reconstruction as is possible sill no doubt un dertaken. All this and much 
more along the same line can never be a substitute for prayer. 
But why pray at all? Does not God, if there be one,  know what has happened? 
Does He stand in need of prayer to enable Him to do  His duty? 
No, God needs no reminder. He is within everyone. N othing happens without 
His permission. Our prayer is a heart search. It is  a reminder to ourselves that 
we are helpless without His support. No effort is c omplete without prayer, 
without a definite recognition that the best human endeavour is of no effect if 
it has not God’s blessing behind. Prayer is a call to humility. It is a call to self-
Purification, to inward search. 
It ask those who appreciate the necessity of inward  purification to join in the 
prayer that we may read the purpose of God in such visitations, that they may 
humble us and prepare us to face our Maker whenever  the call comes, and that 
we may be. –H, 8-6-35, I32.  
 
32. Prayer is not asking. It is a longing of the so ul. It is daily admission of one’s 
weakness. It is better in prayer to have a heart wi thout words than words 
without a heart. –YI, 23-I-30, 25.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15  33. We are born to serve our fellowmen, and we cann ot properly do so unless 
we are wide awake. There is an eternal struggle rag ing in man’s breast 
between the powers of darkness and of light, and he  who has not the sheet-
anchor of prayer to rely upon will be a victim to t he powers of darkness. The 
man of prayer will be at peace with himself and wit h the whole world, the man 
who goes about the affairs of the world without a p rayerful heart will be 
miserable and will make the world also miserable. A part therefore from its 
bearing on man’s condition after death, prayer has incalculable value for man 
in this world of the living. Prayer is the only mea ns of bringing about 
orderliness and peace and repose in our daily acts.  We inmates of the Ashram 
who came here in search of truth and for insistence  on truth professed to 
believe in the efficacy of prayer, but had never up  to now made it a matter of 
vital concern. We did not bestow on it the care tha t we did on other matters. I 
awoke from my slumbers one day and realizes that I had been woefully 
negligent of my duty in the matter. I have suggeste d measures of stern 
discipline and far from being any the worse; I hope  we are the better for it. For 
it is so obvious. Take care of the vital thing and other things will take care of 
themselves. Rectify one angle of the square and the  other angles will be 
automatically right. – YI, 23-I-30, 26.  
 
God’s punishment  
34. It is easy enough to say, ‘I do not believe in God.’ For God permits all things 
to be said of Him with impunity. He looks at our ac ts. And any breach of His law 
carries with it, not its vindictive, but its purify ing, compelling punishment.  
–YI, 23-9-26, 333 . 
 
Divine Aid  
35. God is the hardest taskmaster I have known on e arth, and He tries you 
through and through. And when you find that your fa ith is failing or your body is 
failing you, and you are sinking, He comes to your assistance somehow or other Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  and proves to you that you must not lose your faith  and that He is always at 
your beck and call, but on His terms, not on your t erms. –Nat, 106g  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17   
02. DISCIPLINE FOR THE REALIZATION OF TRUTH 
 
37. Means and end are convertible terms in my philo sophy of life. 
-YI,26-I2-24, 424. 
 
Our Limitations  
38. Knowledge is limitless and so also the applicat ion of truth. Every day we 
add to our knowledge of the power of the Atman, and  we shall keep on doing 
ever the same. New experience will teach us new dut ies, but truth shall ever 
be the same. Who has ever known it in its entirety?   
—YI, 8-4-26, 131 . 
 
Non-violence as means  
39. I have nothing new to teach the world. Truth an d Nonviolence are as old as 
the hills. All I have done is to try experiments in  both on as vast a scale as I 
could. In doing so I have sometimes erred and learn t by my errors. Life and its 
problems have thus become to me so many experiments  in the practice of truth 
and nonviolence. As a Jain muni once rightly said, I was not so much a votary of 
ahimsa as I was of truth, and I put the latter in t he first place and the former in 
the second. For, as he put it, I was capable of sac rificing nonviolence for the 
sake of Truth. In fact it was in the course of my p ursuit of truth that I 
discovered nonviolence. 
–H, 28-3-36, 49 . 
 
40. Ahimsa and Truth are so intertwined that it is practically impossible to 
disentangle and separate them. They are like the tw o sides of a coin, or rather 
a smooth unstamped metallic disc. Who can say, whic h is the obverse, and 
which the reverse? Nevertheless, ahimsa is the mean s; Truth is the end. Means Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18  to be means must always be within our reach, and so  ahimsa is our supreme 
duty. If we take care of the means, we are bound to  reach the end sooner or 
later. When once we have grasped this point, final victory is beyond question. 
Whatever difficulties we encounter, whatever appare nt reverses we sustain, we 
may not give up the quest for Truth which alone is,  being God Himself. 
–YM, I3 . 
 
41. The path of Truth is as narrow as it is straigh t. ‘‘Even so is that of ahimsa. 
It is like balancing oneself on the edge of a sword . By concentration an acrobat 
can walk on a rope. But the concentration required to tread the path of Truth 
and ahimsa is far greater. The slightest inattentio n brings one tumbling to the 
ground. One can realize Truth and ahimsa only by ce aseless striving. 
–YM, 7 . 
 
Realization of Nonviolence comes by Training  
42. Nonviolence is not a mechanical performance. It  is the finest quality of the 
heart and comes by training.  –YI, I6-4-3I, 75.  
 
43. It takes a fairly strenuous course of training to attain to a mental state of 
nonviolence. In daily life it has to be a course of  discipline though one may not 
like it, like for instance, the life of a soldier. But I agree that unless there is 
hearty cooperation of the mind, the mere outward ob servance will be simply a 
mask, harmful both to the man himself and others. T he perfect state is reached 
only when mind and body and speech are in proper co -ordination. But it is 
always a case of intense mental struggle. – YI, 1-10-31, 287 . 
 
Patience  
44. God travels at a snail’s pace Those who want to  do good are not selfish, 
they are not in a hurry, they know that to impregna te people with good 
requires a long time. –IHR, 2I.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19   
45. Having flung aside the sword, there is nothing except the cup of love which 
I can offer to those who oppose me. It is by offeri ng that cup that I expect to 
draw them close to me. I cannot think of permanent enmity between man and 
man and believing as I do in the theory of rebirth,  I live in the hope that, if not 
in this birth, in some other birth, I shall be able  to hug all humanity in friendly 
embrace. – YI, 2-4-3I, 54.  
 
46.This is the path of ahimsa. It may entail contin uous suffering and the 
cultivating of endless patience. Thus step by step we learn how to make friends 
with all the world; we realize the greatness of God -or Truth. Our peace of mind 
increases in spite of suffering; we become braver a nd more enterprising; we 
understand more clearly the difference between what  is everlasting and what is 
not; we learn how to distinguish between what is ou r duty and what is not. Our 
pride melts away, and we become humble. Our  worldly attachments diminish, 
and so does the evil within us diminish from day to  day. –YM, I0.  
 
Fearlessness  
47. Fearlessness connotes freedom from all external  fear-fear of disease, bodily 
injury and death, of dispossession, of losing one’s  nearest and dearest, of losing 
reputation or giving offence, and so on. – YM, 4I. 
 
48. We must give up all external fears. But the int ernal foes we must always 
fear. We are rightly afraid of animal passion, ange r, and the like. External fears 
cease of their own accord, when once we have conque red these traitors within 
the camp. All such fears revolve round the body as the centre, and will, 
therefore, disappear as soon as one gets rid of att achment for the body. ‘We 
thus find that all external fear is the baseless fa bric of our own vision. Fear has 
no place in our hearts, when we have shaken off the  attachment for wealth, for 
family and for the body. Nothing whatever in the wo rld is ours. Even we 
ourselves are His. When we cease to be masters, and  reduce ourselves to the Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20  rank of servants, humbler than the very dust under our feet, all fears will roll 
away like must; we shall attain ineffable peace, an d see Satyanarayana (the 
God of Truth) face to face. – YM, 43.  
 
49. The pursuit of Truth is true bhakti (devotion).  It is the path that leads to 
God, and, therefore, there is no place in it for co wardice, no place for defeat. 
It is the talisman by which death itself becomes th e portal to life eternal.  
–YM,. 5  
 
50. just as one must learn the art of killing in th e training for violence, so one 
must learn the art of dying in the training for non violence. Violence does not 
mean emancipation from fear, but discovering the me ans of combating the 
cause of fear. Nonviolence, on the other hand, has no cause for fear. The 
votary of nonviolence has to cultivate the capacity  for sacrifice of the highest 
type in order to be free from fear. He recks not if  he should lose his land, his 
wealth, his life. He who has not overcome all fear cannot practice ahimsa to 
perfection. The votary of ahimsa has only one fear,  that is of God. He who 
seeks refuge in God ought to have a glimpse of the Atman that transcends the 
body; and the moment one has a glimpse of the Imper ishable Atman one sheds 
the love of the perishable body. Training in nonvio lence is thus diametrically 
opposed to training in violence. Violence is needed  for the protection of things 
external, nonviolence is needed for the protection of the Atman, for the 
protection of one’s honour.— H, I-9-40, 268.  
 
Non-possession  
51. If we are to be non-violent, we must then not w ish for anything on this 
earth which the meanest or the lowest of human bein gs cannot have. 
—Ceylon, 132.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  52. Possession implies provision for the future. A seeker after Truth, a follower 
of the law of Love cannot hold anything against tom orrow. God never stores for 
the morrow; He never creates more than what is stri ctly needed for the 
moment. If, therefore, we repose faith in His provi dence, we should rest 
assured that He will give us every day our daily br ead, meaning everything that 
we require. Perfect fulfillment of the ideal of Non -possession requires that man 
should, like the birds, have no roof over his head,  no clothing and no stock of 
food for the morrow. He will indeed need his daily bread, but it will be God’s 
business, and not his, to provide for it .- YM, 34.  
 
53. From the standpoint of pure Truth, the body too  is a possession. It has been 
truly said, that desire for enjoyment creates bodie s for the soul. When this 
desire vanishes, there remains no further need for the body, and man is free 
from the vicious cycle of births and deaths. The so ul is omnipresent; why 
should she care to be confined within the cage-like  body, or do evil and even 
kill for the sake of that cage? We thus arrive at t he ideal of total renunciation, 
and learn to use the body for the purposes of servi ce so long as it exists, so 
much so that service, and not bread, becomes with u s the staff of life. We eat 
and drink, sleep and wake, for service alone. Such an attitude of mind brings us 
real happiness and the beatific vision in the fulln ess of time. —YM, 37. 
 
54. Love and exclusive possession can never go toge ther. Theoretically when 
there is perfect love, there must be perfect non-po ssession. The body is our 
last possession. So a man can only exercise perfect  love and be completely 
dispossessed, if he is prepared to embrace death an d renounces his body for 
the sake of human service. 
But that is true in theory only. In actual life, we  can hardly exercise perfect 
love, for the body as a possession, will always rem ain with us. Man will ever 
remain imperfect, and it will always be his part to  try to be perfect. So that 
perfection in love or non-possession will remain an  unattainable ideal as long as Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  we are alive, but towards which we must ceaselessly  strive. –MR, 1935,412 
 
Voluntary Suffering for the sake of Love  
55. In the application of Satyagraha, I discovered in the earliest stages that 
pursuit of Truth did not admit of violence being in flicted on one’s opponent but 
that he must be weaned from error by patience and s ympathy. For What 
appears to be Truth to the one may appears to be er ror to another. And 
patience means self-suffering. So the doctrine came  to mean vindication off 
Truth, not by infliction of suffering on the oppone nt, but on one’s self. 
– YI, Nov.Tagore,6.  
 
56. The Satyagrahi seeks to convert his opponent by  sheer force of character 
and suffering. The purer he is and the more he suff ers the quicker the progress.  
–YI, I8-9-24, 306.  
 
57. The religion of ahimsa consists in allowing oth ers the maximum of 
convenience at the maximum of inconvenience to us, even at the risk of life.  
–YI, 2-12-26, 422 
 
58. It is no nonviolence if we merely love those th at love us. It is nonviolence 
only when we love those that hate us. I know how di fficult it is to follow this 
grand law of love. But are not all-great and good t hings difficult to do? Love of 
the hater is the most difficult of all. But by the grace of God even this most 
difficult thing becomes easy to accomplish if we wa nt to do it.  
– (From a private letter, dated 31-12-34.) 
 
59. I saw that nations like individuals could only be made through the agony of 
the Cross and in no other way. Joy comes not out of  infliction of pain on others 
but out of pain voluntarily borne by oneself. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23  — YI,31-12-31 , 418. 
 
60. Suffering, cheerfully endured, ceases to be suf fering and is transmuted into 
an ineffable joy.  
– YI, 13-10-21. 327. 
 
Purity  
61. To see the universal and all-pervading spirit o f Truth face to face one must 
be able to love the meanest of creation as oneself.  Identification with 
everything that lives is impossible without self-pu rification. God can never be 
realized by one who is not pure in heart.— Auto, 615.  
 
Self- restraint  
62. Sex urge is a fine and noble thing. There is no thing to be ashamed of in it. 
But it is meant only for the act of creation. Any o ther use of it is a sin against 
God and humanity. – H, 28-3-36, 53 . 
 
63. Although I have always been a conscientious wor ker, I can clearly recall the 
fact that this indulgence interfered with my work. It was the consciousness of 
this limitation that put me on the track of self-re straint. –H, 4-4-36, 61.  
 
64. A man, whose activities are wholly consecrated to the realization of Truth, 
which requires utter selflessness, can have no time  for the selfish purpose of 
begetting children and running a household. YM, -1– 4. cf. 600-607. 
 
God’s Grace essential for perfect Self-control  
65. Perfection or freedom from error comes only fro m grace. Without an 
unreserved surrender to His grace, complete mastery  over thought is 
impossible. This is the teaching of every great boo k in religion, and I am Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  realizing the truth of fit every moment of my striv ing after that perfect 
Brahmacharya. –Auto, 388 
 
But the Quest is Endless  
66. The goal ever recedes from us. The greater the progress the greater the 
recognition of our unworthiness. Satisfaction lies in the effort, not in the 
attainment. Full effort is full victory. –YI, 9-3-2 2, 141. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25   
03. FUNDAMENTAL BELIEFS AND IDEAS 
 
67. Abstract truth has no value unless it incarnate s in human beings who 
represent it by proving their readiness to die for it. –YI ,22-12-21, 424. 
 
Seeing Truth in Fragments  
68. Does not but God Himself appears to different i ndividuals in different 
aspects? Still we know that He is one. But Truth is  the right designation of God. 
Hence there is nothing wrong in everyone following Truth According to his 
lights. Indeed it is his duty to do so. Then if the re is a mistake on the part of 
anyone so following Truth, it will be automatically  set right. For the quest of 
Truth involves tapas—self-suffering, sometimes even  unto death. There can be 
no place in it for even a trace of self-interest. I n such selfless search for Truth 
nobody can lose his bearings for long. Directly he takes to the wrong path he 
stumbles, and is thus redirected to the right path.  –YM, 4. 
 
69. The golden rule of conduct, therefore, is mutua l toleration, seeing that we 
will never all think alike and we shall see Truth i n fragment and from different 
angles of vision. Conscience is not the same thing for all. Whilst, therefore, it is 
a good guide for individual conduct, imposition of that conduct upon all will be 
an insufferable interference with everybody’s freed om of conscience.* -YI, 23-
9-26, 334. 
 
70. Q. With regard to your Satyagraha doctrine, so far as I understand it, it 
involves the pursuit of Truth and in that 
*Rebutting the charge that he was undemocratic, Gan dhiji once wrote: ‘I have 
never been able to subscribe to the charge of obsti nacy or autocracy. On the 
contrary, I pride myself on my yielding nature in n on-vital matters. I detest 
autocracy. Valuing my freedom and independence I eq ually cherish them for Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  others. I have no desire to carry a single soul wit h me if I cannot appeal to his 
or her reason. My unconventionality I carry to the point of rejecting the divinity 
of the oldest Shastras if they cannot convince my r eason. But I have found by 
experience that, if I wish to live in society and s till retain my independence, I 
must limit the points of utter independence to matt ers of first rate importance. 
In all others which do not involve a departure from  one’s personal religion or 
moral code, one must yield to the majority.—YI, 14- 7-20 (from Ganesan’s 
edition Vol. I, p. 207). 
 
Pursuit you invite suffering on yourself and do not  cause violence to anybody 
else. 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. However honestly a man may strive in his search for Truth, his notions of 
Truth may be different from the notions of others. Who then is to determine 
the Truth? 
A. The individual himself would determine that 
Q. Different individuals would have different views  a to Truth. World that not 
lead to confusion? 
A. I do not think so. 
Q. Honestly striving after Truth is different in ev ery case? 
A. That is why the nonviolence part was a necessary  corollary. Without that 
there would be confusion and worse. – Tagore,29 
71.Courtesy towards opponents and eagerness to unde rstand their view-point is 
the ABC of nonviolence. –HS, 20-7-44 
 
72. The very insistence on. Truth has taught me to appreciate the beauty of 
compromise. It has often meant endangering my life and incurring the 
displeasure of friends. But Truth is hard as adaman t and tender as a blossom. –Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27  Auto, i84. 
 
Propagation of Truth  
73.Q. Should we not confine our pursuit of Truth to  ourselves and not press it 
upon the world, because we know that it is ultimate ly limited in character? 
A . You cannot so circumscribe Truth even if you tr y. Every expression of Truth 
has in it the seeds of propagation, even as the sun  cannot hide its light. –MR, 
I935, 413. 
 
74. Spiritual experiences are shared by us whether we wish it or not – by our 
lives. Not by our speech, which is a most imperfect  vehicle of experience. 
Spiritual experiences are deeper even than thought.  –Sabarmati, 1928, 19. 
 
His Conception of the Law of life  
75. I do dimly perceive that whilst everything arou nd me is ever changing, ever 
dying, there is underlying all that change a living  power that is changeless, that 
holds all together, that creates, dissolves and re- creates. That informing power 
or spirit is God. And since nothing else I see mere ly through the senses can or 
will persist, He alone is. 
And is this power benevolent or malevolent? I see i t as purely benevolent, for I 
can see that in the midst of death life persists, i n the midst of untruth truth 
persists, in the midst of darkness light persists. Hence I gather that God is Life, 
Truth, Light. He is Love. He is the supreme Good. – YI, 11-10-28, 340. 
 
76. Though there is repulsion enough in Nature, she  lives by attraction. Mutual 
love enables Nature to persist. Man does not live b y destruction. Self-love 
compels regard for others. Nations cohere because t here is mutual regard 
among individuals composing them. Some day we must extend the national law 
to the universe, even as we have extended the famil y law to form nations – a 
larger family. –YI, 2-3-22, 130. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28   
77. The fact that there are so many men still alive  in the world shows that it is 
based not on the force of arms but on the force of truth or love. Therefore, the 
greatest and most unimpeachable evidence of the suc cess of this force is to be 
found in the fact that, in spite of the wars of the  world, it still lives on. 
Thousands, indeed tens of thousands, depend for the ir existence on a very 
active working of this force. Little quarrels of mi llions of families in their daily 
lives disappear before the exercise of this force. Hundreds of nations live in 
peace. History dies not and cannot take note of thi s fact. History is really a 
record of every interruption of the even working of  the force of love or of the 
soul. Two brothers quarrel; one of them repents and  re-awakens the love that 
was lying dormant in him; the two again begin to li ve in peace; nobody takes 
note of this. But if the two brothers, through the intervention of solicitors or 
some other reason take up arms or go to law – which  is another form of the 
exhibition of brute force, their doings would be im mediately noticed in the 
press, they would be the talk of their neighbours a nd would probably go down 
to history. And what is true of families and commun ities is true of nations. 
There is no reason to believe that there is one law  for families and another for 
nations. History, then, is a record of an interrupt ion of the course of nature. 
Soul-force, being natural, is not noted in history.  –IHR, 45. 
 
His Philosophy of History  
78. I believe that the sum total of the energy of m ankind is not to bring us 
down but to lift us up, and that is the result of t he definite, if unconscious, 
working of the law of love. –YI, 12-.11-31, 355 
 
79. Human society is a ceaseless growth, an unfoldm ent in terms of spirituality. 
–YI,16-9-26, 324. 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  80. If we turn our eyes to the time of which histor y has any record down to our 
own time, we shall find that man has been steadily progressing towards ahimsa. 
Our remote ancestors were cannibals. Then came a ti me when they were fed 
up with cannibalism and they began to live on chase . Next came a stage when 
man was ashamed of leading the life of a wandering hunter. He therefore took 
to agriculture and depended principally on mother e arth for his food. Thus from 
being a nomad he settled down to civilized stable l ife, founded villages and 
towns, and from member of a family he became member  of a community and a 
nation. All these are signs of progressive ahimsa a nd diminishing Himsa. Had it 
been otherwise, the human species should have been extinct by now, even as 
many of the lower species have disappeared. 
Prophets and avatars have also taught the lesson of  ahimsa more or less. Not 
one of them has professed to teach Himsa. And how s hould it be otherwise? 
Himsa does not need to be taught. Man as animal is violent, but as Spirit is 
nonviolent. The moment he awakes to the Spirit with in, he cannot remain 
violent. Either he progresses towards ahimsa or rus hes to his doom. That is why 
the prophets and avatars have taught the lessons of  truth, harmony, 
brotherhood, justice, etc. – all attributes of ahim sa. 
And yet violence seems to persist, even to the exte nt of thinking people like 
the correspondent regarding it as the final weapon.  But as I have shown history 
and experience are against him. 
If we believe that mankind has steadily progressed towards ahimsa, it follows 
that it has to progress towards it still further. N othing in this world is static, 
everything is kinetic. If there id no progression, then there is inevitable 
retrogression. No one can remain without the eterna l cycle, unless it be God 
Himself. - H, 11-8-40, 245. 
 
Consequence of the Recognition of that Law  
81.I have found that life persists in the midst of destruction and therefore 
there must be a higher law than that of destruction . Only under that law would 
a well-ordered society be intelligible and life wor th living. And if that is the law Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  of life, we have to work it out in daily life. When ever there are jars, wherever 
you are confronted with an opponent conquer him wit h love in this crude 
manner I have worked it out in my life. That does n ot mean that all my 
difficulties are solved. Only I have found that thi s law of love has answered as 
the law of destruction has never done. 
It is not that I am incapable of anger, for instanc e, but I succeed on almost all 
occasions to keep my feelings under control. Whatev er may be the result, there 
is always fin me conscious struggle for following t he law of non-violence 
deliberately and ceaselessly. Such a struggle leave s one stronger for fit. The 
more I work at this law, the more I feel the deligh t in life, the delight in the 
scheme of the universe. It gives me a peace and a m eaning of the mysteries of 
nature that I have no power to describe. –YI, 1-10- 31, 286. 
 
82. When an appeal to man is made to copy or study nature, he is not invited to 
follow what the reptiles do or even the king of the  forest does. He has to study 
man’s nature at its best, i.e. I presume his regene rate nature, whatever it may 
be. Perhaps it requires considerable effort to know  what regenerate nature is. –
H, 4-4-36, 61 
 
83.Q. Why can’t see that whilst there is possession  it must be defended against 
all odds? Therefore your insistence that violence s hould be eschewed in all 
circumstances is utterly unworkable and absurd. I t hink nonviolence is possible 
only for select individuals. 
A. This question has been answered often enough in some form or other in 
these columns as also in those of Young  India. But it is an evergreen. I must 
answer it as often as it is put especially when it comes from an earnest seeker 
as this one does. I claim that even now, though the  social structure is not based 
on a conscious acceptance of nonviolence, all the w orld over mankind lives and 
men retain their possessions on the sufferance of o ne another. If they had not 
done so, only the fewest and the most ferocious wou ld have survived. But such 
is not the case. Families are bound together by tie s of love, and so are groups Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  in the so-called civilized society called nations. Only they do not recognize the 
supremacy of the law of nonviolence. It follows, th erefore, that they have not 
investigated its vast possibilities. Hitherto out o f sheer inertia, shall I say, we 
have taken it for granted that complete nonviolence  is possible only for the few 
who take the vow of non-possession and the allied a bstinences. Whilst it is true 
that the votaries alone can carry on research work and declare from time to 
time the new possibilities of the great eternal law  governing man, if it is a law, 
it must hold good for all. The many failures we see  are not of the law but of 
the followers, many of whom do not even know that t hey are under that law 
willy nilly. When a mother dies for her child she u nknowingly obeys the law. I 
have been pleading for the past fifty years for a c onscious acceptance of the 
law and its zealous practice even in the face of fa ilures. Fifty years work has 
shown marvelous results and strengthened my faith. I do claim that by constant 
practice we shall come to a state of things when la wful possession will 
command universal and voluntary respect. No doubt s uch possession will not be 
tainted. It will not be an insolent demonstration o f the inequalities that 
surround us everywhere. Nor need the problem of unj ust and unlawful 
possessions appall the votary of nonviolence. He ha s at his disposal the 
nonviolent weapon of satyagraha and non-co-operatio n which hitherto has been 
found to be a complete substitute of violence whene ver it has been applied 
honestly in sufficient measure. I have never claime d to present the complete 
science of nonviolence. It does not lend itself to such treatment. So far as I 
know no single physical science does not even the v ery exact science of 
mathematics. I am but a seeker and I have fellow se ekers like the questioner 
whom I invite to accompany me in the very difficult  but equally fascinating 
search. – H,22-2-42, 48. 
 
Life is Unity  
84. I claim that human mind or human society is not  divided into watertight 
compartments called social, political and religious . All act and react upon one 
another. 
—YI,2-3-22,131.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32   
85.I do not believe that the spiritual law works on  a field of its own. On the 
contrary, it expresses itself only through the ordi nary activities of life. It thus 
affects the economic, the social and the political fields. 
–YI, -3-9-25, 304.  
 
86. Several correspondents had complained to him th at he was utilizing his 
prayer meetings for the propagation of his favourit e political ideas. But the 
speaker never suffered from any feeling of guilt on  that account. Human life 
being and undivided whole, no line could ever be dr awn between its different 
compartments, nor between ethics and politics. A tr ader who earned his wealth 
by deception only succeeded in deceiving himself wh en he thought that his sins 
could be washed away by spending some amount of his  ill-gotten gains on so-
called religious purposes. One’s everyday life was never capable of being 
separated from his spiritual being. Both acted and reacted upon one another. 
–H, 30-3-47,85.  
 
Service to God and Man  
87. Man’s ultimate aim is the realization of God, a nd all his activities, social, 
political, religious, have to be guided by the ulti mate him aim of the vision of 
God. The immediate service of all human beings beco mes a necessary part of 
the endeavour, simply because the only way to find God is to see Him in His 
creation and be one with it. This can only be done by service of all. I am a part 
and parcel of the whole, and I cannot find Him apar t from the rest of humanity. 
My countrymen are my nearest neighbours. They have become so helpless, so 
resource less, so inert that I must concentrate mys elf on serving them. If I 
could persuade myself that I should find Him in a H imalayan cave I would 
proceed there immediately. But I know that I cannot  find Him apart from 
humanity. 
–H, 29-8-36, 226.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33   
88. My creed is service of God and therefore of hum anity. 
–YI, 23-I0-24, 350.  
 
89. To serve without desire is to favour not others , but ourselves, even as in 
discharging a debt we serve only ourselves, lighten  our burden and fulfill our 
duty. Again, not only the good, but all of us are b ound to place our resources at 
the disposal of humanity. The duty of renunciation differentiates mankind from 
the beast. 
–YM, 81.  
 
90. Man becomes great exactly in the degree in whic h he works for the welfare 
of his fellow-men. 
–ER, 56.  
 
The Oneness of Man  
91. I believe in absolute oneness of God and theref ore also of humanity. What 
though we have many bodies? We have but one soul. T he rays of the sun are 
many through refraction. But they have the same sou rce. 
–YI, 25-9-24, 313.  
 
92. I do not believe that an individual may gain sp iritually and those that 
surround him suffer. I believe in advaita. I believ e in the essential unity of man 
and for that matter of all that lives. Therefore I believe that if one man gains 
spiritually, the whole world gains with him and, if  one man falls, the whole 
world falls to that extent. 
–YI, 4-I2-24, 398.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34  93. There is not a single virtue which aims at, or is content with, the welfare of 
the individual alone. Conversely, there is not a si ngle moral offence which does 
not, directly or indirectly, affect many others bes ides the actual offender. 
Hence, whether an individual is good or bad is not merely his own concern, but 
really the concern of the whole community, nay of t he whole world. 
–ER, 55.  
 
94. I subscribe to the belief or the philosophy tha t all life in its essence is one, 
and that the humans are working consciously or unco nsciously towards the 
realization of that identity. This belief requires a living faith in a living God 
who is the ultimate arbiter of our fate. Without Hi m not a blade of grass 
moves. 
–GC,88.  
 
Individualism  
95. The individual is the supreme consideration. – YI, 13-11-24, 378.  
 
96. I look upon an increase of the power of the sta te with the greatest fear, 
because, although while apparently doing good by mi nimizing exploitation, it 
does the greatest harm to mankind by destroying ind ividuality which lies at the 
root of all progress. –MR,I935, 4I3.  
 
97. A small body of determined spirits fired by an unquenchable faith in their 
mission can alter the course of history. – H,19-11-38, 343 
 
Man above Institutions  
98. Man and his deed are two distinct things. It is  quite proper to resist and 
attack a system, but to resist and attack its autho r is tantamount to resisting 
and attacking oneself. For we are all tarred with t he same brush, and are Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35  children of one and the same Creator, and as such t he divine powers within us 
are infinite. To slight a single human being is to slight those divine powers, and 
thus to harm not only that being but with him the w hole world. – Auto, 337.  
 
99. I have discovered, that man is superior to the system he propounded. And 
so I fell, that Englishmen as individuals, are infi nitely better than the system 
they have evolved as a corporation. – YI, 13-7-21,22I. CF.  224.  
 
Faith in Man  
100. I refuse to suspect human nature. It will, is bound to respond to any noble 
and friendly action. 
–YI, 4-8-20, Tagore, 559.  
 
101. My proposal for British withdrawal is as much in Britain’s interest as 
India’s. Your difficulty arises from your disinclin ation to believe that Britain can 
never do justice voluntarily. My belief in the capa city of nonviolence rejects 
the theory of permanent inelasticity of human natur e. 
-H, 7-6-42, 177.  
 
102. In the application of the method of nonviolenc e, one must believe in the 
possibility of every person, however depraved, bein g reformed under humane 
and skilled treatment. 
–H, 22-2-42, 49.  
 
103. When I was a little child, there used to be tw o blind performers in Rajkot. 
One of them was a musician. When he played on his i nstrument, his fingers 
swept the strings with an unerring instinct and eve rybody listened spell-bound 
to his playing. Similarly there are chords in every  human heart. If we only know 
how to strike the right chord, we bring out the mus ic. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  —H, 27-5-39, 136.  
 
Reason and the Heart  
104.Every formula of every religion has in this age  of reason, to submit to the 
test of reason and universal assent. – YI, 26-2-25-, 74.  
 
105. Rationalists are admirable beings, rationalism  is a hideous monster when it 
claims for itself omnipotence. Attribution of omnip otence to reason is as bad a 
piece of idolatry as is worship of stock and stone believing it to be God. I plead 
not for the suppression of reason, but for a due re cognition of that in us which 
sanctifies reason. – YI, 14-10-26, 359.  
 
106. I have come to this fundamental conclusion tha t if you want something 
really important to be done, you must not merely sa tisfy reason, you must 
move the heart also. The appeal of reason is more t o the head but the 
penetration of the heart comes from suffering. It o pens up the inner 
understanding in man. 
- YI, 5-11-31, 341.  
 
107. But He is no God who merely satisfies the inte llect if He ever does. God to 
be God must rule the heart and transform it. YI, II-Io-28, 340.  
 
No room for Unintelligence any where  
108. Man alone can worship God with knowledge and u nderstanding. Where 
devotion to God is void of understanding, there can  be no true salvation, and 
without salvation there can be no true happiness. 
GH, I29.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37  109. Truth and nonviolence are not for the dense. P ursuit of them is bound to 
result in an all-round growth of the body, mind and  heart. If this does not 
follow, either truth and nonviolence are untrue or we are untrue, and since the 
former is impossible, the latter will be the only c onclusion. 
–H, 8-5-37, 98.  
 
110. You must know that a true practice of ahimsa m eans also in one who 
practices it the keenest intelligence and wide-awak e conscience. 
–H, 8-9-40, 274.  
 
111. Swaraj is for the awakened, not for the sleepy  and the ignorant. 
–H,  28-1-39, 437.  
 
112. In every branch of reform constant study givin g one a mastery over one’s 
subject is necessary. Ignorance is at the root of f ailures, partial or complete, of 
all reform movements whose merits are admitted, for  every project 
masquerading under the name of reform is not necess arily worthy of being so 
designated. 
–H, 24-4-37, 84.  
 
113. A handicraft plied merely mechanically can be as cramping to the mind 
and soul as any other pursuit taken up mechanically . An unintelligent effort is 
like a corpse from which the spirit has departed. 
–H,  3-7- 37, 161.  
 
Idealism  
114. The virtue of an ideal consists in its boundle ssness. But although religious 
ideals must thus from their very nature remain unat tainable by imperfect Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38  human beings, although by virtue of their boundless ness they may seem ever to 
recede farther and farther away from us, the nearer  we go to them, still they 
are closer to us than our very hands and feet becau se we are more certain of 
their reality and truth than even our own physical being. This faith in one’s 
ideals constitutes true life, in fact, it is man’s all in all.  
–YI, 22-11-28, 391.  
 
115. The goal ever recedes from us. The greater the  progress the greater the 
recognition of our unworthiness. Satisfaction lies in the effort, not in the 
attainment. Full effort is full victory.  
–YI, 9-3-22, 141.  
 
116. We need not be afraid of ideals or of reducing  them to practice to the 
uttermost.   
–Nat, 355.  
 
117. I was in the midst of a population which would  not kill wild animals that 
daily destroy their crops. Before the Sardar threw the whole of his tremendous 
influence into the campaign of the destruction of r ats and fleas, the people of 
the Borsad Taluka had not destroyed a single rat or  flea. (These were plague 
stricken—N.K.B.). But they could not resist the Sar dar to whom they owed 
much, and Dr. Bhaskar Patel was allowed to carry on  wholesale destruction of 
rats and fleas. I was in daily touch with what was going on in Borsad. 
The Sardar had invited me naturally to endorse what  had been done. For the 
work had still to continue, though henceforth with the people’s own unaided 
effort. Therefore, in order to emphasize my endorse ment, I redeclared in the 
clearest possible terms my implicit belief in ahims a, i.e. sacredness and kinship 
of all life. 
But why this contradiction between belief and actio n? Contradiction is 
undoubtedly there. Life is an aspiration. Its missi on is to strive after perfection Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  which is self-realization. The ideal must not be lo wered because of our 
weaknesses or imperfections. I am painfully conscio us of both in me. The silent 
cry goes out to Truth to help me to remove these we aknesses and imperfections 
of mine. I own my fear of snakes, scorpions, lions,  tigers, plague stricken rats 
and fleas, even as I must own fear of evil-looking robbers and murderers. I 
know that I ought not to fear any of them. But this  is no intellectual feat. It is a 
feat of the heart. It needs more than a heart of oa k to shed all fear except the 
fear of God. I could not in my weakness ask the peo ple of Borsad not to kill 
deadly rats and fleas. But I knew that it was a con cession to human weakness. 
Nevertheless there is that difference between a bel ief in ahimsa and a belief in 
himsa which there is between north and south, life and death. One who hooks 
his fortunes to ahimsa, the law of love, daily less ens the circle of destruction 
and to that extent promotes life and love; he who s wears by himsa, the law of 
hate, daily widens the circle of destruction and to  that extent promotes death 
and hate. Though, before the people of Borsad, I en dorsed the destruction of 
rats and fleas, my own kith and kin, I preached to them without adulteration 
the grand doctrine of the eternal Law of Love of al l Life. Though I may fail to 
carry it out to the full in this life, my faith in it shall abide. Every failure brings 
me nearer the realization. 
–H, 22-6-35, 148.  
 
The Age of Miracles  
118. It is open to anyone to say that human nature has not been known to rise 
to such height. But if we have made unexpected prog ress in physical sciences, 
why may we do less in the science of the soul? 
–H,  14-5-38, 114.  
 
119. In this age of wonders no one will say that a thing or idea is worthless 
because it is new. To way it is impossible because it is difficult, is again not in 
consonance with the spirit of the age. Things undre amt of are daily being seen, 
the impossible is ever becoming possible. We are co nstantly being astonished Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40  these days at the amazing discoveries in the field of violence. But I maintain 
that far more undreamt of and seemingly impossible discoveries will be made in 
the field of nonviolence. 
–H, 25-8-40, 260.  
 
Hatred can never yield Good  
120. Brute force has been the ruling factor in the world for thousands of years, 
and mankind has been reaping its bitter harvest all  along, as he who runs may 
read. There is little hope of anything good coming out of it in the future. If 
light can come out of darkness, then alone can love  emerge from hatred.  
– SA, 289.  
 
21. It is my firm conviction that nothing enduring can be built upon violence. 
–YI, 15-11-28, 381.  
 
Nonviolence  
122. (1) Nonviolence implies as complete self-purif ication as is humanly 
possible. 
(2) Man for man the strength of nonviolence is in e xact proportion to the 
ability, not the will, of the nonviolent person to inflict violence. 
(3) Non-violence is without exception superior to v iolence, i. e., the power at 
the disposal of a nonviolent person is always great er than he would have if he 
was violent. 
(4) There is no such thing as defeat in non-violenc e. The end of violence is 
surest defeat. 
(5) The ultimate end of nonviolence is surest victo ry if such a term may be used 
of nonviolence. In reality where there is no sense of defeat, there is no sense of 
victory.        – H, 12-10-35, 276.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41  123. The only condition of a successful use of this  force is a recognition of the 
existence of the soul as apart from the body and it s permanent nature. And this 
recognition must amount to a living faith and not m ere intellectual grasp.  
– Nat, I66.  
 
Consequences of Nonviolence  
124. Q. Is love or nonviolence compatible with poss ession or exploitation in any 
shape or from? 
A. Love and exclusive possession can never go toget her. –MR, I935, 4I2.  
 
125. Military force is inconsistent with soul-force . Frightfulness, exploitation of 
the weak, immoral gains, insatiable pursuit after e njoyments of the flesh are 
utterly inconsistent with soul-force.– YI, 6-5-26, 164.  
 
126. The principle of non-violence necessitates com plete abstention from 
exploitation in any form. –(27I) 
 
127. Rural economy as I have conceived it eschews e xploitation altogether, and 
exploitation is the essence of violence. – H, 4-11-39, 331.  
 
128. No man could be actively nonviolent and not ri se against social injustice 
no matter where it occurred. – H, 20-4-40, 97.  
 
Nonviolence always Applicable and in all Spheres of  Life  
129. Non-violence is a universal principle and its operation is not limited by a 
hostile environment. Indeed, its efficacy can be te sted only when it acts in the 
midst of and in spite of opposition. Our non-violen ce would be a hollow thing 
and nothing worth, if it depended for its success o n the goodwill of the 
authorities. (Here, reference is made to the Britis h Government in India).  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  - H, 12-11-38, 326.  
 
130. Truth and non-violence are no cloistered virtu es but applicable as much in 
the forum and the legislatures and the market place . –H 8-37,98.  
 
131. Some friends have told me that truth and nonvi olence have no place in 
politics and worldly affairs. I do not agree. I hav e no use for them as a means of 
individual salvation. Their introduction and applic ation in everyday life has 
been my experiment all along. – ABP, 30-6-44.  
 
132. We have to make truth and nonviolence, not mat ters for mere individual 
practice but for practice by groups and communities  and nations. That at any 
rate is my dream. I shall live and die in trying to  realize it. My faith helps me to 
discover new truths every day. Ahimsa is the attrib ute of the soul, and 
therefore, to be practiced by everybody in all the affairs of life. If it cannot be 
practical in all departments, it has no practical v alue.  H, 2-3-40, 23 
 
The Meaning of Non-resistance  
133. Hitherto the word ‘revolution’ has been connec ted with violence and has 
as such been condemned by established authority. Bu t the movement of Non-
co-operation, if it may be considered a revolution,  is not an armed revolt; it is 
an evolutionary revolution, it is a bloodless revol ution. The movement is a 
revolution of thought, of spirit. Non-co-operation is a process of purification, 
and, as such it constitutes a revolution in one’s i deas. Its suppression, 
therefore, would amount to co-operation by coercion . Orders to kill the 
movement will be orders to destroy, or interfere wi th, the introduction of the 
spinning wheel, to prohibit the campaign of tempera nce, and an incitement, 
therefore, to violence. For any attempt to compel p eople by indirect methods 
to war foreign clothes, to patronize drink-shops wo uld certainly exasperate 
them. But our success will be assured when we stand  even this exasperation Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43  and incitement. We must not retort. Inaction on our  part will kill Government 
madness. For violence flourishes on response, eithe r by submission to the will 
of the violator, or by counter violence. My strong advice to every worker is to 
segregate this evil Government by strict non-co-ope ration, not even to talk or 
speak about it, but having recognized the evil, to cease to pay homage to it by 
co-operation.- YI, 30-3-21, 97.  
 
134. Passive resistance is a method of securing rig hts by personal suffering; it is 
the reverse of resistance by arms. When I refuse to  do a thing that is repugnant 
to my conscience, I use soul-force. For instance, t he Government of the day has 
passed a law, which is applicable to me. I do not l ike it. If by using violence I 
force the Government to repeal the law, I am employ ing what may be termed 
body-force. If I do not obey the law and accept the  penalty for is breach, I use 
soul-force. It involves sacrifice of self. 
Everybody admits that sacrifice self is infinitely superior to sacrifice of other. 
Moreover, if this kind of force is used in a cause that is just, only the person 
using it suffers. He does not make others suffers f or his mistakes. Men have 
before now done many things which were subsequently  found to have been 
wrong. No man can claim that he is absolutely in th e right or that a particular 
thing is wrong because h thinks so, but it is wrong  for him so long as that is his 
deliberate judgment. It is therefore meet that he s hould not do that which he 
knows to be wrong, and suffer the consequence whate ver it may be. This is the 
key to the use of soul-force. – IHR, 45.  
 
135. The method of passive resistance adopted to co mbat the clearest and 
safest, because, if the cause is not true, it is th e resisters, and they alone, who 
suffer. –Nat, 305.  
 
136. That is the way of Satyagraha or the way of no n-resistance top evil. It is 
the aseptic method in which the physician allows th e poison to work itself out 
by setting in motion all the natural forces and let ting them have full play. *  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44  -H, 9-7-38, I73.  
 
137. I accept the interpretation of ahimsa, namely,  that it is not merely a 
negative state of harmlessness but it is a positive  state of love, of doing good 
even to the evil-doer. But it does not mean helping  the evil-doer to continue 
the wrong or tolerating it by passive acquiescence.  On the contrary, love the 
active state of ahimsa, requires you to resist the wrongdoer by dissociation 
yourself from him even though it may offend him or injure him physically.  
–YI, 25-8-20, Tagore, 322.  
 
138. In its negative form, it (ahimsa) means not in juring any living being 
whether by body or mind. It may not, therefore, hur t the person of any 
wrongdoer or bear any ill-will to him and so cause him mental suffering. The 
statement does not cover suffering caused to the wr ongdoer by natural acts of 
mine which do not proceed from ill-will. It, theref ore, does not prevent me 
from withdrawing from his presence a child whom he,  we shall imagine, is 
about to strike. Indeed, the proper practice of ahi msa requires me to withdraw 
the intended victim from the wrongdoer, if I am in any way the guardian of 
such a child. It was therefore most proper for the passive resisters of South 
Africa to have resisted the evil that the Union Gov ernment sought to do to 
them. They bore no ill-will to it. They showed this  by helping the Government 
whenever it needed their help. "Their resistance Co nsisted of disobedience of 
the orders of the Government even to the extent of suffering death at their 
hands." Ahimsa requires deliberate self-suffering, not a deliberate injury of the 
supposed wrongdoer. – Nat, 346  (from MR, Oct. 1916). 
 
139. If a man abused him, it would never do for him  to return the abuse. An 
evil returned by another evil only succeeded in mul tiplying it, instead of 
leading to its reduction. It was a universal law th at violence would never be 
quenched by superior violence but could only be que nched by non-violence or 
non-resistance. But the true meaning of non-resista nce had often been Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  misunderstood or even distorted. It never implied t hat a nonviolent man should 
bend before the violence of an aggressor. While not  returning the latter’s 
violence by violence, he should refuse to submit to  the latter’s illegitimate 
demand even to the point of death. That was the tru e meaning of non-
resistance. – H, 30-3-47, 85. 
 
Evolution and Revolution  
140. Q. Have you studied history and noted the prog ress of nations? Have you at 
all noted that progress is made by growth and gradu al development; and not by 
revolution and destruction? Do you ever notice how God works through nature 
that the life of plants and animals grows by slow a dvance, by evolution, not 
revolution? Do you ever watch the sky and the movem ent of the stars? The suns 
and systems which continue through the ages can sca rcely be seen to move at 
all. To ascend a mountain the climber has to take s low and painful steps one 
after another. To descend quickly he need only step  over the precipice and he 
is at the bottom in a few seconds. 
A. The nations have progressed both by evolution an d revolution. The one is as 
necessary as the other. Death, which is an eternal verity, is revolution as birth 
and after is slow and steady evolution. Death is as  necessary for man’s growth 
as life itself. God is the greatest Revolutionist t he world has ever known or will 
know. He seconds deluges. He sends storms where a m oment ago there was 
calm. He levels down mountains which. He builds wit h exquisite care and 
infinite patience. I do watch the sky and it fills me with awe and wonder. In the 
serene blue sky, both of India and England, I have seen clouds gathering and 
bursting with a fury which has struck me dumb. Hist ory is more a record of 
wonderful revolutions than the so-called ordered pr ogress no history more so 
than the English. And I beg to inform the correspon dent that I have seen people 
trudging slowly up mountains and have also seen men  shooting up the air 
through great heights. – YI, 2-2-22, 78.  
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46  Inward Freedom and Outward Expression  
141. The outward freedom that we shall attain will only be in exact proportion 
to the inward freedom to which we may have grown at  a given moment. And if 
this is the correct view of freedom, our, chief ene rgy must be concentrated 
upon achieving reform from within. – YI, 1-11-28, 363.  
 
142. The Devil succeeds only by receiving help from  his fellows. He always 
takes advantage of the weakest spots in our natures  in order to gain mastery 
over us. Even so does the Government retain control  over us through our 
weaknesses or vices. And if we could render ourselv es proof against its 
machinations, we must remove our weaknesses. It is for that reason that I have 
called Non-co-operation a process of purification. As soon as that process is 
completed, this Government must fall to pieces for want of the necessary 
environment, Just as mosquitoes cease to haunt a pl ace whose cesspools are 
filled up and dried. YI, 19-1-21, 21.  
 
The Nature of Swaraj and the Meaning of Freedom  
143. The first step to Swaraj lies in the individua l. The great truth: ‘As with the 
individual so with the universe’, is applicable her e as elsewhere. 
–Nat, 409.  
 
144. Government over self is the truest Swaraj, it is synonymous with mocha or 
salvation.  
–YI, 8-12-20, Tagore, 1099.  
 
145. Swaraj of a people means the sum total of the Swaraj (self-rule) of 
individuals. – H, 25-3-39, 64.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  146. Self-government depends entirely upon our own internal strength, upon 
our ability to fight against the heaviest odds. Ind eed, self-government which 
does not require that continuous striving to attain  it and to sustain it, is not 
worth the name. I have therefore endeavoured to sho w both in word and deed, 
that political self-government-that is self-governm ent for a large number of 
men and women,-is no better than individual self-go vernment. And therefore, 
it is to be attained by precisely the same means th at are required for individual 
self-government or self-rule. 
 
147. Evolution is always experimental. All progress  is gained through mistakes 
and their rectification. No good comes fully fashio ned, out of God’s hand, but 
has to be carved out through repeated experiments a nd repeated failures by 
ourselves. This is the law of individual growth. Th e same law controls social and 
political evolution also. The right to err, which m eans the freedom to try 
experiments, is the universal condition of all prog ress. – Ganesh (1921), 245.  
 
The End and The Means  
148. They say ‘means are after all means’. I would say ‘means are after all 
everything’. As the means so the end. Indeed the Cr eator has given us control 
(and that too very limited) over means, non over th e end. Realization of the 
goal is in exact proportion to that of the means. T here is a proposition that 
admits of no exception. – YI, 17-7-24, 236.  
 
149. The means may be likened to a seed, the end to  a tree; and there is just 
the same inviolable connection between the means an d the end as there is 
between the seed and the tree. – IHR, 39.  
 
150. One I said ‘In spinning wheel lies Swaraj’, ne xt I said ‘In prohibition lies 
Swaraj’. In the same way I would say in cent per ce nt swadeshi lies Swaraj lies Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48  Swaraj. Of course, it is like the blind men describ ing the elephant. All of them 
are right and yet not wholly right. – H, 28-9-34, 259.  
 
151. It seems that the attempt made to win Swaraj i s Swaraj itself. The faster 
we run towards it, the longer seems to be the dista nce to be traversed. The 
same is the case with all ideals. – Nat, 685.  
 
152. Though you l have emphasized the necessity of a clear statement of the 
goal, but having once determined it, I have never a ttached importance to its 
repetition. The clearest possible definition of the  goal and its appreciation 
would fail to take us there, if we do not know and utilize the means of 
achieving it. I have, therefore, concerned myself p rincipally with the 
conservation of the means and their progressive use . I know if we can take care 
of them attainment of the goal is assured, I feel t oo that our progress towards 
the goal is assured. I feel too that our progress t owards the goal will be in exact 
proportion to the purity of our means. 
This method may appear to be long, perhaps too long , but I am convinced that 
it is the shortest. 
 –ABP, 17-9-33.  
 
Rights and Duties  
153. The true source of rights is duty. If we all d ischarge our duties, rights will 
not be far to seek. If leaving duties unperformed w e run after rights, they will 
escape us like a will-o’-the-wisp. The more we purs ue them, the farther will 
they fly. The same teaching has been embodied by Kr ishna in the immortal 
words: ‘Action alone is thine. Leave thou the fruit  severely alone.’ Action is 
duty: fruit is the right.  
–YI. 8-1-25, 15.  
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49  The Greatest Good of All  
154. A votary of ahimsa cannot subscribe to the uti litarian formula (of the 
greatest god of the greatest number). He will striv e for the greatest good of all 
and die in the attempt to realize the ideal. He wil l therefore be willing to die, 
so that the others may live. He will serve himself with the rest, by himself 
dying. The greatest good of all inevitably includes  the good of the greatest 
number, and therefore, he and the utilitarian will converge in many points in 
their career but there does come a time when they m ust part company, and 
even work in opposite directions. The utilitarian t o be logical will never 
sacrifice himself. The absolutist will even sacrifi ce himself. 
–YI, 9-12-26, 432.  
 
True Civilization and Self-restraint  
155. Civilization, in the real sense of the term, c onsists not in the 
multiplication, but in the deliberate and voluntary  restriction of wants. This 
alone promotes real happiness and contentment, and increases the capacity for 
service. – YM, 36.  
 
156. Q. But some comforts may be necessary even for  man’s spiritual 
advancement. One could not advance himself by ident ifying himself with the 
discomfort land squalor of the villager. 
A. A certain degree of physical harmony and comfort  is necessary, but above 
that level, it becomes a hindrance instead of help.  Therefore the ideal of 
creating an unlimited number of wants and satisfyin g them seems to be a 
delusion and a snare. The satisfaction of one’s phy sical needs, even the 
intellectual needs of one’s narrow self, must meet at a point a dead stop, 
before it degenerates into physical and intellectua l voluptuousness. A man must 
arrange his physical and cultural circumstances so that they may not hinder him 
in his service of humanity, on which all his energi es should be concentrated.  
–H, -29-8-36, 226.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50   
157. As long as you derive inner help and comfort f rom anything, you should 
deep it. If you were to give it up in a mood of sel f-sacrifice or out of a stern 
sense of duty, you would continue to want it back, and that unsatisfied want 
would make trouble for you. Only give up a thing wh en you want some other 
condition so much that the thing no longer has any attraction for you or when it 
seems to interfere with that which is more greatly desired. –Vishva-Bharati 
Quarterly, New Series II, part II, 46. 
 
Economic Ideal  
158. Ideas derived by Gandhi from Ruskin’s Unto Thi s Last in the year 1904: 
(1) That the good of the individual is contained in  the good of all. 
(2) That a lawyer’s work has the same value as the barber’s, inasmuch as all l 
have the same right of earning their livelihood fro m their work. 
(3) That a life of labour, i. e. the life of the ti ller of the soil and the 
handicraftsman is the life worth living. 
-Auto, 365.r  
 
159. Every human being has a right to live, and the refore to find the 
wherewithal to feed himself and where necessary, to  clothe and house himself. 
–Nat, 350 (273).  
 
160. According to me the economic constitution of I ndia and for the matter of 
that of the world, should be such that no one under  it should suffer from want 
of food and clothing. In other words everybody shou ld be able to get sufficient 
work to enable him to make the two ends meet. And t his ideal can be 
universally realized only if the means of productio n of the elementary 
necessaries of life remain in the control of the ma sses. These should be freely 
available to all as God’s air and water are or ough t to be; they should not be Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51  made a vehicle of traffic for the exploitation of o thers. Their monopolization by 
any country, nation or group of persons would be un just. The neglect of this 
simple principle is the cause of the destitution th at we witness today not only 
in this unhappy land but in other parts of the worl d too.     – YI, 15-11-28, 381.  
 
161. Violence is no monopoly of any one party. I kn ow Congressmen who are 
neither socialists nor communists, but who are fran kly devotees of the cult of 
violence. Contrariwise, I know socialists and commu nists who will not hurt a fly 
but who believe in the universal ownership of the i nstruments of production, I 
rank myself as one among them. 
–H, 10-12-38, 366  
 
162. Q. Is it possible to defend by nonviolence any thing which can only be 
gained by violence? 
A. It followed from what he had said above that wha t was gained by violence 
could not only be defended by non-violence, but the  latter required the 
abandonment of ill-gotten gains. 
Q. Is the accumulation of capital possible except t hrough violence whether 
open or tacit? 
A. Such accumulation by private persons was impossi ble except through violent 
means, but accumulation by the State in a nonviolen t society, was not only 
possible, it was desirable and inevitable. 
Q. Whether a man accumulates material or moral weal th, he does so only 
through the help or co-operation of other members o f society. Has he then the 
moral right to use any of it mainly for personal ad vantage? 
A. The answer was an emphatic no. 
– H, 16-2-47, 25 (Corrected with reference to the original). 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52  163. If they were to prefer death to dishonour, the y had to have the heart of a 
fakir, not the fakir of old who went about with a s taff and a beggar’s bowl. 
That was time when there were rich and poor. Then t here was room for 
beggars. Society’s thought had advanced since, thou gh practice had not kept 
pace with thought. The society of the future was to  be a society in which there 
was to be no distinction between rich and poor. The n there was room for 
beggars. Society’s thought had advanced since, thou gh practice had not kept 
pace with thought. The society of the future was to  be a society in which there 
was to be a society in which there was to be no dis tinction between rich and 
poor, or colour and colour, or country and country.  –H, 3-11-46, 388.  
 
Economics and Morality  
164. That economics is untrue which ignores or disr egards moral values. The 
extension of the law of non- violence in the domain  of economics means 
nothing less than the introduction of moral values as a factor to be considered 
in regulating international commerce. – YI, 26-12-24, 421.  
 
165. True economics never militates against the hig hest ethical standard, just 
as all true ethics to be worth its name, must at th e same time be also good 
economics. An economics that inculcates Mammon wors hip, and enables the 
strong to amass wealth at the expense of the weak, is a false and dismal 
science. It spells death. True economics, on the ot her hand, stands for social 
justice, it promotes the good of all equally includ ing the weakest, and is 
indispensable for decent life. –H, 9-I0-37, 292.  
 
The Social Ideal  
166. I want to bring about an equalization of statu s. The working classes have 
all these centuries been isolated and relegated to a lower status. They have 
been shudras, and the word has been interpreted to mean and inferior status. I 
want to allow no differentiation between the son of  a weaver, of Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53  an agriculturist and of a schoolmaster. –H, 15-1-38 , 416. 
 
Political Ideal  
167. To me political power is not an end but one of  the means of enabling 
people to better their condition in every departmen t of life. Political power 
means capacity to regulate national life through na tional representatives. If 
national life becomes so perfect as to become self- regulated, no representation 
becomes necessary. There is then a state of enlight ened anarchy. In such a 
state everyone is his own ruler. He rules himself i n such a manner that he is 
never a hindrance to his neighbours. In the ideal s tate therefore, there is no 
political power because there is no State. But the ideal is never fully realized in 
life. Hence the classical statement of Thoreau that  that government is best 
which governs the least.* 
-YI, 2-7-31, 162.  
 
168. I look upon an increase in the power of the St ate with the greatest fear, 
because, although while apparently doing good by mi nimizing exploitation, it 
dies the greatest harm to mankind by destroying ind ividuality which lies at the 
root of all progress. 
*The statement that I had derived my idea of Civil Disobedience from the 
writings of Thoreau is wrong. The resistance to aut hority in South Africa was 
well advanced before I got the essay of Thoreau on Civil Disobedience. But the 
movement was then known as Passive Resistance. As i t was incomplete I had 
coined the word Satyagraha for the Gujarati readers . When I saw the title of 
Thoreau’s great essay, I began to use his phrase to  explain our struggle to the 
English readers. But I found that even Civil Disobe dience failed to convey the 
full meaning of the struggle. I, therefore, adopted  the phrase Civil Resistance. 
Nonviolence was always an integral part of our stru ggle. 
—(Letter to Kodanda Rao, quoted in Incidents in Gan dhiji’s Life edited by 
Chandrashankar Shukla,1949. P. 114-5). Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54   
The State represents violence in a concentrated and  organized form. The 
individual has a soul, but as the State is a soulle ss machine, it can never be 
weaned from violence to which it owes its very exis tence. 
It is my firm conviction that if the State suppress ed capitalism by violence, it 
will be caught in the coils of violence itself and fail to develop nonviolence at 
any time. 
What I would personally prefer, would be, not a cen tralization of power in the 
hands of the State but an extension of the sense of  trusteeship; as in my 
opinion, the violence of private ownership is less injurious than the violence of 
the State. However, if it is unavoidable, I would s upport a minimum of State-
owner-ship. 
What I disapprove of is an organization based on fo rce which a State is 
Voluntary organization there must be. – MR, 1935, 412.  
 
Democracy  
169. Let there be no manner of doubt that Swaraj es tablished by nonviolent 
means will be different in kind from the Swaraj tha t can be established by 
armed rebellion. – YI, 2-3-22, 130.  
 
170. Violent means will give violent Swaraj. That w ould be a menace to the 
world and India herself.  –YI, 17-7-24, 236. 
 
171. I hold that democracy cannot be evolved by for cible methods. The spirit of 
democracy cannot be imposed from without. It has to  come from within.  
–Sita, 982.  
 
172. I read Carlyle’s History of the French Revolut ion while I was in prison, and 
Pandit Jawaharlal has told me something about the R ussian Revolution. But it is Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55  my conviction that inasmuch as these struggles were  fought with the weapon of 
violence, they failed to realize the democratic ide al. In the democracy which I 
have envisaged, a democracy established by nonviole nce, there will be equal 
freedom for all. Everybody will be his own master. –GC, 173.  
 
173. I believe that true democracy can only be and outcome of nonviolence. 
The structure of a world federation can be raised o nly on a foundation of 
nonviolence, and violence will have to be totally g iven upon world affairs. 
–GC, 175.  
 
True National Independence  
174. I live for India’s freedom and would die for i t, because it is part of Truth. 
Only a free India can worship the true God. I work for India’s freedom because 
my swadeshi teaches me that being born in it and ha ving inherited her culture, 
I am fittest to serve her and she has a prior claim  to my service. But my 
patriotism is not exclusive; it is calculated not o nly not to hurt another nation 
but to benefit all in the true sense of the word. I ndia’s freedom as conceived 
by me can never be a menace to the world. 
–YI, 3-4-24, 109.  
 
175. We want freedom for our country, but not at th e expense or exploitation 
of others, not so as to degrade other countries. I do not want the freedom of 
India if it means the extinction of England or the disappearance of Englishmen. 
I want the freedom of my country so that other coun tries may learn something 
from my free country, so that the resources of my c ountry might be utilized for 
the benefit of mankind. Just as the cult of patriot ism teaches us today that the 
individual has to die for the district, the distric t for the province, and province 
for the country, even so, a country has to be free in order that it may die, if 
necessary, for the benefit of the world. My love th erefore of become free, that Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56  if need be, the whole country may die, so that the human races may live. There 
is no room for race-hatred there. Let that be our n ationalism. 
–IV, 170.  
 
The International Ideal  
176. My religion has no geographical limits. If I h ave a living faith in it, it will 
transcend my love for India herself. 
–YI, 11-8-20, Tagore, 714.  
 
177. Isolated independence is not the goal of the w orld States. It is voluntary 
interdependence. – YI, 17-7-24, 236.  
 
178. There is no limit to extending our services to  our neighbours across State-
made frontiers. God never made those frontiers. 
–YI, 31-12-31, 427.  
 
Freedom of the Self and of the Nation  
179. I do not realize that I am ‘staking a whole na tion for self-evolution’. For 
self-evolution is wholly consistent with a nation’s  evolution. A nation cannot 
advance without the units of which it is composed a dvancing, and conversely no 
individual can advance without the nation of which he is a part also advancing.  
–YI, 26-3-31, 50.  
 
180. The motto of the Gujarat Vidyapith is. It mean s: That is knowledge which 
is designed for salvation. On the principle that th e greater includes the less, 
national independence or material freedom is includ ed in the spiritual. The 
knowledge gained in educational institutions must t herefore at least teach the 
way and lead to such freedom. – YI, 20-3-30, 100.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57  His Own Mission  
181. I have not conceived my mission to be that of a knight-errant wandering 
everywhere to deliver people from difficult situati ons. My humble occupation 
has been to show people how they can solve their ow n difficulties. –H, 28-6-42, 
201. 
 
182. My work will be finished if I succeed in carry ing conviction to the human 
family, that every man or woman, however weak in bo dy, is the guardian of his 
or her self-respect and liberty. This defense avail s, though the whole world 
may be against the individual resister. -  HS, 6-8-44,  
 
Character of His Leadership  
183. You will see that my influence, great as it ma y appear to outsiders, is 
strictly limited. I may have considerable influence  to conduct a campaign for 
redress of popular grievances because people are re ady and need a helper. But, 
I have no influence to direct people’s energy in a channel in which they have no 
interest. —H,26-7-42, 242 . 
 
Why Politics?  
184. If I seem to take part in politics, it is only  because politics encircle us 
today like the coil of a snake from which one canno t get out, no matter how 
much one tries. I wish therefore to wrestle with th e snake. 
 –YI, 12-5-20, Tagore, 1069.  
 
185. My work of social reform was in no way less or  subordinate to political 
work. The fact is that when I saw that to a certain  extent my social work would 
be impossible without the help of p9olitical work, I took to the latter and only 
to the extent that it helped the former. I must the refore confess that work so 
social reform or self-purification of this nature i s a hundred times dearer to me 
than what is called purely political work. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58  –YI, 6-8-31, 203.  
 
186. My life is one indivisible whole, and all my a ctivities run into one another, 
and they all have their rise in my insatiable love of mankind. – H, 2-3-34, 24.  
 
A Practical Idealist  
187. In dealing with living entities the dry syllog istic method leads not only to 
bad logic but sometimes to fatal logic. For if you miss even a tiny factor-and 
you never have control over all the factors that en ter to be wrong. Therefore, 
you never reach the final truth, you only reach an approximation; and that too 
if you are extra careful in your dealings. 
—H, 14-8-37, 212.  
 
188. For me, the law of complete love is the law of  my being. Each time I fail, 
my effort shall be all the more determined for my f ailure. But I am not 
preaching that final law through the Congress or th e Khilafat. I know that any 
such attempt is foredoomed to failure. To expect a whole mass of men and 
women to obey that law all at once is not to know i t’s working. 
–YI, 9-3-22, 141.  
 
189. I adhere to the opinion that I did will to pre sent to the Congress 
nonviolence as an expedient. I could not have done otherwise, if I was to 
introduce it into politics. In South Africa too I i ntroduced it as an expedient. It 
was successful there because resisters were a small  number in a compact area 
and therefore easily controlled. Here we had number less persons scattered 
over a huge country. The result was that they could  not be easily controlled or 
trained. And yet it is a marvel the way they have r esponded. They might have 
responded much better and shown far better results.  But I have no sense of 
disappointment in me over the results obtained. If I had started with men who 
accepted nonviolence as a creed, I might have ended  with myself. Imperfect as Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59  I am, I started with imperfect men and women and sa iled on an uncharted 
ocean. Thank God, that though the boat has not reac hed its haven, it has 
proved fairly storm-proof. 
–H, 12-4-42, 116. 
 
190. God has blessed me with the mission to place n onviolence before the 
nation for adoption. For better or for worse the Co ngress, admittedly the most 
popular and powerful organization, has consistently  and to the best of its 
ability tried to act up to it. 
I hope the learned critic does not wish to suggest that as the Congress did not 
accept my position, I should have dissociated mysel f entirely from the Congress 
and refused to guide it. My association enables the  Congress to pursue the 
technique of corporate non-violent action. — H, 2-12-39, 357.  
 
191. I would not serve the cause of nonviolence, if  I deserted my best co-
workers because they could not follow me in an exte nded application of 
nonviolence. I therefore remain with them in the fa ith that their departure 
from the nonviolent method will be confined to the narrowest field and will be 
temporary. – H, 30-9-39, 289.  
 
Personal 
192. I lay claim to nothing exclusively divine in m e. I do not claim prophetship. 
I am but a humble seeker after Truth and bent upon finding It. I count no 
sacrifice too great for the sake of seeing God face  to face. The whole of my 
activity whether it may be called social, political , humanitarian or ethical is 
directed to that end. And as I know that God is fou nd more often in the lowliest 
of His creatures than in the high and mighty, I am struggling to reach the status 
of these. I cannot do so without their service. Hen ce my passion for the service 
of the suppressed classes. And as I cannot render t his service without entering Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60  politics, I find myself in them. Thus I am no maste r, I am but a struggling, 
erring, humble servant of India and there through, of humanity. 
–YI, 11-9-24, 298.  
 
193. I claim no perfection for myself. But I do cla im to be a passionate seeker 
after Truth, which is but another name for God. In the course of that search 
the discovery of nonviolence came to me. I its spre ad is my life mission. I have 
no interest in living except for the prosecution of  that mission. 
–H, 6-7-40, 185.  
 
194. I have been a willing slave to this most exact ing Master for more than half 
a century. l His voice has been increasingly audibl e as year as have rolled by. 
He has never forsaken me even in my darkest hour. H e has saved me often 
against myself and left me not a vestige of indepen dence. The greater the 
surrender to Him, the greater has been my joy. 
–H, 6-5-33, 4.  
 
195. Q. Are you happy? 
Ah! I can answer that question. I am perfectly happ y. 
Q. More happy than you were outside the village? 
A. I cannot say, for my happiness is not dependent on external circumstances. 
–H, 8-8-36, 201. 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61   
04. GOSPEL OF WORK 
 
The Sight of Poverty  
196. He then took me to an open space in the very s hadow of the hoary temple 
where were arranged in rows the famine-stricken peo ple. The life was ebbing 
away in them. They were living pictures of despair.  You could count every rib. 
You could see every artery. There was no muscle, no  flesh. Parched, crumpled 
skin and bone was all you could see. There was no l uster in their eyes. They 
seemed to want to die. They had no interest in anyt hing save the handful of 
rice they got. They would not work for money. For l ove, perhaps! It almost 
seemed that they would condescend to eat and live i f you would give them the 
handful of rice. It is the greatest tragedy I know torturing death. Theirs is an 
eternal compulsory fast. And as they break it occas ionally with rice, they seem 
to mock as for the life we live. - VI, 31-10-24, 35 7. 
 
197. True to his poetical instinct, the poet lives for the morrow and would have 
us do likewise. He presents to our admiring gaze th e beautiful picture of the 
birds early in the morning singing hymns of praise as they soar into the sky. 
These birds have had their day's food and soared wi th rested wings. The human 
bird under the Indian sky gets up weaker than when he pretended to retire. For 
millions it is an eternal vigil or an eternal tranc e. It is an indescribably painful 
state which has got to be experienced to be realize d. I have found it impossible 
to soothe suffering patients with a song from Kabir . The hungry millions ask for 
one poem-invigorating food. They cannot be given it  they must earn it. and 
they can earn only by the sweat of their brow. -VI, 13-10-21, 326.  
 
198. Imagine, therefore, what a calamity it must be  to have 300 million 
unemployed, several millions becoming degraded ever y day for want of 
employment, devoid of self-respect, devoid of faith  in God. I may as well place Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62  before the dog over there the message of God as bef ore those hungry millions 
who have no luster in their eyes and whose only God  is their bread. I can take 
before them a message of God only by taking the mes sage of sacred work 
before them. It is good enough to talk of God whils t we are sitting here after a 
nice breakfast and looking forward to a nicer lunch eon, but how am I to talk of 
God to the millions who have to go without two meal s a day? To them God can 
only appear as bread and butter.-VI, 15-10-31, 325.  
 
199. To a people famishing and idle, the only accep table form in which God can 
dare appear is work and promise of food as wages. -  VI, 13-10-21, 325. 
 
200. Hanuman tore open his heart and showed that th ere was nothing there but 
RAMANAMA. I have none of the power of Hanuman to te ar open my heart, but if 
any of you feel inclined to do it, I assure you, yo u will find nothing there but 
love for Rama whom I see face to face in the starvi ng millions of India.- VI, 24-
03-27, 93. 
 
No Question of Giving Alms but the Duty of Getting off Their Backs  
201. We should be ashamed of resting or having a sq uare meal so long as there 
is one able-bodied man or woman without work or foo d. 
-VI, 6-10-21, 314.  
 
202. My ahimsa would not tolerate the idea of givin g a free meal to a healthy 
person who has not worked for it in some honest way , and if I had the power, I 
would stop every sadavrata where free meals are giv en. It has degraded the 
nation and it has encouraged laziness, idleness, hy pocrisy and even crime. 
-VI, 13-8-25, 282. 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63  203. Do not say you will maintain the poor on chari ty. Only two classes of 
people are entitled to charity and no one else the Brahmans who possesses 
nothing and whose business it is to spread holy lea rning, and the cripple and 
the blind. The iniquitous system of giving doles to  the able-bodied idle is going 
on to our eternal shame and humiliation, and it is to wipe out that shame that I 
am going about with the message of the Charkha up a nd down the whole 
country.-VI, 24-2-27, 58. 
 
204. We may not be deceived by the wealth to be see n in the cities of India. It 
does not come from England or America. It comes fro m the blood of the 
poorest. There are said to be seven lakes of villag es in India. Some of them 
have simply been wiped out. No one has any record o f those thousands who 
have died of starvation and disease in Bengal, Karn ataka and elsewhere. The 
Government registers can give no idea of what the v illage folk are going 
through. But being a villager myself, I know the co ndition in the villages. I know 
village economics. I tell you that the pressure fro m the top crushes those at the 
bottom. 
All that is necessaries to get off their backs - AB P, 30-6-44, 
 
205. For the so-called Caste Hindus to serve the Ha rijans in a constructive 
manner is to get off their backs, to get down on th eir knees to them, to treat 
Harijan children as their own and Harijan men and w omen as blood brothers 
and sisters. It is almost a superhuman task and can not be done without Divine 
aid. But Divine aid comes largely through human age ncy, - H, 15-12-33, 3. 
 
206. 'Why should I, who have no need to work for fo od, spin?' may be the 
question asked. Because I am eating what does not b elong to me. I am living on 
the spoliation of my countrymen. Trace the course o f every price that finds its 
way into your pocket, and you will realize the trut h of what I write. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64  I must refuse to insult the naked by giving them cl othes they do not need, 
instead of giving them work which they sorely need.  I will not commit the sin of 
becoming their patron, but on learning that I had a ssisted in impoverishing 
them, I would give them neither crumbs nor cast-off  clothing, but the best of 
my food and clothes and associate myself with them in work. 
God created man to work for his food and said that those who ate without work 
were thieves.  YI, 13-10-21, 325 
 
The Gospel of Work  
207. Service is not possible unless it is rooted in  love or ahimsa. True love is 
boundless like the ocean and rising and swelling wi thin one spreads itself out 
and crossing all boundaries and frontiers envelopes  the whole world. This 
service is again impossible without bread labour, o therwise described in the 
Gita as Yajna. It is only when a man or woman has d one body labour for the 
sake of service that he or she has a right to live.  YI, 20-9-28, 320. 
 
208. All natural and necessary work is easy. Only i t requires constant practice 
to become perfect, and it needs plodding. Ability t o plod is Swaraj. It is yoga. 
Nor need the reader be frightened of the monotony. Monotony is the law of 
nature. Look at the monotonous manner in which the sun rises. And imagine the 
catastrophe that would befall the universe, if the sun became capricious and 
went in for a variety of pastime. Bur there is a mo notony that sustains and a 
monotony that kills. The monotony of necessary occu pations is exhilarating and 
life-giving. An artist never tires of his art. A sp inner who has mastered the art, 
will certainly be able to do sustained work without  fatigue. There is music 
about the spindle, which the practiced spinner catc hes without fail. And when 
India has monotonously worked away at turning out S waraj, she will have 
produced a thing of beauty, which will be a joy for ever. But it cannot be 
without the spinning wheel. Therefore, the best nat ional education for India is 
undoubtedly an intelligent handling of the spinning  wheel. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65  209.In the last issue I have endeavored to answer t he objections raised by the 
Poet against spinning as a sacrament to be performe d by all. I have done so in 
all humility and with the desire to convince the Po et and those who think like 
him. The reader will be interested in knowing that my belief is largely derived 
from the Bhagavad-Gita. I have quoted the relevant verses in the article itself. I 
give below Edwin Arnold's rendering of the verses f rom his Song Celestial for 
the benefit of those who do not read Sanskrit: 
Work is more excellent than idleness;  
    The body's life proceeds not, lacking work.  
There is a task of holiness to do,  
    Unlike world-binding toil, which bindeth not  
The faithful soul: such earthly duty does  
    Free from desire, and thou shalt well perform  
Thy heavenly purpose. Spake Prajapati  
    In the beginning, when all men were made,  
And, with mankind, the sacrifice-"Do this!  
    Work! Sacrifice! Increase and multiply  
With sacrifice! This shall be Kamadhuk,  
    Your 'Cow of Plenty', giving back her milk  
Of all abundance. Worship the gods thereby;  
    The gods shall yield ye grace. Those meats ye c rave  
The gods will grant to Labour, when it pays  
    Tithes in the altar-flame. But if one eats  
Fruits of the earth, rendering to kindly Heaven  
    No gift of toil, that thief steals from his wor ld."  
Who eat of food after their sacrifice  
    Are quit of fault, but they that spread a feast   
All for themselves, eat sin and drink of sin.  
    By food the living live; food comes of rain.  
And rain comes by the pious sacrifice,  
    And sacrifice is paid with tithes of toil;  
Thus action is of Brahma, who is One,  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66      The Only, All -pervading; at all times  
present in sacrifice. He that abstains  
    To help the rolling wheels of this great world,   
Glutting his idle sense, lives a lost life,  
    Shameful and vain. 
Work here undoubtedly refers to physical labour, an d work by way of sacrifice 
can only be work to be done by all for the common b enefit. Such work, such 
sacrifice can only be spinning. I do not wish to su ggest, that the author of the 
Diving Song had the spinning wheel in mind. He mere ly laid down a 
fundamental principle of conduct. And reading in an d applying it to India. I can 
only think of spinning as the fittest and most acce ptable sacrificial body labour. 
I cannot imagine anything nobler or more national t han that for, say, one hour 
in the day, we should all do the labour that the po or must do, and thus identify 
ourselves with them and through them with all manki nd. I cannot imagine 
better worship of God than that in his name I shoul d labour for poor even as 
they do. The spinning wheel spells a more equitable  distribution of the riches 
of the earth. - YI, 21-10-21, 329 
 
Bread Labour  
210. The law, that to live man must work, first cam e home to me upon reading 
Tolstoy's writing on Bread labour. But even before that I had begun to pay 
homage to it after reading Ruskin's Unto This Last.  The divine law, that man 
must earn his bread by labouring with his own hands , was first stressed by a 
Russian writer named T. M. Bondaref. Tolstoy advert ised it, and gave it wider 
publicity. In my view, the same principle has been set forth in the third chapter 
of the Gita, where we are told, that he who eats wi thout offering sacrifice, 
eats stolen food. Sacrifice here can only mean Brea d labour. 
Reason too leads us to an identical conclusion. How  can a man, who does not 
do body labour, have the right to eat? 'In the swea t of the thy brow shalt thou 
eat thy bread', says the Bible. A millionaire canno t carry on for long, and will 
soon get tired of his life, if he roles in his bed all day long, and is even helped Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67  to his food. He, therefore, induces hunger by exerc ise, and helps himself to the 
food he eats. If everyone, whether rich or poor, ha s thus to take exercise in 
some shake or forms, why should it not assume the f orm of productive, i.e., 
Bread labour? No one asks the cultivator to take br eathing exercise or to work 
his muscles. And more than 19th of humanity lives b y tilling the soil, how much 
happier, healthier, and more peaceful would the wor ld became, If the 
remaining tenth followed the example of the overwhe lming majority, at least 
to the extent of labouring enough for their food! A nd many hardships, 
connected with agriculture would be easily redresse d, if such people took a 
hand in it. Again individual distinction of rank wo uld be abolished, when 
everyone without exceptions acknowledged the obliga tion of Bread Labour. It is 
common to all the varna. There is a worldwide confl ict between capital and 
labour, and the poor envy the rich. If all work for  their bread, distinction of 
rank would be obliterated; the rich would still be there, but they would deem 
themselves only trustees of their properties, and w ould use it mainly in the 
public interest. 
Bread labour is a veritable blessing to one who wou ld observe Nonviolence, 
Worship Truth, and make the observance of Brahmacha rya a natural act. This 
labour can truly be related to agriculture alone. B ut at present at any rate, 
everybody is not in a position to take to it. A per son can therefore spin or 
weave, or take up carpentry or smithery, instead of  tilling the soil always 
regarding agriculture however to be the ideal. Ever yone must be his own 
scavenger. Evacuation is as necessary as eating; an d the best thing would be for 
everyone to dispose of his own waste. If this is im possible, each family should 
see to its own scavenging. I have felt for years, t hat there must be something 
radically; wring, where scavenging has been made th e concern of a separate 
class in society. We have no historical record of t he man, who first assigned the 
lowest status to this essential sanitary service. 
Whoever he was, he by no means did us a good. We sh ould, from our very 
childhood, have the idea impressed upon our minds t hat we are all scavengers, 
and the easiest way of doing so is, for everyone wh o has realized this, to Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68  commence Bread labour as a scavenger. Scavenging, t hus intelligently taken 
up, will help one to a true appreciation of the equ ality of man. -YM, 50, cf.291 
 
211. "Brahma created his people with the duty of sa crifice laid upon them and 
said, 'By this do you flourish. Let it be the fulfi ller of all your desires,'…He who 
eats without performing this sacrifice eats stolen bread," - thus says the Gita. 
'Earn thy bread by the sweat of thy brow,' says the  Bible. Sacrifices may be of 
many kinds. One of them may well be Bread labour. I f all laboured for their 
bread and no more, then there would be no cry of ov er-population, no disease 
and no such misery as we see around. Such labour wi ll be the highest form of 
sacrifice. Men will no doubt do many other things e ither through their bodies or 
through their minds, but all this will be labour of  love for the common good. 
There will then be no rich and no poor, none high a nd none low, no touchable 
and no untouchable. 
This may be an unattainable ideal. But we need not,  therefore, cease to strive 
for it. Even if without fulfilling the whole law of  sacrifice, that is, the law of 
our being, we performed physical labour enough for our daily bread, we should 
go a long way towards the ideal. 
If we did so, our wants would be minimized, our foo d would be simple. We 
should then eat to live, not live to eat. Let anyon e who doubts the accuracy of 
this proposition try to sweat for his bread, he wil l derive the greatest relish 
from the productions of his labour, improve his hea lth and discover that many 
things he took were superfluities. 
May not men earn their bread by intellectual labour ? No. The needs of the body 
must be supplied by the body. 'Render unto Caesar t hat which is Caesar's' 
perhaps applies here well. 
Mere mental, that is, intellectual labour is for th e soul and is its own 
satisfaction. It should never demand payment. In th e ideal state, doctors, 
lawyers and the like will work solely for the benef it of society, not for self. 
Obedience to law of Bread labour will bring about a  silent revolution in the 
structure of society. Men's triumph will consist in  substituting the struggle for Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69  existence by the struggle for mutual service. The l aw of the brute will be 
replaced by the law of man. 
Return to the villages means a definite voluntary r ecognition of the duty of 
Bread labour and all it connotes. But says the crit ic, 'Millions of India's children 
are today living in the villages and yet they are l iving a life of semi-starvation.' 
This, alas! is but too true. Fortunately we know th at theirs is not voluntary 
obedience. They would perhaps shirk body labour if they could, and even rush 
to the nearest city if they could be accommodated i n it. Compulsory obedience 
to a master is state o slavery; willing obedience t o one's father is the glory of 
sonship. Similarly compulsory obedience to the law of Bread labour breeds 
poverty, disease and discontent. It is a state of s lavery. Willing obedience to it 
must bring contentment and health. And it is health , which is real wealth, not 
pieces of silver and gold. The village industries A ssociation is an experiment in 
willing Bread labour. 
 
212.(Addressed to the students of the Benares Hindu  University) 
Panditji has collected and has been still collectin g lakhs and lakhs of rupees for 
you from Rajas and Maharajas. The money apparently comes from these 
wealthy Princes, but in reality it comes from the m illions of our poor. For 
unlike Europe, the rich of our land grow rich at th e expense of our villagers the 
bulk of whom have to go without a square meal a day . The education that you 
receive today is thus paid for by the starving vill agers who will never have the 
chance of such an education. It is your duty to ref use to have an education that 
is not within reach of the poor; but I do not ask t hat of you today. I ask you to 
render a slight return to the poor by doing a littl e yajna for them. For he who 
eats without doing his yajna steals his food, says the Gita. The yajna of our age 
and for us is the spinning wheel. Day in and day ou t I have been talking about 
it, writing about it.  YI, 20-1-27,22. cf,697 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70  Intellectual and Manual Labour  
213. Q. Why should we insist on a Rabindranath or R aman earning his bread by 
manual labour? Is it not sheer wastage? Why should not brainworkers be 
considered on a par with manual workers, for both o f them perform useful 
social work? 
A. Intellectual work is important and has an undoub ted place in the scheme of 
life. But what I insist on is the necessity of phys ical labour. No man, I claim, 
ought to be free from that obligation. It will serv e to improve even the quality 
of his intellectual output. I venture to say that i n ancient times Brahmans 
worked with their body as with their mind. But even  if they did not, body 
labour was a proved necessity at the present time. In this connection I would 
refer to the life of Tolstoy and how he made famous  the theory of Bread labour 
first propounded in his country by the Russian peas ant Bondaref. H, 23-2-47, 36 
 
214. Q. You have always been against charity and ha ve preached the doctrine 
that no man is free from the obligation of Bread la bour. What is your advice for 
people who are engaged in sedentary occupations, bu t who lost there all in the 
last riots (at Noakhali)? Should they migrate and t ry to find a place where they 
can go back to their old accustomed habits of life,  or should they try to 
remodel their life in conformity with your ideal of  Bread labour for everybody? 
What use shall their special talents be in that cas e ? 
A. In reply Gandhiji said that it was true that for  years he had been against 
charity as it was understood and for years he had p reached the duty of Bread 
labour. In this connection he mentioned the visit h e had received from the 
District Magistrate and Zaman Saheb along with a po lice officer. They wanted 
his opinion about giving doles to the refugees. The y had already decided to put 
before them the work of the removal of water hyacin th, the repair of roads, 
village's reconstruction or straightening out their  own plots of land or building 
on their land. Those who did any of these things ha d a perfect right to rations. 
He said that he liked the idea. But as a practical idealist he would not take the 
refugees by storm. A variety of works should be put  before the people and they Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71  should have one month's notice that if they made no  choice of the occupations 
suggested nor did they suggest some other acceptabl e occupation but declined 
to do any work though their bodies were fit, they w ould be reluctantly obliged 
to tell the refugees that they would not be able to  give them doles after the 
expiry of the noticed. He advised the refugees and their friends to render full 
co-operation to the Government in such a scheme of work. It was wrong for any 
citizen to expect rations without doing some physic al work. 
 
215. The economics of Bread labour were the living way of life. It meant that 
every man had to labour with his body for his food and clothing. If he could 
convince the people of the value and necessity of B read labour, there would 
never be any want of bread and cloth. He would have  no hesitation in saying to 
the people with confidence that they must starve an d go naked if they would 
neither work on the land nor spin and weave. They r ead in the papers that the 
whole of India was on the brink of starvation and n akedness. If his plan were 
accepted, they would soon find that India had enoug h food and enough Khadi, 
which the masses would produce for themselves. No d oubt, they should be 
assisted in the matter of using the land wisely and  should also be supplied with 
spinning and weaving accessories and instructors. H e added that he had not 
hesitated even to discuss his method with Mr. Casey  (the Governor of Bengal) 
who was taking keen interest in the water supply of  Bengal. No doubt, Mr. 
Casey's was a gigantic scheme requiring years and t ons of money. His was an 
efficient by unambiguous and inexpensive programme .H, 7- 9-47, 316 
 
The Spinning Wheel  
216. There is, on the face of the earth, no other c ountry that has the problem 
that India has of chronic starvation and slow death -a process of 
dehumanization. The solution must therefore be orig inal. In trying to find it, we 
must discover the cause of the tremendous tragedy. These people are starving 
because there is chronic famine, due to floods or w ant of rains. They have no 
other occupation to fall back upon. They are theref ore constantly idle. This Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72  idleness has persisted for so long that it has beco me a habit with them. 
Starvation and idleness are the normal condition of  life for thousands of 
people. We may find remedies to prevent floods. Tha t will take years. We may 
induce people to adopt better methods of cultivatio n. That must take still more 
years. And when we have stopped inundations and hav e introduced among 
millions up-to-date cultivation, there will still b e plenty of time left with the 
peasants if they will only work. But these improvem ents will take generations. 
How are all the starving millions to keep the wolf from the door meanwhile? 
The answer is through the spinning wheel. 
- YI, 31-10-24, 357  
 
217. The only question therefore that a lover of In dia and humanity has to 
address himself to is how best to devise practical means of alleviating India's 
wretchedness and misery. No scheme of irrigation or  other agricultural 
improvement that human ingenuity can conceive can d eal with the vastly 
scattered population of India or provide work for m asses of mankind who are 
constantly thrown out of employment. Imagine a nati on working only five hours 
a day on an average, and this not by choice but by force of circumstances, and 
you have a realistic picture of India. 
-YI, 3-11-21, 350. 
 
218.    At one time our national economics was this  that just as we produced 
our own corn and consumed it, so did we produce our  own cotton, spin it in our 
homes and wear the clothes woven by our weavers fro m our own yarn. The first 
part of this description is still true while the la tter part has almost ceased to 
hold good. A man generally spends upon his clothing  a tenth of what he spends 
upon his food; hence instead of distributing ten pe rcent of our income among 
ourselves, we send it to England or to our own mill s. That means that we lose 
so much labour, and in the bargain spend money on o ur clothing and 
consequently suffer a twofold loss. The result is t hat we stint ourselves in the 
matter of food in order to be able to spend on clot hing, and sink to greater Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73  misery day by day. We are bound to perish if the tw in industries of agriculture 
and spinning as well as weaving disappear from our homes or our villages. 
- YI, 8-1-25, 11  
 
219. Revival of the cottage industry, and not cotta ge industries, will remove 
the growing poverty. When once we have revived the one industry, all the 
other industries will follow. I would make the spin ning wheel the foundation on 
which to build a sound village life; I would make t he wheel the centre round 
which all other activities will revolve. 
220. The Charkha is a useful and indispensable arti cle for every home. It is the 
symbol of the nation's prosperity and therefore fre edom. It is a symbol not of 
commercial war but the nations of the earth but of goodwill and self-help. It 
will not need a navy threatening a world's peace an d exploiting, its resources; 
but it needs the religious determination of million s to spin their yarn in their 
own homes as today they cook their food in their ow n homes. 
YI, 8-12-21, 406.  
 
Spinning as a Supplementary Industry  
22. Hand-spinning does not, it is not intended that  it should, compete with, in 
order to displace, any existing type of industry; i t does not aim at withdrawing 
a single able-bodied person, who can otherwise find  a remunerative occupation 
from his work. The sole claim advanced on its behal f's is that it alone offers an 
immediate, practicable, and permanent solution of t hat problem of problems 
that confronts India, viz. the enforced idleness fo r nearly six months in the year 
of an overwhelming majority of India's population, owing to lack of a suitable 
supplementary occupation to agriculture and the chr onic starvation of the 
masses that results there from.  YI, 21-10-26, 368.  
 
222. I have not contemplated, much less advised, th e abandonment of a single 
healthy, life-giving industrial activity for the sa ke of hand-spinning. The entire Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74  foundation of the spinning wheel rests on the fact that there are crores of 
semi-employed people in India. And I should admit t hat if there were none 
such, there would be no room for the spinning wheel . YI, 27-5-26,191.  
 
223. The spinning wheel is not meant to oust a sing le man or woman from his or 
her occupation. It seeks only to harness every sing le idle minute of our millions 
for common productive work. YI,23-1-30, 30.  
 
224. But I cannot be satisfied, not till every man and woman in India is working 
at his or at her wheel. Burn that wheel if you find  a better substitute. This is 
the one and only work which can supply the needs of  the millions without 
disturbing them from their homes. 
After all, a lip-profession of faith in the Charkha  and the throwing of a few 
rupees at me in a patronizing manner won't bring Sw araj and won't solve the 
problem of the ever-deepening poverty of the toilin g and starving millions. I 
want to correct myself. I have said toiling million s. I wish that it was a true 
description. Unfortunately, as we have not revised our tastes about clothing, 
we have made it impossible for these starving milli ons to toil throughout the 
year. We have imposed upon them a vacation, which t hey do not need, for at 
least four months in the year. This is not a figmen t of my imagination, but it is 
a truth repeated by many English administrators, if  you reject the testimony of 
your own countrymen who have moved in the midst of these masses. So then if 
I take this purse away and distribute it amongst th e starving sisters, it does not 
solve the question. On the contrary it will impover ish their soul. They will 
become beggars and get into the habit of living upo n charity. 
Heaven help the man, the woman or the nation that l earns to live on charity. 
What you and I want to do is to provide work for th ose sisters of ours living 
protected in their own homes, and this is the only work that you can provide 
them with. It is dignified and honest work, and it is good enough work. One 
anna may mean nothing to you. You will throw it awa y in getting into a tram 
car and lazily passing your time instead of taking exercise for 2,3,4 or 5 miles Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75  as the case may be. But when it finds its way into the pocket of one poor sister 
it fructifies. She labours for it and she gives me the beautiful yarn spun by her 
sacred hands, a yarn that has a history behind it. It is a thread worth weaving a 
garment our for princes and potentates. A piece of calico has no such history 
behind it. I must not detain you over this one them e, great as it is for me, and 
though it engrosses practically the whole of my tim e. YI,15-9-27, 313.  
 
Its Organizational Aspect  
225. Khadi gives work to all, mill cloth gives work  to some and deprives many of 
honest labour. Khadi serves the masses, mill cloth is intended to serve the 
classes. Khadi serves labour, mill cloth exploits i t. 
- H,10-4-27, 313.  
 
226. Organization of Khaddar is infinitely better t han co-operative societies or 
any other form of village organization. It is fraug ht with the highest political 
consequence, because it removes the greatest immora l temptation from 
Britain's way. I call the Lancashire trade immoral,  because it was raised and is 
sustained on the ruin of millions of India's peasan ts. And as one immorality 
leads to another, the many roved immoral acts of Br itain are traceable to this 
one immoral traffic. If, therefore, this one great temptation is removed from 
Britain's path by India's voluntary effort, it woul d be good for India, good for 
Britain and , as Britain is today the predominant w orld-power, good even for 
humanity. 
- YI, 26-12-24,420.  
 
227. A starving man thinks first of satisfying his hunger before anything else. He 
will sell his liberty and all for the sake of getti ng a morsel of food. Such is the 
position of millions of the people of India. For th em, liberty, God and all such 
words are merely letters put together without the s lightest meaning. They jar 
upon them. If we want to give these people a sense of freedom we shall have Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76  to provide them with work which they can easily do in their desolate home and 
which would give them least the barest living. This  can only be done by the 
spinning wheel. And when they have become self-reli ant and are able to 
support themselves, we are in a position to talk to  them about freedom, about 
Congress etc, Those, therefore, who bring them work  and means of getting a 
crust of bread will be their deliverers and will be  also the people who will make 
them hunger for liberty. Hence the political value of the spinning wheel, apart 
from its further ability to displace foreign cloth and thus remove the greatest 
temptation in the way of Englishmen to hold India e ven at the risk of having to 
repeat the Jallianwala massacre times without numbe r. 
- YI, 18-3-26, 105.  
 
228. It would necessitate the closest contact of wo rkers with the masses and 
thus make them one with the people. If successful, it would result in total 
elimination of foreign cloth, thus reducing, if not  altogether destroying, the 
poisonous influence of foreign capital upon the sys tem of Government 
prevailing in India. This is its very important pol itical result. 
- YI,5-5-27, 148.  
 
229. Before the educated classes, I do not place th e economic aspect of the 
spinning wheel. I simply want them to realize the s piritual aspect of the thing. 
By spinning and wearing Khadi alone, they will expr ess their sympathy for the 
poor. But for the poor the economic is the spiritua l. You cannot make any other 
appeal to those starving millions. 
- YI,5-5-27,142.  
 
Does It Mean Going Back?  
230. Many people think that in advocating khadi I a m sailing against a head 
wind and am sure to sink the ship of Swaraj, that I  am taking the country to the 
dark ages. I do not propose to argue the case of Kh adi in this brief survey. Bur (I Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77  want to repeat that) it connotes the beginning of e conomic freedom and 
equality of all in the country.  CP,7.  
 
231. Mediaeval times may have been bad ,but I am no t prepared to condemn 
things simply because they are mediaeval. The spinn ing wheel is undoubtedly 
mediaeval, but it seems to have come to stay. thoug h this article is the same, 
it has become a symbol of freedom and unity as at o ne time, after the advent 
of the East India Company, it had become the symbol  of slavery. Modern India 
has found in it a deeper and deeper and truer meani ng than our forefathers had 
dreamt of. Even so, if the handicrafts were once sy mbols of factory labour, may 
they now be symbols and vehicles of education in th e fullest and truest sense of 
the term. H, 16-10-37, 300 
 
Khadi Not a Commercial Concern  
232. Everyone should realize that it is wrong to co nsider Khadi as merely a 
means of livelihood. If it were only an industry it  ought to be run on 
commercial lines. The mills provide livelihood to t housands, if not lakhs, in one 
city. Through Khadi we put crores or rupees into th e pockets of 15,000 villages. 
That the case for the use of Khadi to the exclusion  of mill cloth loses much of 
its force. And the claim of Khadi as a means of att aining Swaraj also falls to the 
ground. But the ideal of Khadi has always been as a  means, par excellence, for 
the resuscitation of villages and there through the  generation of real strength 
among the masses the strength that will ipso facto bring Swaraj. 
It is not proper that the relief rendered to villag es should rest on the 
sentiments of townsfolk. We have to awaken villager s themselves and make 
them capable of tackling their own problems and for ging ahead through their 
own strength. Multiplication of mills will certainl y provide cloth for people and 
if there is proper governmental control of prices, it will be sufficiently cheap 
too. That will save people from exploitation and en sure decent wages also for 
the mill hands. But the special claim for Khadi is that it is an unrivalled means Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78  for rescuing the masses from the idleness and inert ia in which they are today 
plunged and for creating in them the necessary stre ngth for winning through. 
Q. Did our claim amount to this, that Khadi can pro vide a supplementary means 
of livelihood to those who remain idle for so many months in the year? 
A. That is so, of course, but it did not stop there . It was claimed that Swaraj 
hung on the yarn of the spinning whee l. STC,8.  
 
233. It will not produce the slightest impression o n me if the figures for Khadi 
production were to shoot up from two to four lakhs.  If that were to happen, it 
would only prove that Khadi is a blessing to the po or. But then why have a 
country-wide organization like the A.I.S.A. merely for the purpose? Economic 
relief to the poor by itself cannot bring Swaraj. I  go so far as to say that even if 
poor-relief Khadi disappears in the face of Khadi f or Swaraj, the poor will not 
be losers, because it will be possible to provide b read for the poor through 
other means. The pride of Khadi consists in subserv ing the ideal of Swaraj as 
well as helping the poor. For, only in such Swaraj can the poor really come to 
their own. 
Q. We shall have to discontinue the large-scale sal es of Khadi in vogue in the 
cities, if the prospective purchasers are to be ask ed to spin for it. This will 
mean, in the first instance, large-scale closing do wn of bhandars. 
A. Your objection is probably substantial from the commercial point of view. 
The masses today are steeped in poverty. They will do anything they are asked 
to. But unless their activity is directed by full u nderstanding, we shall deceive 
them and ourselves to the bargain. The employment w e give to spinners and 
weavers today is almost on a par with doles distrib uted during times of famine 
or distress against such occupations as breaking of  stones, building of roads, 
etc., which has no permanent value.  STC, 15.  
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79   
Relation between the New Scheme of Khadi, Swaraj an d Non-violence  
234. My experience tells me that in order to make K hadi universal both in the 
cities and villages, it should be made available on ly in exchange for yarn. Today 
a mere one anna's worth in the rupee is demanded. B ut this must be for the 
initial stages only. When people have understood th e meaning of new rule and 
learnt how to spin, then Khadi should be procurable  only in full exchange for 
hand-spun yarn. As time passes I hope people will t hemselves insist on buying 
Khadi through yarn currency. It, however, this does  not happen and they 
produce yarn grudgingly, I fear Swaraj through non- violence will be impossible. 
One of the strongest arguments advanced against the  new system is that if the 
city folk produce their own yarn, even the little t hat is being done by the Sangh 
for the poor will vanish and the hope of seeing vil lagers clad in home-spun will 
remain a dream. Suppose for argument's sake, that c ity people give up wearing 
Khadi either through anger or laziness and villager s, for consequent lack of 
wages, cease to spin and weave, what great loss acc rues? The poor will seek 
out other occupation and somehow or other eke out a  living. Indeed lakhs are 
doing so today but the analogy cannot affect crores . Those engaged in bidi-
making today earn four times as much as, or even mo re than, the spinners. 
Many mill laborers have become rich. it follows the n that those who are 
starving today will starve unto death and the few w ho are able to make money 
will exploit the rest. An increase in the number of  mills and cities will certainly 
not contribute to the prosperity of India's million s. On the contrary, it will bring 
further poverty to the unemployed and all the disea ses that follow in the wake 
of starvation. If town-dwellers can look upon such spectacle worth equanimity 
there is nothing more to be said. In such an event it will be the reign of 
violence in India, not a reign of Truth and ahimsa.  And we shall be forced to 
admit that there is naturally no room there for Kha di. Military training will then 
have to be compulsory for all. But we must only thi nk in terms of the starving 
crores. It they are to be restored, if they are to live, then the Charkha must be 
made the central activity and people must spin volu ntarily. The weapon of non-
violence may not, however, be taken up because ther e is no alternative to it. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80  There must be faith in it. The rule of yarn for the  purchase of Khadi must not 
only come into force but must increase in its appli cation. If, on account of it, 
the existing bhandars have to close down and Khadi wearers give up Khadi, it 
will still be a triumph for Truth because it will b e clear that people had no real 
faith in non-violence and that they wore Khadi out of ignorance and deceived 
themselves into thinking that thereby they would ob tain Swaraj. When I know 
that such Khadi will never obtain Swaraj and even i f Swaraj is attained it will 
immediately be discarded, how can I allow people to  continue to deceive 
themselves? In that case the prophecy of the late S hri Chintamani will come 
true that on Gandhiji's death people will dislike h im and his spinning wheel to 
such an extent that they will throw out Charkhas fr om their homes to make his 
funeral pyre. If hand-spun yarn is not in fact a sy mbol of non-violence then I 
should retrieve my error during my lifetime and sav e, at any rate, the wood of 
the Charkhas. But I do not believe in the truth of that prophecy. People have 
understood that the crores of India cannot win free dom through violence. India 
occupies a very great position in the world. she ca n become still greater. But 
she can only do so through non-violence. If India's  crores wish to demonstrate 
the workability of nonviolence they can only do so by making the Charkha their 
central activity. And as the desire for freedom is even stronger amongst city 
people, it becomes their bounden duty to understand  this truth and take to 
spinning and Khadi-wearing in earnest for their att ainment of non-violent 
Swaraj. STC, 5.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81   
05. INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION: OLD AND NEW 
 
Industrialism  
235. Industrialism is, I am afraid, going to be a c urse for mankind. Industrialism 
depends entirely on your capacity to exploit, on fo reign markets being open to 
you, and on the absence of competitors. It is becau se these factors are getting 
less and less every day for England, that its numbe r of unemployed is mounting 
up daily. The Indian boycott was but a flea-bite. A nd if that is the state of 
England, a vast country like India cannot expect to  benefit by industrialization. 
In fact, India, when it begins to exploit other nat ions-as it must do if it 
becomes industrialized-will be a curse for other na tions, a menace to the 
world. And why should I think of industrializing In dia to exploit other nations? 
Don’t you see the tragedy of the situation viz. Tha t we can find work for our300 
millions and is faced with a problem that baffles t he greatest intellects of 
England? The future of industrialism is dark. Engla nd has got successful 
competitors in America, Japan, France, Germany. It has competitors in the 
handful of mills in India, and as there has been an  awakening in India, even so 
there will be an awakening in South Africa with its  vastly richer resources 
natural, mineral and human. The mighty English look  quite pigmies before the 
mighty races of Africa. They are noble savages afte r all, you will say. They are 
certainly noble, but no savages; and in the course of a few years the Western 
nations may cease to find in Africa a dumping groun d for their wares. And if the 
future of industrialism is dark for the West, would  it not be darker still for 
India? 
– YI, I2-II-3I, 355.  
 
236. ‘What is the cause of the present chaos?’ It i s exploitation, I will not say, 
of the weaker nations by the stronger, but of siste r nations by sister nations. 
And my fundamental objection to machinery rests on the fact that it is 
machinery that has enabled these nations to exploit  others. In itself it is Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82  wooden thing and can be turned to good purpose or b ad. But it is easily turned 
to a bad purpose as we know. 
– YI, 22-I0-3I, 3I8.  
 
237.Indeed, the West has had a surfeit of industria lism and exploitation. The 
fact is that this industrial civilization is a dise ase because it is all evil. Let us 
not be deceived by catchwords and phrases. I have n o quarrel with steamships 
and telegraphs. They may stay, if they can, without  the support of industrialism 
all it connotes. They are not an end. They are in n o way indispensable for the 
permanent welfare of the human race. Now that we kn ow the use of steam and 
electricity, we should be able to use them on due o ccasion and after we have 
learnt to avoid industrialism. Our concern is there fore to destroy industrialism 
at any cost. 
–YI, 7-I0-26, 348.  
 
The Present State in India  
238. Little do town-dwellers know how the semi-star ved masses of India are 
slowly sinking to lifelessness. Little do they know  that their miserable comfort 
represents the brokerage, they get for the work the y do for the foreign 
exploiter, that the profits and the brokerage are s ucked from the masses. Little 
do they realize that the Government established by law in British India is 
carried on for this exploitation of the masses. No sophistry, no jugglery in 
figures can explain away the evidence that the skel etons in many villages 
present to the naked eye. I have no doubt whatsoeve r that both England and 
the town-dwellers of India will have to answer, if there is a God above, for this 
crime against humanity which is perhaps unequalled in history.  
–YI, 23-3-22, I67.  
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83   
The Root Cause  
239.The present distress is undoubtedly insufferabl e. Pauperism must go But 
industrialism is no remedy. The evil does not lie i n the use of bullock-carts. It 
lies in our selfishness and want of consideration f or our neighbours. If we have 
no love for our neighbours, no change, however revo lutionary, can do us any 
good. 
– YI, 7-I0-26, 348.  
 
240. I would destroy that system today, if had the power. I would use the most 
deadly weapons, if I believed that they would destr oy it. I refrain only because 
the use of such weapons would only perpetuate the s ystem though it may 
destroy its present administrators. Those who seek to destroy men rather than 
manners, adopt the latter and become worse than tho se whom they destroy 
under the mistaken belief that the manners will die  with the men. They do not 
know the root of the evil. 
–YI, I7-3-27, 85.  
 
241. The question about railways and telegraphs is really too insignificant in 
relation to the great doctrine I have just discusse d. I am not myself banishing 
the personal use of these conveniences myself. I ce rtainly do not expect the 
nation to discard their use nor do I expect their d isuse under Swaraj. But I do 
expect the nation under Swaraj not to believe, that  these agencies necessarily 
advance our moral growth or are indispensable for o ur material progress. 
–YI, I7-II-2I, 368.  
 
Machinery in the Ideal Condition  
242. ‘Ideally would you not rule out all machinery? ’ Ideally, however, I would 
rule out all machinery, even as I would reject this  very body, which is not 
helpful to salvation, and seek the absolute liberat ion of the soul. From that Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84  point of view, I would reject all machinery, but ma chines will remain, because 
like the body, they are inevitable. The body itself , itself, as I told you, is the 
purest piece of mechanism; but if it is a hindrance  to the highest flights of the 
soul, it has to be rejected. –YI, 20-II-24, 386.  
 
Machinery, the Practical Side  
243. Machinery has its place; it has come to stay. But it must not be allowed to 
displace necessary human labour. An improved plough  is a good thing. But if by 
some chances, one man could plough up by some mecha nical invention of his 
the whole of the land of India, and control all the  agricultural produce and if 
the millions had no other occupation, they would st arve, and being idle, they 
would become dunces, as many have already becomes. There is hourly danger 
of many more being reduced to that unenviable state . 
I would welcome every improvement in the cottage ma chine, but I know that it 
is criminal to displace hand-labour by the introduc tion of power-driven spindles 
unless one is at the same time ready to give millio ns of farmers some other 
occupation in their homes. – YI, 5-II-25, 377.  
 
244. That use of machinery is lawful which sub serv es the interest of all. 
–YI, I5-4-26, I42.  
 
245. I would favour the use of the most elaborate m achinery if thereby India’s 
pauperism and resulting idleness be avoided. I have  suggested hand-spinning as 
the only ready means of driving away penury and mak ing famine of work and 
wealth impossible. The spinning wheel itself is a p iece of valuable machinery, 
and in my own humble way I have tried to secure imp rovements in it in keeping 
with the special conditions of India. 
YI, 3-II-2I, 350.  
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85   
246. ‘Are you against all machinery?’ 
My answer is emphatically, ‘No’. But, I am against its indiscriminate 
multiplication. I refuse to be dazzled by the seemi ng triumph of machinery. I 
am uncompromisingly against all destructive machine ry. But simple tools and 
instruments and such machinery as saves individual labour and lightens the 
burden of machinery as saves individual labour and lightens the burden of the 
millions of cottages, I should welcome. 
–YI, I7-6-26, 2I8.  
 
247. What I object to, is the craze for machinery a s such. The craze is for what 
they call labour-saving machinery. Men go on ‘savin g labour’, till thousands are 
without work and thrown on the open streets to die of starvation. I want to 
save time and labour, not for a fraction of mankind , but for all; I want the 
concentration of wealth, not in the hands of few, b ut in the hands of all. Today 
machinery merely helps a few to ride on the back of  millions. The impetus 
behind it ail is not the philanthropy to save labou r, but greed. It is against this 
constitution of things that I am fighting with all my might. 
‘Then you are fighting not against machinery as suc h, but against its abuses 
which are so much in evidence today.’ 
I would unhesitatingly say ‘yes’; but I would add t hat scientific truths and 
discoveries should first of all cease to be mere in struments of greed. Then 
labourers will not be over-worked and machinery, in stead of becoming a 
hindrance, will be a help. I am aiming, not at erad ication of all machinery, but 
limitation. 
‘When logically argued out, that would seem to impl y the all complicated 
power-driven machinery should go.’ 
It might have to go but I must make one thing clear . The supreme consideration 
is man. The machine should not tend to make atrophi ed the limbs of man. For 
instance, I would make intelligent exceptions. Take  the case of the Singer Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86  Sewing Machine. It is one of the few useful things ever invented, and there is a 
romance about the device itself. Wife labouring ove r the tedious process of 
sewing and seaming with her own hands, and simply o ut of his love for her he 
devised the Sewing hands, and simply out of his lov e for her he devised the 
Sewing Machine in order to save her from unnecessar y labour. He, however, 
saved not only her labour but also the labour of ev eryone who could purchase a 
sewing machine. 
‘But in that case there would have to be a factory for making these Singer 
Sewing Machines, and it would have to contain power -driven machinery of 
ordinary type.’ 
Yes, but I am socialist enough to say that such fac tories should be nationalized, 
or State-controlled. They ought only to be working under the most attractive 
and ideal conditions, not for profit, but for the b enefit of humanity, love taking 
the place of greed as the motive. It is an alterati on in the condition of labour 
that I want. This mad rush for wealth must cease an d the labourer must be 
assured, not only of a living wage, but a daily tas k that is not a mere drudgery. 
The machine will, under these conditions, be as muc h a help to the man 
working it as to the State or the man who owns it. The present mad rush will 
cease, and the labourer will work (as I have said) under attractive and ideal 
conditions. This is but one of the exceptions I hav e in mind. The Sewing 
Machine had love at its back. The individual is the  one supreme consideration. 
The saving of labour of the individual should be th e object, and honest 
humanitarian consideration, and not greed, the moti ve. Replace greed by love 
and everything will come right. – YI, I3-II-24, 378.  
 
248. ‘You are against this machine age, I see.’ To say that is to caricature my 
views. I am not against machinery as such, but I am  totally opposed to it when 
it masters us. 
‘You would not industrialize India? 
I would indeed, in my sense of the term. The villag e communities should be 
revived. Indian villages produced and supplied to t he Indian town and cities all Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87  their wants. India became impoverished when our cit ies become foreign 
markets and began to drain the villages dry by dump ing cheap and shoddy 
goods from foreign lands. 
‘You would then go back to the natural economy?’ 
Yes. Otherwise I should go back to the city. I am q uite capable of running a big 
enterprise, but I deliberately sacrificed the ambit ion, not as a sacrifice, but 
because my heart rebelled against it. For I should have no share in the 
spoliation of the nation which is going on from day  to day. But I 
am industrializing the village in a different way. –H, 27-2-37, I8.  
 
Large-scale Production and Our Economic Problem  
249. Our mill cannot today spin enough for our want s, and if they did, they will 
not keep down prices unless they were compelled. Th ey are frankly money-
makers and will not therefore regulate prices accor ding to the needs of the 
nation. Hand-spinning is therefore designed to the put millions of rupees in the 
hands of poor villagers. Every agricultural country  requires a supplementary 
industry to enable the peasants to utilize the spar e hours. Such industry for 
India has always been spinning. Is it such a vision ary ideal- an attempt to revive 
an ancient occupation whose destruction has brought  on slavery, pauperism and 
disappearance of the inimitable artistic talents wh ich was once all expressed in 
the wonderful fabric of India and which was the env y of the world? – YI, I6-22-2I, 
50.  
 
250. We want to organize our national power not by adopting the best methods 
of production only, but by the best method of both the production and 
distribution— YI, 28-7-20, Tagore, 544.  
 
251. What India needs is not the concentration of c apital in a few hands, but its 
distribution so as to be within easy reach of the 7 1/2 lakhs of villages that 
make this continent 1900 miles long and 1500 miles broad. –YI, 23-3-2I. 93.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88   
252. Multiplication of mills cannot solve the probl em. They can only cause 
concentration of money and labour and thus make con fusion worse confounded. 
–YI, I0-I2-I9, Tagore, 487.  
 
253. India should wear no machine-made clothing whe ther it comes out of 
European mills or Indian mills (written in 1909). – Nat, I043.  
 
254. Do I seek to destroy the mill industry, I have  often been asked. If I did, I 
should not have pressed for the abolition of the ex cise duty. I want the mill 
industry to prosper-only I do not want it to prospe r at the expense of the 
country. On the contrary, if the interests of the c ountry demand that the 
industry should go, I should let it go without the slightest compunction. – YI, 24-
2-27, 58.  
 
 255. The great mill industry may be claimed to be Indian industry. But, in spite 
of its ability to compete with Japan and Lancashire , it is an industry that 
exploits the masses and deepens their poverty in ex act proportion to its success 
over Khadi. In the modern craze for wholesale indus trialization, my 
presentation has been questioned, if not brushed as ide. It has been contended 
that the growing poverty of the masses, due to the progress of 
industrialization, is inevitable, and should theref ore be suffered. I do not 
consider the evil to be inevitable, let alone to be  suffered. The A.I.S.A. has 
successfully demonstrated the possibility of the vi llages manufacturing the 
whole of the cloth requirement of India, simply by employing the leisure hours 
of the nation in spinning and the anterior processe s. The difficulty lies in 
weaning the nation from the use of mill cloth. This  is not the place to discuss 
how it can be done. My purpose in this note was to give my definition of Indian 
industry in terms of the millions of villagers, and  my reason for that definition.  
– H, 23-10-37, 311.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89   
The Economics of Khadi  
256. The science of Khadi requires decentralization  of production and 
consumption, Consumption should take place as nearl y as possible where Khadi 
is produced. – H, 2-11-35, 300. cf. 216.  
 
257. The central fact of Khaddar is to make every v illage self-supporting for its 
food and clothing. – YI, 17-7-24, 234.  
 
258. Self-sufficient Khadi will never succeed witho ut cotton being grown by 
spinners themselves or practically in every village . It means decentralization of 
cotton cultivation so far at least as self-sufficie nt Khadi is concerned.  
–H,27-7-35, 188.  
 
259. Khaddar does not seek to destroy all machinery  but it dies regulate its use 
and check its weedy growth. It uses machinery for t he service of the poorest in 
their own cottages. The wheel is itself an ezquisit e piece of machinery. 
–YI, 17-3-27, 85.  
 
260. I am personally opposed to great trusts and co ncentration of industries by 
means of elaborate machinery. If India takes to Kha ddar and all it means, I do 
not lose the hope of India taking only as much of t he modern machinery as may 
be considered necessary for the amenities of life a nd for labour-
saving purposes.  - YI. 24-7-24, 246.  
 
Revival of the Village  
261. I would say that if the village perishes India  will perish too. India will be 
no more India. Her own mission in the world will ge t lost. The revival of the 
village is possible only when it is no more exploit ed. Industrialization on a mass Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90  scale will necessarily lead to passive or active ex ploitation of the villagers as 
the problems of competition and marketing come in. Therefore we have to 
concentrate on the village being self-contained, ma nufacturing mainly for use. 
Provided this character of the village industry is maintained, there would be no 
objection to villagers using even the modern machin es and tools that they can 
make and can afford to use. Only they should not be  used as a means of 
exploitation of others. 
–H, 29-8-38, 226.cf. 232.  
 
Mass Production vs. Production by the Masses  
262. I would categorically state my conviction that  t6he mania for mass-
production is responsible for the world-crisis. Gra nting for the moment that 
machinery may supply all the needs of humanity, sti ll, it would concentrate 
production in particular areas, so that you would h ave to go about in a round 
about way to regulate distribution, whereas, if the re is production and 
distribution both in the respective areas where thi ngs are required, it is 
automatically regulated, and there is less chance f or fraud, none for 
speculation. 
You see that these nations (Europe and America) are  able to exploit the so-
called weaker or unorganized races of the world. On ce these races gain an 
elementary knowledge and decide that they are no mo re going to be exploited. 
They will simply be satisfied with that they can pr ovide themselves. Mass-
production, then,, at least where the vital necessi ties are concerned, will 
disappear. 
When production and consumption both become localiz ed, the temptation to 
speed up production, indefinitely and at any price,  disappears. All the endless 
difficulties and problems that jour present-day eco nomic system presents, too, 
would then come to an end. 
There could be no unnatural accumulation of hoards in the pockets of the few, 
and want in the midst of plenty in regard to the re st. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91  ‘Then, you do not envisage mass-production as an id eal future of India?  
Oh yes, mass-production, certainly, but not based o n force. After all, t6he 
message of the spinning wheel is that. It is mass-p roduction, but mass-
production in people’s own homes. If you multiply i ndividual production to 
millions of times, would it not give you mass-produ ction on a tremendous scale? 
But I quite understand that your "mass-production" is a technical term for 
production by the fewest possible number through th e aid of highly 
complicated machinery. I have said to myself that t hat is wrong. My machinery 
must be of the most elementary type which I can put  in the homes of the 
millions. 
‘So, you are opposed to machinery, only because and  when it concentrates 
production and distribution in the hands of the few ?’ 
You are right, I hate privilege and monopoly. Whate ver cannot be shared with 
the masses is taboo to me. That is all. –H, 2-11-34, 301.  
 
The Principle of Planning for India  
263. Q. The Government has been introducing schemes  of industrializing the 
country for the maximum utilization of her raw mate rials, not of her abundant 
and unused man-power which is left to (take care of  itself as best as it can). 
Can such schemes be considered Swedish? 
A. Gandhiji remarked that the question had been wel l put. He did not exactly 
know what the Government plan was. But he heartily endorsed toe proposition 
that any plan which exploited the raw materials of a country and neglected the 
potentially more powerful man-power was lop-sided a nd could never tend to 
establish human equality. 
America was the most industrialized country in the world and yet it had not 
banished poverty and degradation. That was because it neglected the universal 
man-power and concentrated power in the hands of th e few who amassed 
fortunes at the expense of the many. The result was  that its industrialization 
had become a menace to its own poor and to the rest  of the world. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 92  If India was to escape such disaster, it had to imi tate what was best in America 
and the other Western countries and leave aside its  attractive looking but 
destructive economic policies. Therefore, real plan ning consisted in the best 
utilization of the whole man-power of India and the  distribution of the raw 
products of India in her numerous villages instead of sending them outside and 
rebuying finished articles at fabulousprices. 
–H, 23-3-47, 79.  
 
Decentralization and Nonviolence  
264. I suggest that, if India is to evolve along no nviolent lines, it will have to 
decentralize many things. Centralization cannot be sustained and defended 
without adequate force. Simple homes from which the re is nothing to take 
away require no policing; the palaces of the rich m ust have strong guards to 
protect them against dacoity. So must huge factorie s. Rurally organized India 
will run less risk of foreign invasion than urbaniz ed India, will equipped with 
military, naval and air forces. 
–H, 30-12-39, 391.  
 
265. Remember also that your nonviolence cannot ope rate effectively unless 
you have faith in the spinning wheel. I would ask y ou to read Hind Swaraj with 
my eyes and see therein the chapter on how to make India nonviolent. You 
cannot build nonviolence on a factory civilization,  but it can be built on self-
contained villages. Even if Hitler was so minded, h e could not devastate even 
hundred thousand nonviolent villages. He would hims elf become nonviolent in 
the process. Rural economy as I have conceived it, eschews exploitation 
altogether, and exploitation is the essence of viol ence. You have, therefore, to 
be rural-minded before you can be nonviolent, and t o be rural-minded you have 
to have faith in the spinning wheel. 
– H, 4-11-39, 331.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 93  266. The end to be sought is human happiness combin ed with full mental and 
moral growth. I use the adjective moral as synonymo us with spiritual. This end 
can be achieved under decentralization. Centralizat ion as a system is 
inconsistent with nonviolent structure of society. 
–H, I8-I-42, 5 
 
Co-operative Effort  
267.Q. Some women workers who earn part of their li ving by weaving mats 
were advised by you the other day to work on c0-ope rative principles. Bengal’s 
agriculture has been reduced to an uneconomic propo sition through extreme 
fragmentation of holdings. Would you advise farmers  also to adopt co-operative 
methods? 
If so, how are they to effect this under the presen t system of land-ownership? 
Should the State make the necessary changes in the law? If the State is not 
ready, but the people so desire, in the law? If the  State is not ready, but the 
people so desire, how are they to work through thei r own organizations to this 
end? 
A. Replying to the first part of the question, Gand hiji said that he had no doubt 
that the system of co-operation was far more necess ary for the agriculturists 
than for the mat-weavers. The land, as he maintaine d, belonged to the State; 
therefore, it yielded the largest return when it wa s worked co-operatively. 
Let it be remembered that co-operation should be ba sed on strict non-violence. 
There was no such thing as success of violent co-op eration. Hitler was a forcible 
example of the latter. He also talked vainly of co- operation which was forced 
upon the people and everyone knew where Germany had  been led as a result. 
Gandhiji concluded by saying that it would be a sad  thing if India also tried to 
build up the new society based upon co-operation by  means of violence. Good 
brought about through force destroyed individuality . Only when the change was 
effected through the persuasive power of nonviolent  non-co-operation, i.e. 
love, could the foundation of individuality be pres erved and real, abiding 
progress be assured for the world. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 94  Q. At East Korea (in Noakhali) you advised peasants  to work co-operatively in 
their fields. Should thy pool together their land a nd divide the crop in 
proportion to the area of the fields they held? Wou ld you give us an outline of 
the idea of how exactly they are to work in a coope rative manner? 
A. Gandhiji said that the question was good and adm itted of a simple answer. 
His notion of co-operation was that the land would be held in co-operation by 
the owners and tilled and cultivated also in co-ope ration. This would cause a 
saving of labour, capital, tools etc. The owners wo uld work in co-operation and 
own capital, tools, animals, seeds etc. in co-opera tion. Co-operative farming of 
his conception would change the face of the land an d banish poverty and 
idleness from their midst. All this was only possib le if people became friends of 
one another and as one family. When that happy even t took place there would 
be no ugly sore in the form of a communal problem. – H, 9-3-47, 58 and 59.  
 
A Picture of Village Swaraj  
268. My idea of Village Swaraj is that it is a comp lete republic, independent of 
its neighbours for its vital wants, and yet interde pendent for many others in 
which dependence is a necessity. Thus every village ’s first concern will be to 
grow its own food crops and cotton for its cloth. I t should have a reserve for its 
cattle, recreation and playground for adults and ch ildren. Then if there is more 
land available, it will grow useful money crops, th us excluding ganja, tobacco, 
opium and the like. The village will maintain a vil lage theatre, school and 
public hall. It will have its own waterworks ensuri ng clean supply. This can be 
done through controlled wells and tanks. Education will be compulsory up to 
the final basic course. As far as possible every ac tivity will be conducted on the 
co-operative basis. There will be no castes such as  we have today with their 
graded untouchability. Nonviolence with its techniq ue of Satyagraha and non-
co-operation will be the sanction of the village co mmunity. There will be a 
compulsory service of village guards who will be se lected by rotation from the 
register maintained by the village. The government of the village will be 
conducted by the Panchayat of five persons, annuall y elected by the adult 
villagers, male and female, possessing minimum pres cribed qualifications. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 95  These will have all the authority and jurisdiction required. Since there will be 
no system of punishments in the accepted sense, thi s Panchayat will be the 
legislature, judiciary and executive combined to op erate for its year of office. 
Any village can become such a republic today withou t much interference, even 
from the present Government whose sole effective co nnection with the villages 
is the exaction of the village revenue. I have not examined here the question of 
relations with the neighboring villages and the cen tre if any. My purpose is to 
present an outline of village government. Here ther e is perfect democracy 
based upon individual freedom. The individual is th e architect of his own 
government. The law of nonviolence rules him and hi s government. He and his 
village are able to defy the might of a world. For the law governing every 
villager is that he will suffer death in the defens e of his and his village’s 
honour. – H, 26-7-42, 238.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 96   
06. THE DISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH 
 
Nature’s Plan  
269. I suggest that we are thieves in a way. If I t ake anything that I do not need 
for my own immediate use, and keep it, I thieve it from somebody else. I 
venture to suggest that it is the fundamental law o f Nature, without exception, 
that Nature produces enough for our wants from day to day, and if only 
everybody took enough for himself and nothing more,  there would be no 
pauperism in this world, there would be no man dyin g of starvation in this 
world. But so long as we have got this inequality, so long we are thieving. I am 
no socialist and I do not want to dispossess those who have got possessions: but 
I do say that, personally, those of us who want to see light out of darkness have 
to follow this rule. I do not want to dispossess an ybody. I should then be 
departing from the rule of ahimsa. If somebody else  possesses more than I do, 
let him. But so far as my own life has to be regula ted, I do say that I dare not 
possess anything which I do not want. In India we h ave got three millions of 
people having to be satisfied with one meal a day, and that meal consisting of a 
chapati containing no fat in it, and a pinch of sal t. You and I have no right to 
anything that we really have until these three mill ions are clothed and fed 
better. You and I, who ought to know better, must a djust our wants, and even 
undergo voluntary starvation in order that they may  be nursed, fed and 
clothed. – Nat, 384.  
 
270. If all men realized the obligation of service (as an eternal moral law), they 
would regard it as a sin to amass wealth; and then,  there would be no 
inequalities of wealth and consequently no famine o r starvation. 
– ER, 58.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 97  271. Non-possession is allied to non-stealing. A th ing not originally stolen must 
nevertheless be classified stolen property, if one possesses it without needing 
it. Possession implies provision for the future. A seeker after Truth, a follower 
of a Law of Love cannot hold anything against tomor row. God never stores for 
the morrow; He never creates more than what is stri ctly needed for the 
moment. If therefore, we repose faith in His provid ence, we should rest 
assured, that He will give us everything that we re quire. Saints and devotees, 
who have lived in such faith, have always derived a  justification for it from 
their experience. Our ignorance or negligence of th e Divine Law, which gives to 
man from day to day his daily bread and no more, ha s given rise to inequalities 
with al the miseries attendant upon them. The rich have a superfluous store of 
things which they do not need, and which are theref ore neglected and wasted, 
while millions are starved to death for want of sus tenance. If each retained 
possession only of what he needed, no one would be in want, and all would live 
in contentment. As it is, the rich are discontented  no less than the poor. The 
poor man would fain become a millionaire, and the m illionaire a 
multimillionaire. The rich should take the initiati ve in dispossession with a view 
to a universal diffusion of the spirit of contentme nt. If only they keep their own 
property within moderate limits, the starving will be easily fed, and will learn 
the lesson of contentment along with the rich. – YM, 34.  
 
272. What was best was that nobody should possess m ore than he could himself 
use. That was the ideal society should strive to re ach. 
–H, 2-3-47, 47.  
 
Voluntary, not Involuntary Poverty  
273. No one has ever suggested that grinding pauper ism can lead to anything 
else than moral degradation. Every human being has a right to live and 
therefore to find the wherewithal to feed himself a nd where necessary, to 
clothe and house himself. But for this very simple performance we need no 
assistance from economists or their laws. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 98  ‘Take no thought for the morrow’ is an injunction w hich finds an echo in almost 
all the religious scriptures of the world. In well- ordered society the securing of 
one’s livelihood should be and is found to be the e asiest thing in the world. 
Indeed, the test of orderliness in a country is not  the number of millionaires it 
owns, but the absence of starvation among its masse s. The only statement that 
has to be examined is, whether it can be laid down as a law of universal 
application that material advancement means moral p rogress. 
Now let us take a few illustrations. Rome suffered a moral fall when it attained 
high material affluence. So did Egypt and so perhap s most countries of which 
we have any historical record. The descendants and kinsmen of the royal and 
divine Krishna too fell when they were rolling in r iches. We do not deny to the 
Rockefellers and the Carnegies possession of an ord inary measure of morality 
but we gladly judge them indulgently. I mean that w e do not even expect them 
to satisfy the highest standard of morality. With t hem material gain has not 
necessarily meant moral gain. In South Africa, wher e I had the privilege of 
associating with thousands of our countryman on mos t intimate terms, I 
observed almost invariably that the greater the pos session of riches, the 
greater was their moral turpitude. Our rich men, to  say the least, did not 
advance the moral struggle of passive resistance as  did the poor. The rich 
men’s sense of self-respect was not so much injured  as that of the poorest. If I 
were not afraid of t4reading on dangerous ground, I  would even come nearer 
home and show how that possession of riches has bee n a hindrance to real 
growth. I venture to think that the scriptures of t he world are far safer and 
sounder treatises on laws  of economics than many of the modern text-books. 
–Nat, 350.  
 
Economic Equality: The Goal  
274. My ideal is equal distribution, but so far as I can see, it is not to be 
realized. I therefore work for equitable distributi on. –YI, I7-3-27, 86 . 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 99  275. Economic equality is the master key to nonviol ent independence. Working 
for economic equality means abolishing the eternal conflict between capital 
and labour. It means the leveling down of the few r ich in whose hands is 
concentrated the bulk of the nation’s wealth on the  one hand, and a leveling 
up of the semi-starved naked millions on the other.  A non-violent system of 
government is clearly an impossibility so long as t he wide gulf between the rich 
and the hungry millions persists. The contrast betw een the palaces of New 
Delhi and the miserable hovels of the poor, labouri ng class cannot last one day 
in a free India in which the poor will enjoy the sa me power as the richest in the 
land. A violent and bloody revolution is a certaint y one-day unless there is a 
voluntary abdication of riches and power that riche s give and sharing them for 
the common good. I adhere to my doctrine of trustee ship in spite of the 
ridicule that has been poured upon it. It is true t hat it is difficult to reach. So is 
non-violence difficult to attain. But we made up ou r minds in 1920 to negotiate 
that steep ascent. – CP, 18.  
 
276. The real implication of equal distribution is that each man shall have the 
wherewithal to supply all his natural wants and no more. For example, if one 
man has a weak digestion and requires only a pound,  both should be in a 
position to satisfy their wants. To bring this idea l into being the entire social 
order has got to be reconstructed. A society based on non-violence cannot 
nature any other ideal. We may not perhaps be able to realize the goal, but we 
must bear it in mind and work unceasingly to near i t. To the same extent as we 
progress towards our goal we near it. To the same e xtent as we progress 
towards our goal we shall find contentment and happ iness, and to that extent 
too, shall we have contributed and happiness, and t o that extent too, shall we 
have contributed towards the bringing into being of  a nonviolent society. 
Now let us consider how equal distribution can be b rought about through non-
violence. The first step towards it is for him who has made this ideal part of his 
being to bring about the necessary changes in his p ersonal life. He would 
reduce his wants to a minimum, bearing in mind the poverty of India. His 
earnings would be free of dishonesty. The desire fo r speculation would be Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 100  renounced. His habitation would be in keeping with his new mode of life. There 
would be self-restraint exercised in every sphere o f life. When he has done all 
that is possible to preach this ideal among his ass ociates and neighbours. 
Indeed at the root of this doctrine of equal distri bution must lie that of the 
trusteeship of the wealthy for superfluous wealth p ossessed by them. For 
according to the doctrine they may not possess a ru pee more than their 
neighbours. How is this to be brought about? Non-vi olently? Or should the 
wealthy be dispossessed of their possessions? To do  this we would naturally 
have to resort to violence. This violent action can not benefit society. Society 
will be the poorer, for it will lose the gifts of a  man who knows how to 
accumulate wealth. Therefore nonviolent way is evid ently superior. The rich 
man will be left in possession of his personal need s and will act as a trustee for 
the remainder to be uses for the society. In this a rgument, honesty on the part 
of the trustee is assumed. 
If however, in spite of the utmost effort, the rich  do not become guardians of 
the poor in the true sense of the term and the latt er are more and more 
crushed and die of hunger, what is to be done? In t rying to find out the solution 
of this riddle I have lighted on nonviolent non co- operation and civil 
disobedience as the right and infallible means. The  rich cannot accumulate 
wealth without the co-operation of the poor in soci ety. If this knowledge were 
to penetrate to and spread amongst the poor, they w ould become strong and 
would learn how to free themselves which have broug ht them to the verge of 
starvation. –H, 25-8-40, 260.  
 
277. "What exactly do you mean by economic equality ," Gandhiji was asked at 
the Constructive Worker’s Conference during his rec ent tour of Madras, "and 
what is statutory trusteeship as conceived by you?"  
Gandhiji reply was that economic equality of his co nception did not mean that 
everyone would literally have the same amount. It s imply meant that everybody 
should have enough for his or her needs. For instan ce, he required two shawls 
in winter whereas his grand nephew Kanu Gandhi who stayed with him and was Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 101  like his own son did not require any warm clothing what-so ever. Gandhiji 
required goat’s milk, oranges and other fruit. He e nvied Kanu but there was no 
point in it. Kanu was a young man whereas he was an  old man of 76. The 
monthly expense of his food was far more than that of Kanu but it did not mean 
that there was economic inequality between them. Th e elephant needs a 
thousand times more food than the ant, but that is no indication of inequality. 
So the real meaning of economic equality was: "To e ach according to his need." 
That was the definition of Marx. If a single man de manded as much as a man 
with wife and four children that would be a violati on of economic equality. 
"Let no one try to justify the blaring difference b etween the classes and the 
masses, the prince and the pauper, by saying that t he former need more. That 
will be idle sophistry and a travesty of my argumen t," he continued." he 
contrast between the rich and the poor today is a p ainful sight. The poor 
villagers are exploited by the foreign government a nd also by their own 
countrymen-the city-dwellers. They produce the food  and go hungry. They 
produce milk and their children have to go without it. It is disgraceful. 
Everyone must have a balanced diet, a decent house to live in, facilities for the 
education of one’s children and adequate medical re lief." That constituted his 
picture of economic equality. He did not want to ta boo everything above and 
beyond the bare necessaries but they must come afte r the essential needs of 
the poor are satisfied. First things must come firs t. 
 
Statutory Trusteeship  
As for the present owners of wealth they would have  to make a choice between 
class war and voluntarily converting themselves int o trustees of their wealth. 
They would be allowed to retain the stewardship of their possessions and use 
their talent to increase the wealth, not for their own sakes, but for the sake of 
the nation and therefore without exploitation. The state would regulate the 
rate of commission which they would get commensurat e with the service 
rendered and its value to society. Their children w ould inherit the stewardship 
only if they proved their fitness for it. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 102  "Supposing India becomes a free country tomorrow," he concluded, "all the 
capitalists will have an opportunity of becoming st atutory trustees." But such a 
statute will not be imposed from above. It will hav e to come from below. When 
the people understand the implications of trusteesh ip and the atmosphere is 
ripe for it, the people themselves, beginning with gram Panchayat, will begin 
to introduce such statutes. Such a thing coming fro m below is easy to swallow. 
Coming from above, it is liable to prove a dead wei ght. –H, 3I-3-46, 63.  
 
In Favour of Equality of Income  
278. Put your talents in the service of the country  instead of converting them 
into £. S. d. If you Are a medical man, there is di sease enough in India to need 
all your medical skill. If you are a lawyer, there are difference and quarrels 
enough in India. Instead of fomenting more trouble,  patch up those quarrels 
and stop litigation. If you are an engineer, build model houses suited to the 
means and needs of our people and yet full of healt h and fresh air. There is 
nothing that you have learnt which cannot be turned  to account. (The friend 
who asked the question was a Chartered Accountant a nd Gandhiji then said to 
him:) There is a dire need everywhere for accountan ts to audit the accounts of 
Congress and its adjunct associations. Come to Indi a-I will give you enough work 
and also your hire-4 annas per day which is surely much more than millions in 
India get. – YI, 5-II-3I, 334.  
 
279. (Several Mysore lawyers who had taken part in the Mysore Satyagraha 
struggle had been disbarred by the Mysore Chief Cou rt. Gandhiji wrote about 
them:) Let these lawyers be proud of their poverty which will be probably their 
lot now. Let them remember Thoreau’s saying that po ssession of riches is a 
crime and poverty a virtue under an unjust administ ration. This is an eternal 
maxim for Satyagrahis. The disbarred lawyers have a  rare opportunity of so 
remodeling their lives that they can always be abov e want. Let them remember 
that practice of law ought not to mean taking more daily than, say, a village 
carpenter’s wage Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 103  –H , I3-7-40, 205.  
 
280. Q. To those who had lost all their trade, your  advice is that they should 
voluntarily turn themselves into labourers. Who wil l then look after education, 
commerce and the like? If you thus dissolve the div ision of labour, will not the 
cause of civilization suffer? 
A. The question betrayed ignorance of his meaning. If a man could not carry on 
his original business, it was not open to him but o bligatory on him to take to 
physical labour say scavenging or breaking stones. He believed in the division of 
labour of work. But he did insist on the equality o f wages. The lawyer, the 
doctor, or the teacher was entitled to no more than  the bhang. Then only 
would division of work uplift the nation or the ear th. There was no other royal 
road to true civilization of happiness. 
–H, 23-3-47, 78.  
 
281. Q. You wrote about economic equality in 1941. Do you hold that all 
persons who perform useful and necessary service in  society, whether farmer of 
bhangi (sweeper), engineer of accountant, doctor or  teacher, have a more right 
only to equal wages with the rest? Of course, it is  understood, educational or 
other expenses shall be a charge of the State Our q uestion is, should not all 
persons get the same wages for this equality, it wi ll cut sooner under the root 
of untouchability than any other process? 
A. As to this Gandhiji had no doubt that if India w as to live an exemplary life of 
independence which would be the envy of the world, all the bhangis, doctors, 
lawyers, teachers, merchants and others would get t he same wages for an 
honest day’s work. Indian society may never reach t he goal but it was the duty 
of every Indian to set his sail towards that goal a nd no other if India was to be a 
happy land. – H, I6-3-47, 67.  
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 104  The Hypnotic Influence of Capital  
282. We have unfortunately come under the hypnotic suggestion and the 
hypnotic influence of Capital is all in all on eart h. But a moment’s thought 
would show that Labour has at its disposal Capital which the Capitalist will 
never possess. Ruskin taught in his age that Labour  has unrivalled opportunities. 
But he spoke above our heads. At the present moment  there is an Englishman, 
Sir Daniel Hamilton, who is really making the exper iment. He is an economist. 
He is a Capitalist also; but through his economic r esearch and experiments he 
has come to the same conclusions as Ruskin had arri ved at intuitively, and he 
has brought to Labour a vital message. He says it i s wrong to think that a piece 
of metal constitutes Capital. He says it is wrong t o think that so much produce 
is Capital; but he adds that if we go the very sour ce, it is Labour that is Capital, 
and that living Capital is inexhaustible.— IC, 393.  
 
Earlier Writings on Capital and Labour  
283. The avowed policy of Non-co-operation has been  not to make political use 
of disputes between Labour and Capital. They have e ndeavored to hold the 
balance evenly between the two-we would be fools id  we wantonly set Labour 
against Capital. It would be just the way to play i nto the hands of a 
Government which would greatly strengthen its hold on the country by setting 
capitalist against labourers and vice versa. In Jha ria, for instance, it was a non-
co-operator. The latter will not hesitate to advanc e the cause of strikers where 
they have a just grievance. They have ever refused to lend their assistance to 
unjust strikes. – YI, 20-4-2I I24.  
 
284. Swaraj as conceived by me does not mean the en d of kingship. Nor does it 
mean the end of capital. Accumulated capital means ruling power. I am for the 
establishment of right relations between capital an d labour etc. I do not wish 
for the supremacy of the one over the other. I do n ot think there is any natural 
antagonism between them. The rich and the poor will  always be with us. But 
their mutual relations will be subject to constant change. –YI, 8-1-25, 10.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 105   
285. I do not fight shy of capital. I fight capital ism. The West teaches us to 
avoid concentration of capital, to avoid a racial w ar in another and deadlier 
form. Capital and labour need not be antagonistic t o each other. I cannot 
picture to myself a time when no man shall be riche r than another. But I do 
picture to myself a time when the rich will spurn t o enrich themselves at the 
expense of the poor and the poor will cease to envy  the rich. Even in a most 
perfect world, we shall fail to avoid inequalities,  but we can and must avoid 
strife and bitterness. There are numerous examples extant of the rich and the 
poor living in perfect friendliness. We have but to  multiply such instances.  
– YI, 7-I0-26, 348.  
 
286. I have not been writing much about the agricul turists advisedly. For I know 
that it is impossible for us to do anything for the m today. There are thousand 
and one things that need to be done for the amelior ation of the lot of the 
agriculturists. But so long as the reins of Governm ent are not in the hands of 
the agriculturists’ representatives, i.e. so long a s we have no Swaraj-
Dharmaraj-that amelioration is very difficult if no t impossible. I know that the 
peasant is dragging a miserable existence and hardl y gets even a scanty meal a 
day. That is why I have suggested the revival of th e spinning wheel. 
And the need for internal reform is as that for leg islative reform. And internal 
reform can be only partly achieved when numerous vo lunteers are found to 
take up village-work as the mission of their lives.  The evil habits of ages cannot 
go in a year or two. 
We may not forcibly dispossess the Zamindars and Ta lukdars of their thousands 
of bighas. And among whom shall we distribute them?  We need not dispossess 
them. They only need a change of heart. When that i s done, and when they 
learn to melt at their tenants’ woe, they will hold  their lands in trust of them, 
will give them a major part of the produce keeping only sufficient for 
themselves. ‘We had better wait for that day until the Greek Kalends’ someone 
will say. I do not think so. I think that the world  is moving toward peace i.e. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 106  Ahimsa. The way of violence has been tried for ages  and found wanting. Let no 
one believe that the people of Russia, Italy, and o ther countries are happy or 
are independent. The sword of Damocles is always ha nging over their heads. 
Those who have the good of the Indian agriculturist s at heart must pin their 
faith on nonviolence and plod on. Those who think o f other methods are vainly 
flattering themselves with the hope of success. The  agriculturist never figures 
in their calculation, or at any rate they do not kn ow their condition. 
What I have said above applies equally to the sowka r and other exploiters. 
Nothing but their own profit appeals to them. But t here too the remedy is the 
moral education of both. The oppressed need no othe r education except in 
Satyagraha and non-co-operation. A slave is a slave  because he consents to 
slavery. If training in physical resistance is poss ible, why should that in spiritual 
resistance be impossible? If we  know the use of the body why can we not know 
the use and power of the soul? – YI, 4-2-26, 45.  
 
Position of Labour: Later Views  
287. Q. What is your opinion about the social econo mics of Bolshevism and how 
far do you think they are fit to be copied by our c ountry? 
A. I must confess that I have not yet been able ful ly to understand the meaning 
of Bolshevism. All that I know is that it aims at t he abolition of the institution 
of private property. This is only an application of  the ethical ideal of non-
possession in the realm of economics and if the peo ple adopted this ideal of 
their own accord of could be made to accept it by m eans of peaceful 
persuasion, there would be nothing like it. But fro m what I know of Bolshevism 
it not only does not preclude the use of force but freely sanctions it for the 
expropriation of private property and maintaining t he Collective State 
ownership of the same. And if that is so I have no hesitation in saying that the 
Bolshevik regime in its present form cannot last fo r long. For it s my firm 
conviction that nothing enduring can be built on vi olence. But be that as it may 
there is no questioning the fact that the Bolshevik  ideal has behind it the purest 
sacrifice of countless men and woman who have given  up their all for its sake, Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 107  and an ideal that is sanctified by the sacrifices o f such master spirits as Lenin 
cannot go in vain: the noble example of their renun ciation will be emblazoned 
forever and quicken and purify the ideal as time pa sses. –YI, I5-II-28, 38I.  
 
288. Q. How exactly do you think the Indian princes , landlords, mill-owners and 
money-lenders and other profiteers are enriched? 
A. At the present moment by exploiting the masses. 
Q. Can these classes be enriched without the exploi tation of the Indian workers 
and peasants? 
A. To a certain extent, yes. 
Q . Have these classes any social justification to live more comfortable than the 
ordinary worker and peasant who does the work which  provides their wealth? 
A. No justification. My idea of society is that whi le we are born equal, meaning 
that we have a right to equal opportunity, all have  not the same capacity. It is, 
in the nature of things, impossible. For instance, all cannot have the same 
height, or colour or degree of intelligence, etc; t herefore in the nature of 
things, some will have ability to earn more and oth ers less. People with talents 
will have more, and they will utilize their talents  for this purpose. If they 
utilize their talents kindly, they will be performi ng the work of the State. Such 
people exist as trustees, on no other terms. I woul d allow a man of intellect to 
earn more; I would not cramp his talent. *But the b ulk of his greater earnings 
must be used for the good of the State. Just as the  income of all earning sons 
of the father go to the common family fund. They wo uld have their earnings 
only as trustees. It may be that I would fail miser able in this. But that is what I 
am sailing for. 
The masses do not today see in landlords and other profiteers their enemy; but 
the consciousness of the wrong done to them by thes e classes has to be created 
in them. I do not teach the masses to regard the ca pitalists as their enemies, 
but I teach them that they are their own enemies. N on-co-operators never told 
the people that the British or General Dyer were ba d, but that they were the Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 108  victims of a system. So that, the system must be de stroyed and not the 
individual. 
The zamindar is merely a tool of a system. It is no t necessary to take up a 
movement against them at the same time as against t he British system. It is 
possible to distinguish between the two. But, we ha d to tell the people not to 
pay to the Zamindars, because, out of this money th e Zamindars paid to the 
Government. But, we have no quarrel with the zamind ars as such, so long as 
they act well by the tenants. 
–YI, 26-II-3I, 363. cf. 306, 14.  
 
289. He was no lover of the zamindari system. He ha d often spoken against it; 
but he frankly confessed that he was not the enemy of the zamindars. He 
owned no enemies. The best way to bring about refor m in the economic and 
social systems, whose evils were admittedly many, w as through the royal road 
of self-suffering. Any departure from it only resul ted in merely changing the 
form of the evil that was sought to be liquidated v iolently. Violence was 
incapable of destroying the evil root and branch. – H, 30-3-47, 87.  
 
An Appeal to the Upper Classes  
290. The village work frightens us. We who are town  bred find it trying to take 
to the village life. But it is a difficulty which w e have to face boldly, even 
heroically, if our desire is to establish Swaraj fo r the people, not substitute one 
class rule by another, which may be even worse. Hit herto the villagers have 
died in their thousands so that we might live. Now we might have to die so that 
they may live. The difference will be fundamental. The former have died 
unknowingly and involuntarily. Their enforced sacri fice had degraded us. If now 
we die knowingly and willingly, our sacrifice will ennoble us and the whole 
nation. Let us not flinch from the necessary sacrif ice, if we will live as an 
independent self-respecting nation. – YI, I7-4-24, I30.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 109  291. A model zamindar would therefore at once reduc e mush of the burden the 
ryot and know their wants and inject hope into them  in the place of despair 
which is killing the very life out of them. He will  not be satisfied with the ryots’ 
ignorance of the laws of sanitation and hygiene. He  will reduce himself to 
poverty in order that the ryot may have the necessa ries of life. He will study 
the economic condition of the ryots under his care,  establish schools in which 
he will educate his own children side by side with those of the ryots. He will 
purify the village well and the village tank. He wi ll teach the ryot to sweep his 
roads and clean his latrines by himself doing this necessary labour. He will 
throw open without reserve his own gardens for the unrestricted use of the 
ryot. He will use as hospital, school, or the like most of the unnecessary 
buildings which he keeps for his pleasure. If only the capitalist class will read 
the signs of the times, revise their notions of God -given right to all they 
possess, in an incredibly short space of time the s even hundred thousand dung-
heaps which today pass muster as villages can be tu rned into abodes of peace, 
health and comfort. I am convinced that the capital ist, if he follows the 
Samurai of Japan, has nothing really to lose and ev erything to gain. There is no 
other choice than between voluntary surrender on th e part of the capitalist of 
superfluities and consequent acquisition of the rea l happiness of all on the one 
hand, and on the other, the impending chaos into wh ich, if the capitalist does 
not wake up betimes, awakened but ignorant, famishi ng millions will plunge 
the country and which not even the armed force that  a powerful Government 
can bring into play can avert. – YI, 5-I2-29, 396.  
 
The Method of Securing Economic Justice  
292. Q. How then will you bring about the trusteesh ip? Is it by persuasion? 
A. Not merely by verbal persuasion. I will concentr ate on my means. Some have 
called me the greatest revolutionary of my time. It  may be false, but I believe 
myself to be a revolutionary-a nonviolent revolutio nary. My means are non-co-
operation. No person can amass wealth without the c o-operation, willing or 
forced, of the people concerned. YI, 26-II-3I, 369.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 110   
293. The greatest obstacle in the path of nonviolen ce is the presence in our 
midst of the indigenous interests that have sprung up from British rule, the 
interests of monied men, speculators, scrip-holders , landholders, factory-
owners and the like. All these do not always realiz e that they are living on the 
blood of the masses, and when they do, they become as callous as the British 
principals whose tools and agents they are. If like  the Japanese Samurai they 
could but realize that they must give up their bloo d-stained gains, the battle is 
won for nonviolence. It must not be difficult for t hem to see that the holding of 
millions is a crime when millions of their own kith  and kin are starving and that, 
therefore, they must give up their agency. No princ ipal has yet been found able 
to work without faithful agents. 
But non-violence has to be patient with these as wi th the British principals. The 
aim of the non-violent worker must ever be to conve rt. He may not however 
wait endlessly. When therefore the limit is reached , he takes risks and 
conceives plans of active Satyagraha which may mean  civil disobedience and 
the like. His patience is never exhausted to the po int of giving up his creed. 
- YI, 6-2-30, 44.  
 
294. Q. If you benefit the workers, the peasant and  the factory-hand, can you 
avoid class war? 
A. I can most decidedly, if only the people will fo llow the nonviolent method. 
By the nonviolent method, we seek not to destroy th e capitalist, we seek to 
destroy capitalism. We invite the capitalist to reg ard himself as a trustee for 
those on whom he depends for the making, the retent ion and the increase of 
his capital. Nor need the worker wait for his conve rsion. If capital is power, so 
is work. Either power can be used destructively or creatively. Either is 
dependent on the other. Immediately the worker real izes his strength, he is in 
a position to become a co-sharer with the capitalis t instead of remaining his 
slave. If he aims at becoming the sole owner, he wi ll most likely be killing the 
hen that lays golden eggs. Inequalities in intellig ence and even opportunity will Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 111  last till the end of time. A man living on the bank s of a river has any day more 
opportunity of growing crops than one living in an arid desert. But if 
inequalities stare us in the face the essential equ ality too is not to be missed. 
Every man has an equal right to the necessaries of life even as birds and beasts 
have. And since every right carries with it a corre sponding duty and the 
corresponding remedy for resisting an attack upon i t, it is merely a matter of 
finding out the corresponding duties and remedies t o vindicate the elementary 
equality. The corresponding duty is to labour with my limbs and the 
corresponding remedy is to non-co-operate with him who deprives me of the 
fruit of my labour. And if I would recognize the fu ndamental equality, as I 
must, of the capitalist and the labourer, I must no t aim at his destruction. I 
must strive for his conversion. My non-co-operation  with him will open his eyes 
to the wrong he may be doing. Nor need I be afraid of someone else taking my 
coworkers so as not to help the wrong-doing of the employer. This kind of 
education of the mass of workers is no doubt a slow  process, but as it is also 
the surest, it is necessarily the quickest. It can be easily demonstrated that 
destruction of the capitalist must mean destruction  in the end of the worker; 
and as no human being is so bad as to be beyond red emption, no human being 
is so perfect as to warrant his destroying him whom  he wrongly considers to be 
wholly evil. 
–YI, 26-3-3I, 49.  
 
295. There is in English a very potent world, and y ou have it in French also; all 
the languages of the world have it-it is ‘No’: and the secret that we have hit 
upon is that when Capital wants Labour to say ‘Yes,  Labour roars out ‘No’, if it 
means ‘No’. And immediately Labour comes to recogni ze that it has got its 
choice of saying ‘Yes’ when it wants to say ‘Yes’, and ‘No’ when it wants to say 
‘No’. Labour is free of Capital and Capital has to woo Labour. And it would not 
matter in the slightest degree that Capital has gun s and even poison gas at its 
disposal. Capital would still be perfectly helpless  if Labour would assert its 
dignity by making good its ‘No’. Labour does not ne ed to retaliate, but Labour 
stands defiant receiving the bullets and poison gas  and still insists upon its ‘No. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 112  The whole reason why Labour so often fails is that instead of sterilizing Capital, 
as I have suggested, Labour (I am speaking as a lab ourer myself) want to seize 
that capital and become capitalist itself in the wo rse sense of the term. And 
the capitalist, therefore, who is properly entrench ed and organized, finding 
among labourers also candidates for the same office , makes use of a portion of 
these to suppress Labour. If we really were not und er the hypnotic spell, 
everyone of us, men and women, would recognize this  rock-bottom truth 
without the slightest difficulty. Having proved it for myself through a series of 
experiments carried on in different departments of life, I am speaking to you 
with authority (you will pardon me for saying so) t hat when I put this scheme 
before you, it was not as something superhuman but as something within the 
grasp of every labourer, man or woman. 
Again, you will see what Labour is called upon to d o under this scheme of non-
violence is nothing more than what the Swiss soldie r does under gun-fire, or the 
ordinary soldier who is armed from top to toe is ca lled upon to do. While he 
undoubtedly seeks to inflict death and destruction upon his adversary, he also 
carries his own life in his pocket. I want Labour, then to copy the courage of 
the soldier without copying the brute in the soldie r namely the ability to inflict 
death; and I suggest to you that a labourer who cou rts death and has the 
courage to die without even carrying arms, with no weapon of self-defense, 
show a courage of a much higher degree than a man w ho is armed from top to 
toe. –IC, 394. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 113   
07. A CHAPTER ON CLASS WAR 
 
Nonviolence and Exploitation  
296. The principle of non-possession necessitates c omplete abstention from 
exploitation in any form.- 
297. Nonviolence in the very nature of things is of  no assistance in the defense 
of ill-gotten gains and immoral acts.— H, 5-9-36, 236.  
 
298. In nonviolent Swaraj, there can be no encroach ment upon just rights; 
contrariwise no one can possess unjust rights. – H, 25-3-39, 65.  
 
299. You have said that nonviolence automatically s olves unemployment. You 
are right, for it rules out exploitation. –H, 21-5-38, 121.  
 
Nonviolence and Capital  
300. Q. Is it possible to defend by nonviolence any thing which was gained 
through violence? 
A. It followed from what Gandhiji had said above th at what was gained by 
violence could not only be defended by nonviolence but the latter required the 
abandonment of the ill-gotten gains. 
Q. Is the accumulation of capital possible except t hrough violence whether 
open or tacit? 
A. Such accumulation by private persons was impossi ble except through violent 
means, but accumulation by the State in a nonviolen t society was not only 
possible, it was desirable and inevitable. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 114  Q. Whether a man accumulates material or moral weal th, he does so only 
through the help or co-operation of other members o f the society. Has he then 
the moral right to use any of it mainly for persona l advantage? 
A. The answer was as emphatic no.-- H, I6-2-47, 25 . 
 
A Talk to Zamindars  
301. Q. The Karachi Congress passed a resolution la ying down the fundamental 
rights of the people, and since it recognized priva te property, nationalist 
zamindars have supported the Congress. But the new Socialist Party in the 
Congress threatens extinction of private property. How would it affect the 
Congress policy? Don’t you think, this will precipi tate class war? Will you 
prevent it? 
A. The Karachi Resolution can be altered only by th e open session of the next 
Congress, but let me assure you that I shall be no party to dispossession 
propertied classes of their private property withou t just cause. My objective is 
to reach your heart and convert you so that you may  hold all your private 
property in trust for your tenants and use it prima rily for their welfare. I am 
aware of the fact that within the ranks of the Cong ress a new party, called the 
Socialist party is coming into being, and I cannot say what would happen if that 
party succeeds in carrying the Congress with it. Bu t I am quite clear that if 
strictly honest and unchallengeable referendum of o ur millions were to be 
taken, they would not vote for the wholesale exprop riation of the propertied 
classes. I am working for the co-operation and co-o rdination of capital and 
labour, of landlord and tenant. It is open to you t o join the Congress as much as 
it is open to the poorest by paying the fee of anna s four and subscribing to the 
Congress creed. 
But I must utter a not of warning. I have always to ld mill owners that they are 
not exclusive owners of mills and workmen are equal  sharers in ownership. In 
the same way, I would tell you that ownership of yo ur land belongs as much to 
the ryots as to you, and you may not squander your gains in luxurious or 
extravagant living, but must use them for the well- being of ryots. Once you Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 115  make your ryots experience a sense of kinship with you and a sense of security 
that their interests as members of a family will ne ver suffer at your hands, you 
may be sure that there cannot be a clash between yo u and them and no class 
war. 
Class war is foreign to the essential genius of Ind ia, which is capable of evolving 
communism on the fundamental rights of all on equal  justice. Ramarajya of my 
dream ensures rights alike of prince and pauper. 
You may be sure that I shall throw the whole weight  of my influence in 
preventing class war. Supposing that there is an at tempt unjustly to deprive 
you of your property, you will find me fighting on your side. 
Q. We propose to support Congress candidates in the  next Assembly elections. 
But we have our misgivings about the policy they wi ll adopt in the Assembly. 
Could you persuade the Parliamentary Board to dispe l our fears? 
A. I invite you to discuss the thing with the membe rs of the Parliamentary 
Board. I know, however that no member will talk of expropriation or extinction 
of private property. They will certainly insist on radical reform in your relations 
with the ryots, but that should be no new thing to you. Even Sir Malcolm Haily 
and Lord Irwin appealed to you to realize and live up to the spirit of the time. 
If you will only do this, you may be sure we shall be able to evolve indigenous 
socialism of the purest type. 
Socialism and communism of the West are based on ce rtain conception which 
are fundamentally different from ours. One such con ception is their belief in 
essential selfishness of human nature. I do not sub scribe to it for I know that 
the former can respond to the call of the spirit in  him, can rise superior to the 
passions that he owns in common with the brute and,  therefore, superior to 
selfishness and violence, which belong to the brute  nature and not to the 
immortal spirit of man. That is the fundamental con ception of Hinduism, which 
has years of penance and austerity at the back of d iscovery of this truth. That 
is why, whilst we have had saints who have worn out  their bodies and laid down 
their lives in order to explore the secrets of the lives in exploring the remotest 
or the highest regions of the earth. Our socialism or communism should, Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 116  therefore, be based on nonviolence and on harmoniou s co-operation of labour 
and capital, landlord and tenant. 
There is nothing in the Congress creed or policy th at need frighten you. All your 
fears and misgivings, permit me to tell you, are th ose of guilty conscience. 
Wipe out injustices you may have been consciously o r unconsciously guilty of, 
and shed all fear of congress and Congressmen. Once  you turn a new life in 
relations between Zamindars and ryots, you will fin d us on your side guarding 
your private rights and property. 
When I say ‘us’, I have Pandit Jawaharlal also in m ind, for I am sure that on this 
essential principle of nonviolence there is no diff erence between us. He does 
indeed talk of nationalization of property, but it need not frighten you. The 
nation cannot own property except by vesting it in individuals. It simply ensures 
it’s just and equitable use, and prevents all possi ble misuse; and I do not think 
you can have any possible objection to holding your  property for the benefit of 
the ryots. Ryots themselves have no greater ambitio n than to live in peace and 
freedom and they will never grudge your possession of property provided you 
use it for them.— ABP, 2-8-34.  
 
On Class War  
302.Q. Do you think co-operation between the exploi ted and the exploiters is at 
all possible to attain the ideals you stand for? Do  you not think that the time 
has come when the Congress should take a definite s tand for the rights of the 
landlords? Do you not think that it is not possible  to organize the masses 
effectively on the nationalistic programme, and wor kers have no need of no 
other alternative but to array themselves against t he capitalists and landlords 
and for the exploited tenants and labour? Do you no t think that a class war is 
inevitable and interested classes must perish for t he sake of a greater 
humanity? 
A. I never said that there should be co-operation b etween the exploiter and the 
exploited so long as exploitation and the will to e xploit persists. Only I do not 
believe that the capitalists and the landlords are all exploiters by an inherent Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 117  necessity or that there is a basic or irreconcilabl e antagonism between their 
interests and those of the masses. All exploitation  is based on co-operation, 
willing or forced, of the exploited. However mush w e may detest admitting it, 
the fact remains that there would be no exploitatio n if people refuse to obey 
the exploiter. But self comes in and we hug the cha ins that bind us. This must 
cease. What is needed is not the extinction of land lords and capitalists, but a 
transformation of the existing relationship between  them and the masses into 
something healthier and purer. 
You ask ‘whether the time has not come when the Con gress should stand for 
the rights of the masses as opposed to the interest s of the capitalists and the 
landlords’. My reply is that ever since the Congres s has come on the scene, it 
has done nothing else, whether it was dominated by the Moderates or the 
Extremists. From its very inception under A.O. Hume , it has sought to represent 
the masses. That indeed was its origin; and a study  of the history of nearly half 
a century would prove to the hilt that congress has  been all through 
progressively representative of the masses. 
Do I not think that the time has come when congress  should take a definite 
stand for the rights of the masses irrespective of the interests of the capitalists 
and the landlords? No. We, the so-called friends of  the masses will only dig out 
and their graves if we took that stand. I would lik e to use the landlords and the 
capitalists for the service of the masses, as the l ate Sir Surendra Nath used to 
do. We must not sacrifice the interests of the mass es to the capitalists. We 
must not play their game. We must trust them to the  measure of their ability to 
surrender their gains for the service of the masses . 
Do you think that the so-called privileged classes are altogether devoid of 
nationalistic sentiments? If you think so, you will  be doing grave injustice to 
them and disservice to the cause of the masses. Are  not they too exploited by 
the rulers? They are not insusceptible to the highe r appeal. It has been my 
invariable experience that a kind word uttered, goe s home to them. If we win 
their confidence and put them at their ease, we wil l find that they are not 
averse to progressively sharing their riches whit t he masses. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 118  Moreover, let us ask ourselves how much we have don e to identify ourselves 
with the masses. Have we bridged the gulf between t he surging millions and us? 
Let us, who live in glass houses, not throw stones.  To what extent do you share 
the life of the masses? I confess that with me, it is still an aspiration. We 
ourselves have not completely shed the habits of li ving that we say that the 
capitalists are notorious for. 
The idea of class war does not appeal to me. India a class war is not inevitable, 
but it is avoidable if we have understood the messa ge of nonviolence. Those 
who talk about class war as being inevitable, have not understood the 
implications of nonviolence or have understood them  only skin-deep. 
Q. How can the rich help the poor without the rich being poor themselves? 
Richness or capitalism is a system which tries to p erpetuate the colossal 
difference between capital and labour in order to m aintain its position and 
status. Is it therefore possible, to effect any com promise between them 
without greatly injuring the interests of either? 
A. The rich can help the poor by using their riches  not for selfish pleasure, but 
so as to sub serve the interests of the poor. If th ey do so, there will not be that 
unbridgeable gulf that today exists between the hav es and the have-nots. 
Class division there will be, but they will then be  horizontal, not vertical. 
Let us not be obsessed with catch-words and seducti ve slogans imported from 
the West. Have we not our distinct Eastern traditio n? Are we not capable of 
finding our own solution to the question of capital  and labour? What is the 
system of Varnashrama but a means of harmonizing th e difference between 
high and low, as well as between capital and labour ? All that comes from the 
West on this subject is tarred with the brush of vi olence. I object to it because 
I have seen the wreckage that lies at the end of th is road. The more thinking 
set even in the West today stand aghast at the abys s for which their system is 
heading. And I owe whatever influence I have in the  West to my ceaseless 
endeavour to find a solution which promises an esca pe from the vicious circle 
of violence and exploitation. I have been a sympath etic student of the Western 
social order and I have discovered that underlying the fever that fills the soul of Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 119  the West there is a restless search for truth. I va lue that spirit. Let us study our 
Eastern institutions in that spirit of scientific e nquiry and we shall evolve a 
truer socialism and a truer communism than the worl d has yet dreamed of. It is 
surely wrong to presume that Western socialism or c ommunism is last word on 
the question of mass poverty.— ABP, 3-8-34 . 
 
303. Gandhiji wanted to say a few words to the work men in the workmen’s 
locality. He hoped that there was no distinction be tween the Hindus and the 
Muslims in labour. They were all labourers. If the communal canker entered the 
labour ranks, both will weaken labour and therefore  themselves and the 
country. Labour was a great leveller of all distinc tions. If they realized that 
truth, he would like them to go a step further. Lab our, because it chose to 
remain unintelligent, either became subservient or insolently believed in 
damaging capitalists’ goods and machinery or even i n killing capitalists. He was 
a labourer by conviction and a bhangi. As such his interests were bound with 
those of labour. As such he wished to tell them tha t violence would eggs. What 
he had been saying for years was that labour was fa r superior to capital. 
Without labour, gold, silver and copper were a usel ess burden. It was labour 
which extracted precious ore from the bowels of the  earth. He could quit 
conceive labour existing without metal. Labour was priceless, not gold. He 
wanted marriage between capital and labour. They co uld work wonders in co-
operation. But that could happen only when labour w as intelligent enough to 
co-operate with itself and then offer co-operation with capital on terms of 
honourable equality. Capital controlled labour beca use it know the art of 
combination. Drops in separation could only fade aw ay; drops in co-operation 
made the ocean which carried on its broad bosom oce an greyhounds. Similarly, 
if all the labourers in any part of the world combi ned together they could not 
be tempted by higher wages or helplessly allow them selves to be attracted for, 
say a pittance. A true and nonviolent combination o f labour would act like a 
magnet attracting to it all the needed capital. Cap italists would then exist only 
as trustees. When that happy day dawned, there woul d be no difference 
between capital and labour. Then labour will have a mple food, good and Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 120  sanitary dwellings, all the necessary education for  their children, ample leisure 
for self-education and proper medical assistance. –H, 7-9-47, 3II.  
 
304. The correspondent is wrong in suggesting that I do not believe in the 
existence of class struggle. What I do not believe in is the necessity of 
fomenting and keeping it up. I entertain a growing belief that it is perfectly 
possible to avoid it. There is no virtue in fomenti ng it, as there is in preventing 
it. The conflict between monied classes and laboure rs is merely seeming. When 
labour is intelligent enough to organize itself and  learns to act as one man, it 
will have the same weight as money if not much grea ter. The conflict is really 
between intelligence and unintelligence. Surely it will be folly to keep up such 
a conflict. Unintelligence must be removed. 
Money has its use as much as labour. After all mone y is a token of exchange. A 
person having 25 rupees has say 50 labourers per da y at his disposal, regarding 
8 as the wage for a day of eight hours. A labourer who has 49 fellow labourers 
working in unison with the person who has Rs. 25. T he advantage, if any, will 
be with the one who has monopoly of labour. If both  are even there will be 
harmony. The problem therefore is not to set class against class, but to educate 
labour to a sense of its dignity. Monied men after all form a microscopic 
minority in the world. They will act on the square,  immediately labour realizes 
its power and yet acts on the square. To inflame la bour realizes its power and 
yet acts on the square. To inflame labour against m onied men is to perpetuate 
class hatred and all the evil consequences flowing from it. The strife is a vicious 
circle to be avoided at any cost. It is an admissio n of weakness, a sign of 
inferiority complex. The moment labour recognizes i ts own dignity, money will 
find its rightful place, i.e. it  will be held in trust for labour. For labour is mor e 
than money. – H, I6-I0-45, 285.  
 
Liquidating Class Interests by Conversion  
305. Exploitation of the poor can be extinguished n ot by effecting the 
destruction of a few millionaires, but by removing the ignorance of the poor Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 121  and teaching them to non-co-operate with their expl oiters. That will convert 
the exploiters also. I have even suggested that ult imately it will lead to both 
being equal partners. Capital as such is not evil; it is its wrong use that is evil. 
Capital in some form or other will always be needed . –H, 28-7-40, 2I9. cf. 326, 
364.  
 
306. The money-lender who is inevitable today will gradually eliminate himself. 
Q. But what about the Zamindars? Would you eliminat e him? Would you destroy 
him? 
A. I do not want to destroy the Zamindars, but neit her do I feel that the 
Zamindars is inevitable. I expect to convert the Za mindars and other capitalists 
by the non-violent method, and therefore there is f or me nothing like an 
inevitability of class conflict. For it is an essen tial part of non-violence to go 
along the line of least resistance. The moment the cultivators of the soil realize 
their power, the Zamindars evil will be sterilized.  What can the poor Zamindars 
do when they say that they will simply not work the  land unless they are paid 
enough to feed and clothe and educate themselves an d their children in a 
decent manner. In reality the toiler is the owner o f what he produces. If the 
toiler is the owner of what he produces. If the toi lers intelligently combine, 
they will become an irresistible power. That is how  I do not see the necessity of 
class conflict. If I though it inevitable, I should  not hesitate to preach it and 
teach it. – H, 5-I2-36, 338.  
 
307. (Speaking to the vast crowd gathered at the pu blic meeting at Brindaban, 
Bihar, Gandhiji said:) 
I believe that they land you cultivate should belon g to you, but it cannot be 
your own all at once, you cannot force it from the Zamindars. Non-violence is 
the only way, consciousness of your own power is th e only way, consciousness 
of your own power is the only way.— H, 20-5-39, 133.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 122  308. Real socialism has been handed down to us by o ur ancestors who taught: 
‘All land belongs to Gopal, where then is the bound ary line? Man is the maker of 
that line and he can therefore unmake it.’ Gopal li terally means shepherd; it 
also means God. In modern language it means the sta te i.e. the People. That 
the land today does not belong to the people is too  true. But the fault is not in 
the teaching. It is in us who have not lived up to it. 
I have no doubt that we can make as good an approac h to it as is possible for 
any nation, not excluding Russia, and that without violence. The most effective 
substitute for violent dispossession is the wheel w ith all its implications. Land 
and all property is his who will work it. Unfortuna tely the workers are or have 
been kept ignorant of this simple fact. 
Continuous unemployment has induced in the people a  kind of laziness which is 
most depressing. Thus whilst the alien rule is undo ubtedly responsible for the 
growing pauperism of the people, we are more respon sible for the it. If the 
middle-class people, who betrayed their trust and b artered away the economic 
independence of India for a mess of pottage, would now realize their error and 
take the message of the wheel to the villagers and induce them to shed their 
laziness and work at the wheel, we can  ameliorate the condition of the people 
to a great extent. –H, 2-I-37, 375.  
 
The Farmer’s Share  
309. Q. We agree that intrinsically a movement for reducing the share of the 
owner from half to a third of the crop is justified . But could not the present 
Tebhaga Movement in Bengal be postponed until such time as the affected 
persons can be smoothly absorbed in other occupatio ns according to some long-
term plan sponsored by the state? 
We know you have said that the only way to effect s uch a radical 
transformation in society is through non-violence. But interested parties will 
sleep over that portion of your advice and parade y our moral support to their 
demand and carry on the Movement in their own viole nt way. Hence, is it not 
wrong for you to lend support to the Movement under  the present Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 123  circumstances when there is every chance of the ent ire middle class of Bengal 
being completely ruined as a result? The common vil lager will also suffer no 
less because he will also be deprived of the servic es now being rendered to the 
village economy by them. 
A. In reply, Gandhiji uttered the warning that he o nly dealt with principles as 
he know them. He had not studied the local question . Therefore, the 
questioner ran the risk of his ignorance causing in justice. 
He felt that the question betrayed exaggeration on the part of the questioner. 
There was no ruin impending the landlord. His land was not being confiscated. 
His portion, which he could take even if he was in Timbuktu, was merely to be 
reduced from 50% to 33%. He could see no ruin in th e proposal. He was afraid 
that they were too much obsessed by the communal qu estion. They should rise 
above it and examine every problem strictly on meri ts. Then they would never 
go wrong. Therefore they should accept the moral pr inciple underlying the 
demand for reduction of the owner’s share and work for solid amendments in 
which they were likely to succeed. Let them not fac e confiscation rather than 
moderate reduction. Let them remember that for year s past India had been 
ruined and both the artisans as well as the farmers  of India had been 
progressively reduced to poverty. 
If the desired change were brought about through no n-violent means. The 
world would not be deprived of the talents of the c lasses, but then the latter 
would not exercise them at the expense of the labou rers. In the nonviolent 
order of the future, the land would belong to the s tate, for had it not been said 
‘sabhi bhumi Gopalki’? Under such dispensation, the re would be no waste of 
talents and labour. This would be impossible throug h violent means. It was 
therefore a truism to say that the utter ruin of th e landowner brought about 
through violence would also involve the ruin of the  labourers in the end. If the 
landowners, therefore, acted wisely, no party would  lose.  –H, 9-3-47, 57.  
 
310. I am not ashamed to own that many capitalists are friendly towards me 
and do not fear me. They know that I desire to end capitalism almost, if not Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 124  quite, as much as the most advanced socialist or ev en communist. But our 
methods differ, our languages differ. My theory of ‘trusteeship’ is no make-
shift, certainly no camouflage. I am confident that  it will survive all other 
theories. It has the sanction of philosophy and rel igion behind it. That 
possessors of wealth have not acted up to the theor y does not prove its falsity; 
it proves the weakness of the wealthy. No other the ory is compatible with non-
violence. In the non-violent method the wrong-doer compasses his own end, If 
he does not undo the wrong. For either through non- violent non-co-operation 
he is made to see his error, or he finds himself co mpletely isolated. 
–H, I6-I2-39, 376. 
 
For the Princes  
311. A kind of nervousness creeps over me as I thin k of the princes of India, 
although I have the privilege of knowing many and s ome even intimately. My 
nervousness arises from the painful knowledge that they are a creation of the 
British rulers. Though some of them pre-existed bef ore the British advent, their 
existence thereafter depended solely on British goo dwill, which in its turn 
depended upon the price the then incumbents paid fo r that commodity. The 
present incumbents are sole creation of the Imperia l power. Its simple frown 
can undo them. 
The Empire is going either by the will of the Briti sh people or by the force of 
circumstances beyond their control. India shall not  always be a slave country. 
Will the Princes march with the times or must they remain tied to the Imperial 
chariot-wheel? 
This I admit is a heroic step. They can adopt the m iddle course. They may earn 
the goodwill of their people by sharing their power s with them. But they may 
certainly hope to retain much if they can secure th e contentment and active 
co-operation of the people within their jurisdictio n, in the administration of 
their own affairs. I think it is wrong of the Princ es to let their critics say of 
their people that they are too backward to deserve freedom. It is a reflection 
on them. The people in the States belong to the sam e stock as those outside Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 125  their borders. The Princes can lose nothing by bein g liberal. And they can lose 
everything by holding on to their autocracy. 
For my part I desire not abolition, but conversion of their autocracy into 
trusteeship, not in name but in reality. The arbitr ary powers they enjoy should 
go. The liberty of the people should not depend upo n the will of an individual 
however noble and ancient may be his decent. Nor ca n any person, whether 
prince or a princely Zamindars or merchant, be the sole owner and disposer of 
possessions hereditary of self-acquired. Every indi vidual must have the fullest 
liberty to use his talents consistently with equal use by his neighbours but no 
one is entitled to the arbitrary use of the gains f rom the talents. He is part of 
the nation or say the social structure surrounding him. Therefore he can only 
use his talents not for self only but for the socia l structure of which he is but a 
part and on whose sufferance he lives. The present inequalities are surely due 
to people’s ignorance. With a growing knowledge of their natural strength, the 
inequalities must disappear. If the revolution is r evolution is about by violence 
the position will be reversed, but not altered for the better. With nonviolence, 
i.e. conversion, the new era which people hope for must be born. My approach 
and appeal are in terms of nonviolence pure and und efiled. The French have a 
noble motto in Liberty, Equality, Fraternity. It is  a heritage not for the French 
only but for all mankind. 
What the French never realized is open to us to do.  Will the Princes and the 
princely land-holders and merchants take the lead? It is for them to take the 
lead not for the have-nots, who have nothing to sha re with anybody except 
their pauperism and abjectness. I am addressing wee kly appeals to the British 
Power. They are made exactly in the same friendly s pirit as this is. The British 
may not respond. If the haves, who are in fact the pillars on which the mighty 
British Power rests, can realize their obvious duty , the British Power must 
yield. It was because I had despaired of response f rom the pillars, that I have 
thought of moving the masses on whom the pillars re st. I may not leave a single 
stone unturned to avoid, if I can,  what is undoubtedly a great risk. Hence this 
appeal. – H, 2-8-42, 249.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 126  The Theory of Trusteeship  
312. Q. You have asked rich men to be trustees. Is it implied that they should 
give up private ownership in their property and cre ate out of it a trust valid in 
the eyes of law and managed democratically? How wil l the successor of the 
present incumbent be determined on his demise? 
A. In answer Gandhiji said that he adhered to the p osition taken by him years 
ago that everything belonged to God and was from go d. Therefore it was for His 
people as a whole, not for a particular individual.  When an individual had more 
than his proportionate portion he became a trustee of that portion for God’s 
people. 
God who was all-powerful had no need to store. He c reated from day to day, 
hence men also should in theory live from day to da y and not stock things. If 
this truth was imbibed by the people generally, it would become legalized and 
trusteeship would become a legalized institution. H e wished it became a gift 
from India to the world. Then there would be no exp loitation and no reserves 
as in Australia and other countries for White men a nd their posterity. In these 
distinctions lay the seeds of a war more virulent t han the last two. As to the 
successor, the trustee in office would have the rig ht to nominate his successor 
subject to legal sanction. — H, 23-2-47, 39.  
 
313. Q. How would the successor of a trustee be det ermined? Will he only have 
the right of proposing a name, the right of finaliz ation being vested in the 
State? 
A. As he had said yesterday, choice should be given  to the original owner who 
became the first trustee, but the choice must be fi nalized by the state. Such 
arrangement puts a check on the state as well as th e individual. 
Q. When the replacement of private by public proper ty thus takes place 
through the operation of the theory of trusteeship,  will the ownership vest in 
the state, which is an instrument of violence, or i n associations of a voluntary 
character like village communes and municipalities,  which may, of course, 
derive their final authority from state-made laws? Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 127  A. That question involved some confusion of thought . Legal ownership in the 
transformed condition was vested in the trustee, no t in the state. It was in 
order to avoid confiscation that the doctrine of tr usteeship came into play, 
retaining for society the ability of the original o wner in his own right 
Nor did he, the speaker, hold that the state must a lways be based on violence. 
It might be so in theory, but the practice of the t heory demanded a state which 
would for the most part be based on non-violence. –H, 16-2-47, 25.  
 
314. To the landlords he said that if what was said  against them was true, he 
would warn them that their days were numbered. They  could no longer 
continue as lords and masters. They had a bright fu ture if they became the 
trustees of the poor kisans. He had in mind not tru stees in name but in reality. 
Such trustees would take nothing for themselves tha t their labour and care did 
not entitle them to. Then they would find that no l aw would be able to touch 
them. The kisans would be their friends. –H, 4-5-47 , 134. 
 
315. Q. You say that a Raja, a Zamindars or a capit alist should be a trustee for 
the poor. Do you think that any such exist today? O r do you expect them to be 
so transformed? 
A. I think that some very few exist even today, tho ugh not in the full sense of 
the term. They are certainly moving in that directi on. It can, however, be 
asked whether the present Rajas and others can be e xpected to become 
trustees of the poor. If they do not become trustee s of their own accord, force 
of circumstances will compel the reform unless they  court utter destruction. 
When Panchayat Raj is established, public opinion w ill do what violence can 
never do. The present power of the Zamindars, the c apitalists and the Rajas 
can hold sway only so long as the common people do not realize their own 
strength. If the people non-co-operate with the evi l of Zamindars of capitalism, 
it must die of inanition. In Panchayat Raj only the  Panchayat will be obeyed 
and the Panchayat can only work through the laws of  their making. – H, I-6-47, 
I72.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 128   
08. THE CONGRESS IN RELATION TO THE CLASSES AND THE  MASSES 
 
The Character of the Congress  
316. I do not consider the Congress as a party orga nization, even as the British 
Parliament, though it contains all parties, and has  one party or other 
dominating it from time to time, is not a party org anization. I shall venture to 
hope that all parties platform for all parties to a ppeal to the Nation, with a 
view to molding its policy, and I would endeavor so  to mould the policy of the 
League* as to make the Congress retain its no-party  national character.—Sita, 
326. 
 
317. The Congress represents the whole of India. Th e Congress from its very 
inception has not been of any particular groove or any particular colour or 
caste or of any particular province. It has claimed , ever since its birth, to 
represent the whole nation and on your behalf I hav e made the claim that you 
represent not only the registered members of the co ngress but the entire 
nation. (A.I.C.C. speech of 8-8-42) 
—ABP, 9-8-42. 
 
318. Let us understand the functions of the Congres s. For internal growth and 
administration it is as good a democratic organizat ion as any to be found in the 
world. But this democratic organization has been br ought into being to fight 
the greatest imperialist power living. For this ext ernal work, therefore, it has 
to be likened to an army. As such, it ceases to be democratic. The Central 
authority possesses plenary powers, enabling it to impose and enforce 
discipline on the various units working under it…. 
It has been suggested that, whilst my thesis holds good when there is active 
war in the shape of civil resistance going on, it c annot, whilst the latter Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 129  remains under suspension. But suspension of Civil D isobedience does not mean 
suspension of war. 
* The Home Rule League of which he had become Presi dent after Mrs. Annie 
Besant. 
The latter can only end when India has a constituti on of her making. Till then, 
the congress must be in the nature of an army. 
Therefore, the Congress, conceived as a fighting ma chine, has to centralize 
control and guide every department and every congre ssman, however highly 
placed. And expect unquestioned obedience. The figh t cannot be fought on any 
other terms. They say this is fascism, pure and sim ple; but they forget that 
fascism is the naked sword. Under it…should lose hi s head. The Congress is the 
very antithesis of fascism, because it is bases on nonviolence pure and 
undefiled. Its sanctions are all moral. Its authori ty is not derived from the 
control of panoplied Black-Shirts. 
That is the glory and strength of the Congress, not  its weakness. Its authority is 
derived form that non-violent attitude. It is the o nly purely nonviolent political 
organization of importance, to my knowledge, throug hout the world. And let it 
continue to be the boast of the Congress that it ca n command the willing and 
hearty obedience from its followers, so long as the y choose to belong to it. 
–A.I.C.C. bulletin on C.P. Ministerial Crisis (1937 -38), 71-81. 
 
319. The Congress has a double function. It is a de mocratic organization in 
peace time. It becomes a non-violent army in wartim e. In its second capacity it 
has no voting power. It will is expressed by its ge neral whoever he may be. 
Every unit has to tender him willing obedience in t hought, word and deed. Yes, 
even in thought, since the fight is non-violent. –H , 18-11-39, 344. 
 
Representing the Masses  
320. The Congress must cease to be a debating socie ty of talented lawyers who 
do not leave their practice, but it must consist of  producers and manufacturers, Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 130  and those who would understand them, nurse them and  voice their feelings. 
Practicing lawyers can help by becoming silent work ers and donors. I 
sympathize with them for their desire to be in the limelight. But I would urge 
them to recognize their limitations. 
–YI, II-8-2I, 252. 
 
321. The congress must progressively represent the masses. They are as yet 
untouched by politics. They have no political consc iousness of the type our 
politicians desire. Their politics are confined to bread and salt-I dare not say 
butter, for millions do not know the taste of ghee or even oil. Their politics are 
confined to communal adjustments. It is right howev er to say that we the 
politicians do represent the masses in opposition t o the government. But if we 
begin to use them before they are ready, we shall c ease to represent them We 
must first come in living touch with them by workin g for them and in their 
midst. We must share their sorrows, understand thei r difficulties and anticipate 
their wants. With the pariahs we must be pariahs an d see how we feel to clean 
the closets of the upper classes and have the remai ns of their table thrown at 
us. We must see how we like being in the boxes, mis called houses, of the 
labourers of Bombay. We must identify ourselves wit h the villagers who toil 
under the hot sun beating on their bent backs and s ee how we would like to 
drink water from the pool in which the villagers ba the, wash their clothes and 
pots and in which their cattle drink and roll. Then  and not till then shall we 
truly represent the masses and they will, as surely  as I am writing this, respond 
to every call. 
‘We cannot all do this, and if we are to do this, g ood-boy to Swaraj for a 
thousand years and more,’ some will say. I shall sy mpathize with the objection. 
But I do claim that some of us at least will have t o go  through the agony and 
out of it only will a nation full, vigorous and fre e be born.—YI, II-9-24, 300. 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 131  Interest of the Masses Supreme  
322. I may tell you that the congress does not belo ng to any particular group of 
men. It belongs to all; but the protection of the p oor peasantry, which forms 
the bulk of the population of the poor peasantry, w hich forms the bulk of the 
population, must be its primary interest. The congr ess must, therefore, truly 
represent the poor. But that does not mean that all  other classes the middle 
classes, the capitalists or zamindars-must go under . All that it aims at is that all 
other classes must subscribe to the interests of th e poor. 
To me Hind Swaraj is the rule of all the people, is  the rule of justice. –YI, I6-4-
3I, 79, 78. 
 
323. Let there be no mistake as to what Purna Swara j means to the Congress. It 
is full economic freedom for the toiling millions. It is no unholy alliance with 
any interest for their exploitation. –YI, I6-4-3I, 77. 
 
324. I will therefore state the purpose. It is comp lete freedom from alien yoke 
in every sense of the term, and this for the sake o f the dumb millions. Every 
interest, therefore, that is hostile to their inter est, must be revised or must 
subside if it is not capable of revision. —YI, I7-9 -3I,263. 
 
Under Swaraj  
325. I am afraid that for years to come India would  be engaged in passing 
legislation in order to raise the downtrodden, the fallen, from the mire into 
which they have been sunk by the capitalists, by th e landlords, by the so-called 
higher classes, and then, subsequently and scientif ically, by the British rulers. 
If we are to lift these people from the mire, then it would be the bounden duty 
of the National Government of India, in order to se t its house in order, 
continually to give preference to these people and even free them from the 
burdens under which they are being crushed. And, if  the landlords, zamindars, 
monied men and those who are today enjoying privile ges-I do not care whether Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 132  they are Europeans or Indians-if they find that the y are discriminated against. I 
shall sympathize with them, but I will not be able to help them, even if I could 
possible do so, because I would seek their assistan ce in that process, and 
without their assistance it would not be possible t o raise these people out of 
the mire. 
Look at that condition, if you will, of the untouch ables, if the law comes to 
their assistance and sets apart miles of territory.  At the present moment they 
hold no land; they are absolutely living at the mer cy of the so-called higher 
castes, and also, let me say, at the mercy of the s tate. They can be removed 
from one quarter to another without complaint and w ithout being able to seek 
the assistance of law. Well, the first act of the L egislature will then be to see 
that in order somewhat to equalize conditions, thes e people are given grants 
freely. 
From whose pockets are those grants to come? Not fr om the pockets of Heaven 
is not going to drop money for the sake of the stat e. They will naturally come 
from the monied classes, including the Europeans. 
It will be, therefore, a battle between the haves a nd have-nots: and if that is 
what is feared, I am afraid the National Government  will not be able to come 
into being if all the classes hold the pistol at th e head of the dumb millions and 
say: ‘You shall not have a Government of your own u nless you guarantee our 
possessions and our rights.’ 
I have got another formula also hurriedly drafted b ecause I drafted it here as I 
was listening to Lord Reading and Sir Tej Bahadur S apru. It is in connection with 
existing rights: 
"No existing interest legitimately acquired and not  being in conflict with the 
best interests of the nation in general, shall be i nterfered with except in 
accordance with the law applicable to such interest s." 
I certainly have in mind what you find in the congr ess resolution in connection 
with the taking over by the incoming Government of obligation that are being 
today discharged by the British Government. Just as  we claim that these 
obligations must be examined by an impartial tribun al before they are taken Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 133  over by us, so should existing interests be subject  to judicial scrutiny when 
necessary. There is no question, therefore, of repu diation but merely of taking 
over under examination under audit. We have here so me of us who have made 
a study of the privileges and monopolies enjoyed by  the Europeans, but let it 
not be merely Europeans: there are Indians-I have u ndoubtedly several Indians 
in mind-who are today in possession of land which h as been practically given 
away to them not for any service rendered to the na tion but for some service 
rendered, I cannot even say to the Government, beca use I do not think that the 
Government has benefited, but to some official; and  if you tell me that those 
concessions and those privileges are not to be exam ined by the state, I again 
tell you that it will be impossible to run the mach inery of Government on 
behalf of the have-nots on behalf of the dispossess ed. Hence, you will see that 
there is nothing stated here in connection with the  Europeans. The second 
formula also is applicable equally to the Europeans  as it is applicable to 
Indians, as it is applicable, say, to Sir Purushott amdas Thakurdas and Sir 
Pheroze Sethna. If they have obtained concessions w hich have been obtained 
because they did some service to the officials of t he day and got some miles of 
land, well, if I had the possession of the Governme nt I would quickly dispose 
them. I would not consider them because they are In dians, and I would just as 
readily they are and however friendly they are to m e. The law will be no 
respecter of whatsoever. I give you that assurance.  I am unable to go any 
further. So, that is really what is implied by ‘leg itimately acquired’ that every 
interest must have been taintless, it we shall expe ct to examine all these things 
when they come under the notice of the Government. 
Then you have ‘not being in conflict with the best interests of the nation’. I 
have in mind certain monopolies legitimately acquir ed, undoubtedly, but which 
have been brought into being in conflict with the b est interests of the nation. 
Let me give you an illustration which will amuse yo u somewhat, but which is on 
natural ground. Take this white elephant which is c alled New Delhi. Crores 
have been spent upon it. Suppose that the future Go vernment comes to the 
conclusion that seeing that we have got this white elephant it ought to be 
turned to some use. Imagine that in Old Delhi there  is a plague or cholera going Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 134  on, and we want hospitals for the poor people. What  are we to do? Do you 
suppose that the National Government will be able t o build hospitals, and so 
on? Nothing of the kind. We will take charge of tho se buildings and put these 
plague-stricken people in them and use them as hosp itals, because I contend 
that those buildings are in conflict with the best interests of the nation. They 
do not represent the millions of India. They may be  representative on the 
monies men who are sitting here at the table; they may be representative of 
His Highness the Nawab Sahib of Bhopal, or of sir P urushottamdas Thakurdas, or 
of Sir Pheroze Sethna, or of Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru,  but they are not 
representative of those who lack even a place to sl eep and have not even a 
crust of bread to eat. If the National Government c omes to the conclusion that 
that place is unnecessary, no matter what interests  are concerned, they will be 
dispossessed, and they will be dispossessed, I may tell you, without any 
compensation, because, if you want this Government,  to pay compensation it 
will have to rob Peter and Pay Paul, that would be impossible. 
It is a bitter pill which has got to be swallowed i f a Government, as Congress 
conceives it, comes into being. In order to take in to the belief that everything 
will be quite all right. I want, on behalf of the c ongress, to lay all the cards on 
the table. I want no mental reservation of any desc ription whatsoever; and 
then, if the Congress position is acceptable, nothi ng will please me better, but 
if today I fell I cannot possible touch your hearts  and cannot carry you with me, 
then the Congress must continue to wander and must continue the process of 
proselytization until you are all converted and all ow the millions of India to feel 
that at last they have got a National Government. – NV, 7I. 
 
The Question of the States  
326. I have often declared that the Congress should  generally adopt a policy of 
non-interference with regard to questions affecting  Indian States. At a time 
when the people of British India are fighting for t heir own freedom, for them to 
interfere with the affairs of the Indian States wou ld only be to betray 
impotence. Just as the Congress clearly cannot have  any effective voice in the 
relation between Indian States and the British Gove rnment, even so will its Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 135  interference be ineffective as to the relations bet ween the Indian States and 
their subjects. Still the people in British India a s well as in the Indian States are 
one, for India is one. 
I am firmly of opinion that so long as British Indi a have not free, so long as the 
people of British India have not attained real powe r, that is to say, so long as 
British India has not the power of self-expression,  in a word, so long as British 
India does not obtain Swaraj, so long will India, B ritish as well as Native remain 
in a distracted condition. The existence of a third  power depends upon a 
continuance of such distraction. We can put our hou se in order only when 
British India has attained Swaraj. 
I have therefore often said that the liberation of British India spells the 
liberation of the states as well. When the auspicio us day of the freedom of 
British India arrives, the relation of the ruler an d the ruled in the Indian states 
will not cease but will be purified. Swaraj as conc eived by me does not mean 
the end of kingship. I have staked my all in the mo vement of Swaraj in the hope 
that Swaraj is a certain cure for all maladies. As darkness vanishes at sunrise, 
so when the sun of Swaraj rises, the dark anarchy o f the rulers as well as of the 
subjects will disappear in an instant. 
If the institution of kingship has a moral basis, p rinces are not independent 
proprietors but only trustees of their subjects the m only as trust money. It may 
be said that this principle has been almost complet ely carried out in the English 
Constitution. Abubaker and Hazrat Umar collected re venue running into Crores 
and yet personally they were as good as fakirs. The y received not a pie from 
the Public Treasury. They were ever watchful to see  that the people got 
justice. It was their principle that one may not pl ay false even with the enemy 
but must deal justly with him. 
That prince is acceptable to me who becomes a princ e among his people’s 
servants. The subjects are the real master. But wha t is the servants to do if the 
master goes to sleep? Everything, therefore, is inc luded in trying for a true 
national awakening. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 136  In my humble opinion I have done my done my duty by  the Princes in saying a 
few words about them. A word now to the people. The  popular saying, ‘As is 
the king, so are the people,’ is only a half-truth.  That is to say, it is not more 
true than its converse, ‘As are the people, so is t he prince.’ Where the subjects 
are watchful a prince is entirely dependent upon th em for his status. Where the 
subjects are overtaken by sleepy indifference, ther e is every possibility that 
the Prince will cease to function as a protector an d become an oppressor 
instead. Those who are not wide-awake have no right  to blame their prince. 
The Prince as well as the people are mostly creatur es of circumstances. 
Enterprising princes and peoples mould circumstance s for their own benefit. 
Manliness consists in making circumstances subservi ent to ourselves. Those who 
will not heed themselves perish. To understand this  principle is not to be 
impatient, not to reproach Fate, not to blame other s. He who understands the 
doctrine of self-help blames himself for failure. I t is on this ground that I object 
to violence. If we blame others where we should bla me ourselves and wish for 
or bring about their destruction, that does not rem ove the root cause of the 
disease which, on the contrary, sinks all the deepe r for the ignorance thereof. 
We then see that the people themselves are as respo nsible as and even more 
responsible than the Princes for the defects pointe d out by me. If public 
opinion is opposed to a particular line of action, it should be impossible for the 
Prince to adopt it. Opposition here does not mean m erely inaudible murmur. 
Public opposition is effective only where there is strength behind it. 
Such being my ideal there is room for there is full  protection guaranteed to the 
subjects for their rights. The true source of right s is duty. I have therefore 
spoken only about the duties of Princes as well as the peoples. I have not dealt 
with the questions of the ideal constitution for th e States as you alone can be 
its fashioners. My duty lies in discovering and emp loying means by which the 
nation may evolve the strength to enforce its will.  When once the nation is 
conscious of its strength it will find its own way or make it.—(Extracts from the 
speech delivered as President of the Kathiawad Poli tical Conference) 
—YI, 8-  I-25, 9. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 137   
327. I disclaim any undue partiality for the States . At the same time I own them 
no grudge; I do not desire their destruction. There  is an abundant scope for 
reform in them which it should not be impossible to  effect today. But it is my 
firm belief that it is impossible to reform the Sta tes in the true sense while 
India is in bondage. It may be possible to obtain r edress here and there in cases 
of flagrant injustice by leading a crusade against them. But such tinkering does 
not interest me. It gives me no satisfaction. I am therefore today concentrating 
all my energy on the root evil. If I can effectivel y touch the root, the branches 
will in time drop down of their own accord, whereas , on the contrary, to divert 
public attention from the root evil and mobilize it  against the branch evils in 
the States would mean lending an additional lease o f life to the former. That is 
a risk that I for one am not prepared to run. 
Let no one, however, understand me to mean from thi s that no action 
whatsoever is at present possible in the case of th e State. I shall repeat here 
what I have already said, Wherever the subjects of the States are ready for it 
they can and ought to organize an agitation against  maladministration in that 
State, especially if they have the strength to make  use of the never failing 
weapon of Satyagraha. But it is a matter of deep so rrow to me that today the 
ruled are often the tools in the hand of the wicked  rulers. Grinding oppression 
has rendered the people nerveless. No one has yet b een able to save goats from 
the clutches of tigers. The goats’ emancipation wou ld be possible only if one 
could envisage the goat-world itself giving birth t o its would-be emancipator. 
Though reduced to the position of the goat, as is n ot lost for him. He belongs to 
a higher species. Strength lies dormant in the weak . If they find an environment 
in which bipeds exactly like them exhibit strength,  it is not unlikely that they 
will catch the infection. Bardoli was only a modest  forerunner, a beam from 
the powerful sun. If Bardoli exhibited the full str ength and qualifications 
necessary for the full Satyagraha, its example woul d spread throughout the 
length and breadth of the land, and we should find ourselves including the 
people of the States a free nation. (Translated fro m Navajivan by P.)—YI, 29-8-
29, 282. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 138  Two Significant Pronouncements  
328. It is the privilege and the duty of a Hindu pr ince to propound religious 
codes which are not inconsistent with the fundament al principles of Hinduism 
as derived from the Vedas and which are demanded by  the spirit of the time. 
This must be true of all the progressive and living  religions. If the Brahmin cal 
spirit was restored, princes would be rishis, who w ould take from the revenues 
the honest minimum necessary to support them as a c ommission for their 
labours on behalf of the ryots, and hold their reve nue in trust for the ryots. 
They would not have private property as they posses s today and feel 
independent of their ryots and their wishes. —H, 2I -II-36, 324. 
 
329. As trustee the Thakore Saheb (of Rajkot) and o ther members of his family 
should perform their duty. Through the performance of their duty to the State, 
they earn the right of taking a certain amount of m oney from the State. –H, 25-
3-39, 65. 
 
330. The almost simultaneous awakening in the vario us states is a very 
significant event in the national struggle for can be due to the instigation of the 
one person or a body of persons of any organization . It is just possible that the 
Haripura resolution of the Congress put the people of the States on their mettle 
and they realized as never before that their salvat ion depended upon their own 
labours. But above all it is the time spirit that h as brought about the 
awakening. It is to be hoped that the Princes and t heir advisers will recognize it 
and meet the legitimate aspirations of the people. There is no half-way house 
between total extinction of the States and the Prin ces making their people 
responsible for the administration of their States and themselves becoming 
trustees for the people, taking an earned commissio n for their labours. 
–H, 3-I2-38, 360. 
 
*The Home Rule League of which he had become Presid ent after Mrs. Annie Besant Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 139   
09. POLITICAL SELF-GOVERNMENT  
 
The Right to Govern Oneself  
331. We must be content to die, if we cannot live a s free men and women. 
–YI, 5-I-22, 5.  
 
332. As every country is fit to eat, to drink and t o breathe, even so is every 
nation fit to manage its own affairs, no matter how  badly. 
–YI, I5-I0-3I, 305.  
 
The Ideal of Anarchism  
333. Self-government means continuous effort to be independent of 
government control whether it is foreign government  or whether it is national. 
Swaraj government will be a sorry affair if people look up to it for regulation of 
every detail of life. – YI, 6-8-25, 276.  
 
What is Swaraj for India?  
334.By Swaraj I mean the government of India by the  consent of the people as 
ascertained by the largest number of the adult popu lation, male or female, 
native born or domiciled, who have contributed by m anual labour to the service 
of the State and who have taken the trouble of havi ng their names registered as 
voters. I hope to demonstrate that real Swaraj will  come not by the acquisition 
of the capacity by all to resist authority when abu ses. In other words, Swaraj is 
to be attained by educating the masses to a sense o f their capacity to regulate 
and control authority. – YI, 29-I-25, 40, 4I.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 140  335. Mere withdrawal of the English is not independ ence. It means the 
consciousness in the average villager that he is th e maker of his own destiny, 
he is his own legislator through his chosen represe ntatives. 
–YI, I3-2-30, 52.  
 
336. We have long been accustomed to think that pow er comes only through 
Legislative Assemblies. I have regarded this belief  as a grave error brought 
about by inertia or hypnotism. A superficial study of British History has made us 
think that all power percolates to the people from parliaments. The truth is 
that power resides in the people and it is entruste d for the time being to those 
whom they may choose as their representatives. Parl iaments have no power or 
even existence independently of the people. It has been effort for the last 
twenty-one years to convince the people of this sim ple truth. Civil disobedience 
is the store-house of power. Imagine a whole people  unwilling to conform to 
the laws of the legislature, and prepared to suffer  the consequences of non-
compliance. They will bring the whole legislative a nd executive machinery to a 
standstill. The police and the military are of use to coerce minorities however 
powerful they may be. But no police or military coe rcion can bend the resolute 
will of a people, out for suffering to the uttermos t. –CP, 5.  
 
337. By political independence I do not mean an imi tation of the British House 
of Commons, or the soviet rule of Russia or the Fas cist rule of Italy or the Nazi 
rule of Germany. They have systems suited to their genius. We must have ours 
suited to ours. What that can be is more than I can  tell. I have described it as 
Rama Raj i.e. sovereignty of the people based on pu re moral authority.  
- H, 2-I-37, 374. cf. 322, 720.  
 
Franchise: Upper and Lower Age-limits  
338. As to the franchise, he swore by the franchise  of all adults, male and 
female, above the age of twenty-one or even eightee n. He would bar old men Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 141  like himself. They were of no use as voters. India and the rest of the world did 
not belong to those who were on the point of dying.  To them belonged death, 
life to the young. Thus he would have a bar against  persons beyond a certain 
age, say fifty, as he would against persons below e ighteen. 
Side by side with adult franchise, or even before t hat, he pleaded for universal 
education, not necessarily literary except as perha ps an aid. English education, 
he was convinced, had starved our minds, enervated them and never prepared 
them for brave citizenship. He would give them all sufficient knowledge in the 
rich languages of which any country would be proud.  Education in the 
understanding of the rights ofcitizenship was a sho rt-term affair if they were 
honest and earnest. – H, 2-3-47, 45.  
 
The Right of Minorities  
339. The rule of majority has a narrow application,  i.e. one should yield to the 
majority in matters of detail. But it is slavery to  be amenable to the majority, 
no matter what its decisions are. Democracy is not a state in which people act 
like sheep. Under democracy individual liberty of o pinion and action is 
jealously guarded. I therefore believe that the min ority has a perfect right to 
act differently from the majority as long as it doe s not act in the name of the 
congress. – YI, 2-3-22, I29.  
 
340. In matters of conscience the law of majority h as no place. 
—YI, 4-8-20. Tagore, 3I8.  
 
341. The vision that Joseph (Mr. George Joseph) put s before us of an armed 
government bending a minority to its will by a clat ter of arms, is a negation of 
the democratic to its will by a clatter of arms, is  a negation of the democratic 
spirit and progress. If that is the promise of the new programme, we have the 
armed coercion even now, not indeed of a mere minor ity but of an 
overwhelming majority. What we want, I hope, is a g overnment not based on Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 142  coercion even of a minority but on its conversion. If it is a change from white 
military rule to a brown, we hardly need make any f uss. At any rate the masses 
then do not count. They will be subject to the same  spoliation as now if not 
even worse. 
–YI, I9-I2-29, 4I2.  
 
Condition of the Masses under Swaraj  
342.The Swaraj of my dream is the poor man’s Swaraj . The necessaries of life 
should be enjoyed by you in common with those enjoy ed by the princes and the 
monied men. But that does not mean that you should have palaces like theirs. 
They are not necessary for happiness. You or I woul d be lost in them. But, you 
ought to get all the ordinary amenities of life tha t a rich man enjoys. I have not 
the slightest doubt that Swaraj is not Purna Swaraj until these amenities are 
guaranteed to you under it. – YI, 26-3-3I, 46.  
 
Swaraj for the Good of All  
343. The Swaraj of my dream recognizes no race or r eligious distinction. Nor is 
it to be the monopoly of the latter persons nor yet  of monied men. Swaraj is to 
be for all, including the former, but emphatically including the maimed, the 
blind, the starving, toiling millions. 
 
What of the West?  
344. I feel that fundamentally the disease is the s ame in Europe as it is in India, 
in spite of the fact that in the former country the  people enjoy political self-
government. No mere transference of political power  in India will satisfy my 
ambition, even though I hold such transference to b e a vital necessity of Indian 
national life. The people of Europe have no doubt p olitical power but no 
Swaraj. Asian and African races are exploited for t heir partial benefit, and they 
on their part, are being exploited by the ruling cl ass or caste under the sacred 
name of democracy. At the root, therefore, the dise ase appears to be the same Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 143  as in India. The same remedy is, therefore, likely to be applicable. Shorn of all 
camouflage, the exploitation of the masses of Europ e is sustained by violence. 
Violence on the part of the masses will never remov e the disease. Anyway up to 
now experience shows that success of violence has b een tried hitherto has been 
a variety of violence and artificial checks depende nt mainly upon the will of 
the violent. At the crucial moment these checks hav e naturally broken down. It 
seems to me, therefore, that sooner or later, the E uropean masses will have to 
take to non-violence if they are to find their deli verance. That there is no hope 
of their taking to it in a body and at once does no t baffle me. A few thousand 
years are but a speck in the vast time circle. Some one has to make a beginning 
with a faith that will not flinch. I doubt not that  the masses, even of Europe, 
will respond, but what is more emergent in point of  time is not so much a large 
experiment in non-violence as a precise grasp of th e meaning of deliverance. 
From what will the masses be delivered? It will not  do to have a vague 
generalization and to answer ‘from exploitation and  degradation’. Is not the 
answer this that they want to occupy the status tha t Capital does to day? If so, 
it can be attained only by violence. But if they wa nt to shun the evils of 
Capital, in other words, if they would revise the v iew-point of Capital, they 
would strive to attain a juster distribution of the  products of labour. This 
immediately takes us to contentment and simplicity,  voluntarily adopted. 
Under the new outlook multiplicity of material want s will not be the aim of life 
the aim will be rather their restriction consistent ly with comfort. We shall 
cease to think of getting what we can but we shall decline to receive what all 
cannot get. It occurs to me that it ought not to be  difficult to make a successful 
appeal to the masses of Europe in terms of economic s and a fairly successful 
working of such an experiment must lead to immense and unconscious spiritual 
results. I do not believe that the spiritual law wo rks in a field of its own. On the 
contrary, it expresses itself only through the ordi nary activities of life. It thus 
affects the economic, the social and the political fields. It the masses of Europe 
can be persuaded to adopt the view I have suggested , it will be found that can 
easily come to their own by following the obvious c orollaries of non-violence. It 
may even be that what seems to me to be so natural and feasible in India, may Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 144  take longer to permeate the inert Indian masses tha n the active European 
masses. But I must reiterate my confession that all  my argument is based 
on  suppositions and assumption and must, therefore, be  taken for what it is 
worth. –YI, 3-9-25, 305.  
 
Why National Independence before International Co-o peration  
345. You want co-operation between nations for the salvaging of civilization. I 
want it too, but co-operation presupposes free nati ons worthy of co-operation. 
If I am to help in creating or restoring peace and goodwill and resist 
disturbances thereof, I must have the ability to do  so and I cannot do so unless 
my country has come to its own. At the present mome nt, the very movement 
for freedom in India is India’s contribution to pea ce. For so long as India is a 
subject nation, not only is she a danger to peace, but also England which 
exploits India. Other nations may tolerate today En gland’s imperialist policy 
and her exploitation of other nations, but they cer tainly do not appreciate it; 
and they would gladly help in the prevention of Eng land becoming a greater 
and greater menace every day. Of course you will sa y that India free can 
become a menace herself. But let us assume that she  will behave herself with 
her doctrine of nonviolence, if she achieves her fr eedom through it and for all 
her bitter experiences of being a victim of exploit ation. –YI, I2-II-3I, 353.  
 
India in the Council of Nations  
346. My notion of Purna Swaraj is not isolated inde pendence but healthy and 
dignified interdependence. My nationalism, fierce t hough it is, is not exclusive, 
not designed to harm any nation or individual. Lega l maxims are not so legal as 
they are moral. I believe in the eternal truth of ‘ sic utere tuo ut alienum non 
loedas’ (Use thy own property so as not to injure t hy neighbour’s). 
—YI, 26-3-3I, 5I.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 145  347. Our nationalism can be no peril to other natio ns in as much as we will 
exploit none just as we will allow none to exploit us. Through Swaraj we would 
serve the whole world. – YI, I6-4-3I, 79.  
 
348. Our non-co-operation is neither with the Engli sh nor with the West. Our 
non-co-operation is with the system the English hav e established, with the 
material civilization and its attendant greed and e xploitation of the weak. Our 
non-co-operation is a retirement within ourselves. Our non-co-co-operation is a 
refusal to co-operate with the English administrato rs on their own terms. We 
say to them, ‘Come and co-operate with us on our te rms and it will be well for 
us, for you and the world.’ We must refuse to be li fted off our feet. A drowning 
man cannot save others. In order to be fit to save others, we must try to save 
ourselves. Indian nationalism is not exclusive, nor  aggressive, nor destructive. It 
is health-giving, religious and therefore humanitar ian. India must learn to live 
before she can aspire to die for humanity. –YI, I3-I0-2I, 326.  
 
349. I would like to see India free and strong so t hat she may offer herself as a 
willing and pure sacrifice for the betterment of th e world. The individual, being 
pure, sacrifices himself for the family, the latter  for the village, the village for 
the district, the district for the province, the pr ovince for the nation, the 
nation for all. – YI, 17-9-25, 321.  
 
Ideal of National Interdependence  
350. The better mind of the world desires today not  absolutely independent 
States warring one against another but a federation  of friendly interdependent 
States. The consummation of that event may be far o ff. I want to make no 
grand claim for our country. But I see nothing gran d or impossible about our 
expressing our readiness for universal interdepende nce rather than 
independence. I desire the ability to be totally in dependent without asserting 
the independence. 
–YI, 26-I2-24, 425.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 146   
351. Nor have I the slightest difficulty in agreein g with you in these days of 
rapid intercommunication and growing consciousness of oneness of all mankind, 
we must recognize that our nationalism must not be isolation and unaffected by 
what is going on in other parts of the world. We sh ould therefore range 
ourselves with the progressive forces of the world.  
–ABP, I7-9-33.  
 
352. Q. A man who sacrifices self-interest for the sake of his community is at 
least unselfish to that extent. How can the heart o f such a man be affected so 
that he will sacrifice communal interests for the i nterests of the nation? 
A. A man whose spirit of sacrifice did not go beyon d his own community 
became selfish himself and also made his community selfish. In his opinion the 
logical conclusion of self-sacrifice was that the i ndividual sacrificed himself for 
the community, the community sacrificed itself for the district the district for 
the province, the province for the nation and the n ation for the world. A drop 
torn from the ocean perished without doing any good . If it remained a part of 
the ocean, it shared the glory of carrying on its b osom a fleet of mighty ships. 
Q. In Free India whose interest shall be supreme? I f a neighboring State is in 
want, what should Free India do? 
A. Gandhiji said that the first part of the questio n had been answered in the 
above. A truly independent India was bound to run t o the help of its neighbours 
in distress. He instanced Afghanistan, Ceylon and B urma and said that the rule 
also applied to the neighbours of the last three an d, thus by implication, they 
became India’s neighbours too. And thus, he said, t hat if individual sacrifice 
was a living sacrifice, it embraced the whole of hu manity. 
Q. Can a man serve his immediate neighbours and yet  serve the whole of 
humanity? What is the true meaning of Swadeshi? 
A. Gandhiji said that the question had been answere d by him on the previous 
evening. He believed in the truth implicitly at the  same time, the condition Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 147  being that the service of the neighbours was in no way selfish or exclusive, i.e. 
did not in any way involve the exploitation of any other human being. The 
neighbours would then understand the spirit on whic h such service was given. 
They would also know that they would be expected to  give their services to 
their neighbours. Thus considered, it would spread like the proverbial snowball 
gathering strength in geometrical progression encir cling the whole earth. 
It followed that Swadeshi was that spirit which dic tated man to serve his next-
door neighbour to the exclusion of any other. The c ondition that he had already 
mentioned was that the neighbour thus served had in  his turn to serve his own 
neighbour. In this sense Swadeshi was never exclusi ve. It recognized the 
scientific limitation of human capacity for service . 
–H, 23-3-47, 78, 79.  
 
Offers of Co-operation with Britain  
353. Q. How far would you cut India off from the Em pire? 
A. From the Empire entirely; from the British natio n, not at all, if I want India 
to gain and not to grieve. The British nation, Empi re is an Empire only because 
of India. That Emperorship must go and I should lov e to be an equal partner 
with Britain sharing her joys and sorrows. But it m ust be a partnership on equal 
terms. 
Q. To what extent would India be prepared to share the sorrows of England? 
A. To the fullest extent. 
Q. Do you think that India would unite her fortunes  inextricably with Britain? 
A. Yes, so long as she remains a partner. But if sh e discovers that the 
partnership is like one between a giant and a dwarf  or if it utilized for the 
exploitation of the other races of the earth, she w ould dissolve it. The aim is 
the common good of all nations of the earth and if it cannot be achieved I have 
patience enough to wait for ages rather than patch up an unnatural 
partnership. – YI, I2-II-3I, 356.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 148  354. The partnership has to be on equal terms. It s hould not be ‘subjection’ in 
glorified language. That means that the present rel ationship must be 
completely transformed though the connection may be  retained, and that 
connection should be wholly and solely for the bene fit of mankind. India by 
herself has no capacity to exploit the nations of t he earth, but with Great 
Britain’s assistance she can do it. Now the partner ship must mean that 
exploitation shall cease, and if Great Britain shou ld not desist from it, India 
should sever the connection. All that is wanted is a fundamental change in the 
British policy of exploitation. Britain cannot ther eafter boast that she has a 
strong navy guarding the maritime highways and all her overseas commerce. 
What about the South African possessions? I would n ot insist on a 
transformation of Britain’s relations with them, as , as a condition precedent to 
our partnership. But I should certainly strive to w ork for the deliverance of 
those South African races which, I can say from exp erience, are ground down 
under exploitation. Our deliverance must mean their  deliverance. But if that 
cannot come about, I should have no interest in a p artnership with Britain, 
even if it were of benefit to India. Speaking for m yself, I would say that the 
partnership, giving the promise of a world set free  from exploitation, would be 
a proud privilege for my nation and I would maintai n it forever. But India 
cannot reconcile herself in any shape or form to an y policy of exploitation and, 
speaking for myself, I may say that if ever the con gress should adopt an 
imperial policy I should sever my connection with t he Congress.— YI, I9-II-3I, 
364.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 149   
10. INDIA'S FREEDOM : WAYS AND MEANS 
 
355. There is no such thing as slow freedom. Freedo m is like a birth. Till we are 
fully free, we are slaves. All birth takes place in  a moment. 
–YI, 9-3-22, I48.  
 
The Chief Obstacle  
356. It is my certain conviction that no man loses his freedom except through 
his own weakness. – IC, 209.  
 
357. It is not so much British guns that are respon sible for our subjection as our 
voluntary co-operation. – YI, 9-2-2I, 46.  
 
358. Even the most despotic government cannot stand  except for the consent 
of the governed which consent is often forcibly pro cured by the despot. 
Immediately the subject ceases to fear the despotic  force, his power is gone.  
–YI, 30-6-20, Tagore, 225. 
 
359. I do not believe in armed risings. They are a remedy worse than the 
disease sought to be cured. They are a token of the  spirit of revenge and 
impatience and anger. They are a token of the spiri t of revenge and impatience 
and anger. The method of violence cannot do good in  the long run. Witness the 
effect of the armed rising of the allied powers aga inst Germany. Have they not 
become even like the Germans, as the latter have be en depicted to us by them? 
We have a better method. Unlike that of violence it  certainly involves the 
exercise of restraint and patience; but it requires  also resoluteness of will. This 
method is to refuse to be party to the wrong. No ty rant has ever yet succeeded 
in his purpose without carrying the victim with him , it may be, as it often is by Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 150  force. Most people choose rather to yield to the wi ll of the tyrant than to suffer 
for the consequence of resistance. Hence does terro rism form part of the stock-
in-trade of the tyrant. But we have instances in hi story where terrorism has 
failed to impose the terrorist’s will upon his vict im. India has choice before her 
now. If then the acts of the Punjab Government be a n insufferable wrong, if 
the repot of Lord hunter’s Committee and the two di spatches be a greater 
wrong by reason of their grievous condonation of th ese acts, it is clear that we 
must refuse to submit to this official violence. Ap peal the Parliament by all 
means if necessary, but if the Parliament fails us and if we are worthy to call 
ourselves a nation, we must refuse to uphold the go vernment by withdrawing 
co-operation from it. – YI, 9-6-20, Tagore, 80.  
 
Constitutional Right of Non-co-operation  
360. I venture to claim that I have succeeded by pa tient reasoning in weaning 
the party of violence from its ways. I confess that  I did not-I did not attempt to 
succeed in weaning them from violence on moral grou nds, but purely on 
utilitarian grounds. The result, for the time being  at any rate, has, however, 
been to stop violence. I hold that no repression co uld have prevented a violent 
eruption, if the people had not had presented to th em a form of direct action 
involving considerable sacrifice and ensuring succe ss if such direct action was 
largely taken up by the public. Non-co-operation wa s the only dignified and 
constitutional form of such direct action. For it i s the right recognized from 
time immemorial of the subject to refuse to assist a ruler who misrules  
–YI, 30-6-20, Tagore, 168.  
 
361. I reiterate the statement that the principle o f civil disobedience is 
implicitly conceded in the settlement of the 5th Ma rch 1931, arrived at 
between the then Viceroy on behalf of the Governmen t of India and myself on 
behalf of the Congress. I hope you know that the pr incipal Congressmen were 
discharged before that settlement was even thought of. Certain reparations 
were made to Congressmen under that settlement. Civ il disobedience was Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 151  discontinued only on conditions being fulfilled by the Government. That by 
itself was, in my opinion, an acknowledgement of it s legitimacy, of course 
under  given conditions. – GC, 40.  
 
Swaraj and Self-purification  
362. Our Non-co-operation refers not so much to the  paralysis of a wicked 
government as to our being proof against wickedness . It aims therefore not at 
destruction but at construction. It deals with caus es rather than with 
symptoms. – YI, 19-1-21, 19. cf. 142.  
 
363. The primary motive of Non-co-operation is self -purification by withdrawing 
co-operation from an unrighteous and unrepentant go vernment. The secondary 
object is to rid ourselves of the feeling of helple ssness by being independent of 
all government control or supervision, i.e. to gove rn ourselves in all possible 
affairs, and, in fulfilling both the objects, to re frain from doing or promoting 
injury, or violence, to any individual or property.  –YI, 6-4-21, 106.  
 
364. It is because the rulers, if they are bad, are  so, not necessarily or wholly 
by reason of birth, but largely because of their a environment, that I have 
hopes of their altering their course. It is perfect ly true that the rulers cannot 
alter their course themselves. If they are dominate d by their environment, they 
do not surely deserve to be killed, but should be c hanged by a change of 
environment. But the environment are we the people who make the rulers what 
they are. They are thus an exaggerated edition of w hat we are in the 
aggregate. If my argument is sound, any violence do ne to the rulers would be 
violence done to ourselves. It would be suicide. An d since I do not want to 
commit suicide, nor encourage my neighbours to do s o, I become nonviolent 
myself and invite my neighbours to do likewise. 
Moreover, violence may destroy one or more bad rule rs, but like Ravana’s 
heads, others will pop up in their places, for, the  root lies elsewhere. It lies in 
us. If we reform ourselves, the rulers will automat ically do so. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 152  –H, 2-I-9-34, 250.  
 
365. I am not interested in freeing India merely fr om the English yoke. I am 
bent upon freeing India from any yoke whatsoever. I  have no desire to 
exchange ‘king log for king stork’. Hence for me th e movement of Swaraj is a 
movement of self-purification. – YI, 12-6-24, 195.  
 
366. The reforms required are more from within than  from without. A perfect 
constitution super-imposed upon a rotten internal c ondition will be like a 
whited sepulcher. – YI, 24-6-26, 226.  
 
A Middle-Class Revolution to Pave the Way for Revol ution of the Masses  
367. We cannot get Swaraj if not one class in the c ountry is prepared to work 
and sacrifice for it. The Government will yield not  to the logic of words. It 
knows no logic but that of brave and true deeds. 
Bravery of the sword they know. And they have made themselves proof against 
its use by us. Many of them will welcome violence o n our part. They are 
unconquerable in the art of meeting and suppressing  violence. We Propose, 
therefore, to sterilize their power of inflicting v iolence by our non-violence. 
Violence is the corner-stone of the edifice of non- violence is the corner-stone 
of the edifice of non-co-operation. You will, there fore, not be hasty or 
overzealous in your dealings with those who may not  see eye to eye with you. 
Intolerance is a species of violence and therefore,  against our creed. Non-
violent non-co-operation is an object lesson in dem ocracy. The moment we are 
able to ensure non-violence, even under circumstanc es the most provoking, 
that moment we have achieved our end, because that is the moment when we 
can offer complete non-co-operation. 
I ask you not to be frightened at the proposition j ust stated. People do not 
move in arithmetical progression, not even in geome trical progression. They 
have been known to perish in a day: they have been known to rise in a day. Is it Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 153  such a difficult thing for India to realize that th irty crores of human beings have 
but to fell their strength and they can be free wit hout having to use it? As we 
had not regained national consciousness, the rulers  have hitherto played us 
against one another. We have to refuse to do so, an d we are masters, not they. 
Non-co-operation deals first with those sensitive c lasses upon whom the 
Government has acted so successfully and who have b een lured into the trap 
consciously or unconsciously as the school going yo uths have been. 
When we come to think about it, the sacrifice requi red is infinitesimal for an 
individual, because the whole is distributed among so many of us. For what is 
your sacrifice? To suspend your literary studies fo r one year or till Swaraj is 
established. If I could ‘infect’ the whole of the s tudent world with my faith, I 
know that the suspension of studies need not extend  even to a year. – YI. 19—1-
21, 17.  
 
368. The secret of non-violence and non-co-operatio n lies in our realizing, that 
it is through suffering that we are to attain our g oal. What is the renunciation 
of titles, councils, law courts and schools but a m easure (very slight indeed) of 
suffering? That preliminary renunciation is a prelu de to the larger suffering-the 
hardships of a goal life and even the final consumm ation on the gallows if need 
be. The more we suffer and the more of us suffer, t he nearer we are to our 
cherished goal.  –29-9-2I, 310.  
 
369. I do not merely rely upon the lawyer class or highly educated men to 
enable the committee to carry out all the stages of  non-co-operation. My hope 
lies more with the masses so far as the latter stag es of non-co-operation are 
concerned. YI, 18-8-20 Tagore. 370.  
 
370. Surely it was necessary to remove the hallucin ation about titles, law 
courts, schools and councils. I venture to think th at on the whole the 
nationalists have responded nobly in regard to thes e items. There are no titled Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 154  men among them, no nationalist lawyer who has not s uspended practice has 
any public status among non-co-operators, schools a nd colleges have furnished 
boys and girls who are now giving a good account of  themselves and who, I 
make bold to say, will stagger humanity by their sa crifice when the time of 
their trial has arrived. Those who have refrained f rom entering the councils, 
are rendering, as all who care may see, a service w hich they could not have 
rendered in the council halls. The few who have giv en up their titles have 
shown the way to the others. All these are acting a s leaven in the community. 
Now, there is little need for verbal propaganda amo ng these special classes. 
The action and character of those who have renounce d titles, schools, courts or 
councils, constitute propaganda more telling and ef fective than speeches. 
To recall Lord Canning’s words, under the blue and serene Indian sky a cloud no 
bigger than a man’s thumb may appear on the horizon , but it may any moment 
assume dimensions unexpected by any, and no man can  tell when it may burst. 
When India as a whole will respond by action, I can not say. But this I do say 
that the educated classes to whom the Congress has appealed will one day-and 
probably during this year, respond in the manner wo rthy of the nation. 
But whether they do or not, the progress of the nat ion cannot be arrested by 
any person or class. The uneducated artisans, the w omen, the men in the 
street, are taking their share in the movement… The  appeal to the educated 
classes paved the way for them. The goats had to be  shifted from the sheen. 
The educated classes had to be put upon their trial . The beginning had to be 
made by and through them. – YI, 20-4-2I, I22.  
 
371. Clouds no bigger than a man’s hand have a knac k of appearing in the 
Indian horizon and all of a sudden assuming dangero us dimensions. 
–YI, I5-I2-2I, 408.  
 
372. We have not failed in our effort regarding the  educated classes. I admit 
that the response in practice might have been great er from them. But I make 
bold to say that the vast majority of them are with  us in spirit though the flesh Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 155  being weak, they are not able to make what from the ir point of view is a 
sacrifice. We have been trying to act on the masses  from the commencement. 
We regard them as our mainstay, for it is they who have to attain Swaraj. It is 
neither the sole concern of the monied men nor that  of the educated class. 
Both must sub-serve their interest in any scheme of  Swaraj, and as soon as the 
masses have attained sufficient self-control and le arnt mass discipline we shall 
not hesitate if necessary to advise them to suspend  payment of taxes to a 
Government that has never truly looked after their welfare and that has 
exploited and terrorized them every time they have shown the least symptom 
of rising against their exploitation. –YI, 20-4-2I, I24.  
 
The Price of Freedom  
373. Swaraj can never be a free gift by one nation to another. It is a treasure to 
be purchased with a nation’s best blood. Swaraj wil l be the fruit of incessant 
labour, suffering beyond measure. – YI, 5-1-22, 4.  
 
374. I hold it to be our duty to tell the present g eneration and generations yet 
unborn that in our march towards true freedom we mu st be prepared for 
repetitions of the wrongs such as the Jalianwala Ba gh massacre. We must 
provide against them, we must not seek them, but we  must be ready to face 
them if they came again. I would not have us flinch  from the battle of national 
life. –YI, 18-2-20, Tagore, I00.  
 
375. Before we become a nation possessing an effect ive voice in the councils of 
nations, we must be prepared to contemplate with eq uanimity, not a thousand 
murders of innocent men and women but many thousand s before we attain a 
status in the world that shall not be surpassed by any nation. – YI, 7-4-20, 
Tagore, 84.  
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 156   
Death, the Portal to Life Eternal  
376. No country has ever risen without being purifi ed through the force of 
suffering. The mother suffers so that her child may  live. The condition of wheat 
growing is that the seed grain should perish. Life comes out of Death. Will India 
rise out of slavery without fulfilling this eternal  law of purification through 
suffering?  –YI, 16-6-20.  
 
377.Swaraj is the abandonment of the fear of death.  If Swaraj is delayed, it is 
delayed because we are not prepared calmly to meet death and inconveniences 
less than death. –YI, 13-10-21, 326-7.  
 
378. That nation is great which rests its head upon  death as its pillow. Those 
who defy death are free from all fear. –IHR, 48 . 
 
379. A nation that is capable of limitless sacrific e is capable of rising to 
limitless heights. The purer the  sacrifice, the quicker the progress. 
–YI, 25-8-20, Tagore, 501.  
 
Type of Work needed for India  
380. In his fearsomeness, he does not see that to e xchange British brute force 
for any other brute force is no real remedy for the  ills of India. And if it is the 
steel that is to decide the issue. It must be not S ikh or Gurkha steel, it must be 
all-India steel. That is the one supreme lesson tha t Europe teaches. If it is brute 
force that is to rule, then the millions of India m ust learn the art of war, or 
must for ever remain prostrate at the feet of him w ho wields the sword, 
whether he is paradeshi or swadeshi. The millions m ust remains ‘dumb driven 
cattle’. Non-co-operation is an attempt to awaken t he masses to a sense of 
their dignity and power. This can only be by enabli ng them to realize that they Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 157  need not fear brute force, if they would but know t he soul within. – YI, I-I2-20, 
Tagore, 330.  
 
381. I contend that the revolutionary method cannot  succeed in India. If an 
open warfare were a possibility, I may concede that  we may tread the path of 
violence that the other countries have and at least  evolve the qualities that 
bravery on the battlefields brings forth. But the a ttainment of Swaraj through 
warfare I hold impossibility for any time that we c an foresee. Warfare may give 
us another rule for the English rule, but not self- rule in terms of the masses. 
The pilgrimage to Swaraj is a painful climb. It req uires attention to details. It 
means vast organizing ability, it means penetration  into the villages solely for 
the service of the villagers. In other words, it me ans national education i.e. 
education of the masses. It means an awakening of n ational consciousness 
among the masses. It will not spring like the magic ian’s mango. It will grow 
almost unperceived like the banyan tree. A bloody r evolution will never 
perform the trick. Haste here is most certainly was te. –YI, 21-5-25, 178.  
 
382. Surely Swaraj will not drop from the clouds. I t will be the fruit of 
patience, perseverance, ceaseless toil, courage and  an intelligent appreciation 
of the environment. – YI, 27-8-25, 297.  
 
383. We have to grow by strenuous effort out of our  bondage, whether it is 
Education, Economical. Social or Political. The eff ort itself is three-fourths of 
the battle. –H, 9-7-38, 178.  
 
Creed vs. Policy of Non-violence  
384. I have not put before India the final form of non-violence. The non-
violence that I have preached from Congress platfor ms is non-violence as a 
policy. But even policies require honest adherence in thought, word and deed. 
If I believe that honesty is the best policy. Surel y whilst I so believe, I must be Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 158  honest in thought, word and deed, for otherwise I b ecome an impostor.  
Non-violence being a policy means that it can upon due notice be given up 
when it proves unsuccessful or ineffective. But sim ple morality demands that it 
can upon due notice be given up when it proves unsu ccessful or ineffective. But 
simple morality demands that whilst a particular po licy is pursued, it must be 
pursued with all one’s heart. It is simple policy t o march along a route, but the 
soldier who marches with an unsteady step along tha t route is liable to be 
summarily dismissed. I become therefore incredulous  when people talk to me 
skeptically about non-violence or are seized with f right at the very mention of 
the non-violence, they must denounce it but not cla im to believe in the 
expedient when their heart resists it. How disastro us it would be, if not 
believing in violence even as an expedient, I joine d say, a violence party and 
approached a gun with a perturbed heart! The reader  will believe me when I 
say that I have the capacity for killing even flies . Now suppose I joined an 
expedition for fly-killing as an expedient. Will I not be expected before being 
permitted to join the expedition to use all the ava ilable engines of destruction 
whilst I remained in the army of able engines of de struction whilst I remained 
in the army of able engines of destruction whilst I  remained in the army of fly-
killers? If those who are in the Congress and the K hilafat Committees will 
perceive this simple truth, we shall certainly eith er finish the struggle this year 
to a successful end or be so sick of non-violence a s to give up the pretension 
and set about devising some other programme. – YI, 2-3-22, I30.  
 
385. If the majority do not believe in the Congress  policy of non-violence and 
truth, let them have the first article altered. Let  us understand the distinction 
between policy and creed. A policy may be changed, a creed cannot. But either 
is as good as the other whilst it is held. Those th erefore who hold non-violence 
only as a policy may not, without exposing themselv es to the charge of 
dishonorable conduct, use the Congress membership a s a cover for violence. I 
cannot get rid of the conviction, that the greatest  obstacle to our progress 
towards Swaraj is our want of faith in our policy. –YI, 30-7-3I, I95.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 159  Violence to be matched by Non-violence  
386. We have chosen a method that compels us to tur n, each one of us, our 
face towards God. Non-co-operation presumes that ou r opponent with whom 
we non-co-operate resorts to methods which are as q uestionable as the purpose 
he seeks to fulfill by such methods. We shall there fore find favour in the sight 
of God only by choosing methods which are different  in kind from those of our 
opponents. This is a big claim we have made for our selves, and we can attain 
success within the short time appointed by us, only  if our methods are in reality 
radically different from those of the Government. 
Hence the foundation of our movement rests on compl ete non-violence, 
whereas violence is the final refuge of the Governm ent. And as no energy can 
be created without resistance, our non-resistance t o Government violence must 
bring the latter to a standstill. But our non-viole nce to be true, must be in 
word, thought and deed. It makes no difference that  with you non-violence is 
an expedient. Whilst it lasts, you cannot consisten tly with your pledge harbour 
designs of violence. On the contrary we must have i mplicit faith in our 
programme of non-violence, which presupposes perfec t accord between 
thought, word and deed.— YI, 29-9-21, 310.  
 
The Means of Organization  
(A) POLITICS AND SOCIAL REFORM  
387. The sooner it is recognized that many of our s ocial evils impede our march 
towards Swaraj, the greater will be our progress to wards our cherished goal. To 
postpone social reform till after the attainment of  Swaraj is not to know the 
meaning of Swaraj.- YI, 28-6-28, 216.  
 
388. Q. Is it yet time for the youths of India to f orce a social reordering? Should 
it follow or precede any further political efforts towards Swaraj? 
A. The two things- the social reordering and the fi ght for political Swaraj-must 
go hand in hand. There can be no question of preced ence, of division into Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 160  watertight compartments here. But a new social orde r cannot be ‘forced’; that 
would be a remedy worse than the disease. I am an i mpatient reformer. I am 
all for thorough-going, radical, social reordering;  but it must be an organic 
growth, not a violent super-imposition. 
–ABP, 3-8-34.  
 
(B) NATIONAL UNITY  
389. What does unity consist in and how can it be b est promoted? The answer is 
simple. It consists in our having a common purpose,  a common goal and 
common sorrows. It is best promoted by co-operating  to reach the common 
goal, by sharing one another’s sorrows and by mutua l toleration. – YI, 25-2-20, 
Tagore, 596.  
 
390. The union that we want is not a patched up thi ng but a union of hearts 
based upon of hearts based upon a definite recognit ion of the in-dubitable 
proposition that Swaraj for India must be an imposs ible dream without an 
indissoluble union between the Hindus and Muslims o f India. It must not be a 
mere truce. It must be a partnership between each r especting the religion of 
the other. – YI, 6-I0-20, Tagore, 583.  
 
391. We have forgotten the divine art of dying for our faiths without 
retaliation, and we have equally forgotten the art of using force in self-defense 
at the peril of our lives. And Hindu-Muslim unity i s nothing if it not a 
partnership between brave men and women. We must tr ust each other always, 
but in the last resort we must trust ourselves and our God. 
–YI, 29-9-2I, 307.  
 
392. For good or for ill, the two communities are w edded it India, they are 
neighbours, sons of the soil. They are destined to die here as they are born Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 161  here. Nature will force them to live on peace if th ey do not come together 
voluntarily. – H, 29-I0-38, 308.  
 
393. As a satyagrahi I believe in the absolute effi cacy of full surrender. 
Numerically the Hindus were in a minority, as a sat yagrahi and a Hindu I should 
say that the Hindus would lose nothing in the long run by full surrender. To this 
argument a retort has thoughtlessly been made, why then do you not advise 
India to surrender to the English? Give them the do mination that I have not 
advised surrender to the bayonet. In the code of a satyagrahi there is no such 
thing as surrender to brute force. Or the surrender  then is the surrender of 
suffering and not to the will of the wielder of the  bayonet. A satyagrahis 
surrender has to come out of his strength, not out of weakness. The surrender 
advised by me is not of honour but of earthly goods . There is no loss of honour 
in surrendering seats and positions of emolument. T here is loss of honour in 
haggling about them. The law of surrender and suffe ring is a universal law 
admitting of no  exceptions. – YI, 30-4-3I, 92.  
 
394. It would be a great things, a brave thing, for  the Hindus to achieve act of 
self-denial. –YI, I2-3-3I, 36.  
 
395. My implicit faith in non-violence does mean yi elding to minorities when 
they are really weak. The best way to weaken commun alists is to yield to them. 
Resistance will only rouse their suspicion and stre ngthen their opposition. A 
satyagrahi resists when there is threat of force be hind obstruction. I know that 
I do not carry the Congressmen in general with me i n this to me appears as very 
sensible and practical point of view. But if we are  to come to Swaraj through 
non-violent means, I know that this point of view w ill be accepted. –YI, 2-7-31, 
162. cf. 133.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 162  396. There will never be equality so long as one fe els inferior or superior to the 
other. There is no room for patronage among equals.  
–YI, 28-7-2I, 236.  
 
397. I have put untouchability in the forefront bec ause I observe a certain 
remissness about it. Hindu no-co-operators may not be indifferent about it. We 
may be able to right the Khilafat wrong but we can never reach Swaraj, with 
the poison of untouchability corroding the Hindu pa rt of the national body. 
Swaraj is a meaningless term, if we desire to keep a fifth of India under 
perpetual subjection, and deliberately deny to them  the fruits of national 
culture. We are seeking the aid of God in this grea t purification movement, but 
we deny to the most deserving among His creatures t he rights of humanity. 
Inhuman ourselves, we may not plead before the Thro ne for deliverance from 
the inhumanity of others. – YI, 25-5-21, I65.  
 
398. It seems to have been represented that I am op posed to any 
representation of the untouchables on the legislatu res. This is a travesty of the 
truth. What I have said and what I must repeat is t hat I am opposed to their 
special representation. I am convinced that this ca n do them no good and may 
do much harm. But the Congress is wedded to adult f ranchise. Therefore, 
millions of them can be placed on the voters’ roll.  It is impossible to conceive 
that with untouchability fast disappearing, nominee s of these voters can be 
boycotted by the others. But what these people need  more than election to the 
legislatures is protection from social and religiou s persecution. Custom which is 
often more powerful than law, has brought them to a  degradation of which 
every thinking Hindu has need to feel ashamed and t o do penance. I should, 
therefore. Have the most drastic legislation render ing criminal all the special 
persecution to which these fellow-countrymen of min e are subjected by the so-
called superior classes. Thank God the conscience o f the Hindu has been 
stirred, and untouchability will soon be a relic of  our sinful past. – NV, 40.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 163  (C) VILLAGE ORGANIZATION  
399. Over 75 per cent of the population are agricul turists and Mr. Higginbotham 
told us last night in his own felicitous language t hat they are the men who grow 
two blades of grass in the place of one. But there cannot be much spirit of self-
government about us if we take away or allow others  to take away from them 
almost the whole of the results of their labour. Ou r salvation can only come 
through the farmer. Neither the lawyers, non the do ctors, nor the rich 
landlords are going to secure it. –(Speech at Benar es, 4-2-I6) –Nat, 323.  
 
400. Our contact with them begins with their servic e through the spinning 
wheel, but it does not end there. The spinning whee l is the centre of that 
service. If you spend your next vacation in some fa r off village in the interior 
you will see the truth of my remark. You will find the people cheerless and 
fear-stricken. You will find houses in ruins. You w ill find the cattle in a 
miserable way, and yet you will see idleness stalki ng there. The people will tell 
you of the spinning wheel having been in there. The  people will tell you of the 
spinning wheel having been in their homes long ago,  but today they will 
entertain no talk of it or of any other cottage ind ustry. They have no hope left 
in them. They live, for they cannot die at will. Th ey will spin only if you spin. 
You assure them of an additional income of Rs. 1,80 0 a year. You can lay the 
foundation of solid reform on this income in every village. It is easy I know to 
say this, but difficult to do. Faith can make it ea sy. ‘I am alone, how can I 
reach seven hundred thousand villages?’ –This is th e argument that pride 
whispers to us. Start with the faith that if you fi x yourself up in one single 
village and succeed, the rest will follow. Progress  is then assured. –YI, 17-6-26, 
217.  
 
401. I have suggested Khaddar as indispensable for civil disobedience for Swaraj 
for two reasons. The first is that swaraj I hold to  be impossibility without 
Khaddar becoming universal in our country. Secondly  it  is the most efficient aid Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 164  to mass discipline without which mass civil disobed ience is impossible. – YI, I2-6-
 24, 199.  
 
402. Probably very few workers have noticed that pr ogress of hand-spinning 
means the greatest voluntary co-operation among mil lions of human beings 
scattered over a very wide area and working for the ir daily bread. No doubt 
agriculture has required much co-operative effort, but hand-spinning requires 
still greater and more honest co-operation. Wheat g rows more by nature’s 
honesty than by man’s. Manufacture of yarn in our c ottages is dependent solely 
on human honesty. Hand-spinning is impossible witho ut the willing and 
intelligent co-operation of millions of human being s. We have to arrive at a 
stage marked for his yarn as well as the supply of cotton slivers if he or she 
does not know the process of carding. Is it any won der if I claim that hand-
spinning can drive away as if by magic the growing pauperism of the masses? –
YI, 3-11-21, 350.  
 
403. The half a dozen modern cities are an excresce nce, and serve at the 
present moment the evil purpose of draining the lif e-blood of the villages. 
Khaddar is an attempt to revise and reverse the pro cess, and establish a better 
relation between the cities and reverse the process , and establish a better 
relation between the cities and the villages. The c ities with their insolent torts 
are a constant menace to the life and liberty of th e villagers. 
Khaddar has the greatest organizing power in it bec ause it has itself to be 
organized and because it affects all India. If Khad dar rained from heaven it 
would be a calamity. But as it can only be manufact ured by the willing co-
operation of starving millions and thousands of mid dle class men and women, 
its success means the best organization conceivable  along peaceful lines.— Is 
India Different?, 23.  
 
404. The chief thing that I want the members to con sider is that, so far the 
Sangh work was directed from the General Office, bu t henceforth the work is Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 165  be autonomous, is to be allowed to do so. Workers m ust be prepared to go to 
organize such autonomous centers with the prestige and moral support of the 
Sangh. Workers will be paid for their maintenance f or five years on an annually 
diminishing scale. They should work there according  to the fundamental 
principles and policy laid down by the Sangh. It is  not possible otherwise to 
decentralize the work in seven lakhs of villages. 
There are two schools of thought current in the wor ld. One wants to divide the 
world into cities and the other into villages. The village civilization and the city 
civilization are totally different things. One depe nds on machinery and 
industrialization, and the other on handicrafts. We  have given preference to 
the latter. 
After all, this industrialization and large scale p roduction are only of 
comparatively recent growth. We don’t know how far it has contributed to the 
development of our happiness, but we know this much  that it has brought in its 
wake the recent world wars. This Second World War i s not still over, and even 
if it comes to an end, we are hearing of a third wo rld war. Our country was 
never so unhappy and miserable as it is at present.  City people may be getting 
big profits and good wages, but all that has become  possible by sucking the 
blood of villages. We won’t always want to depend o n money for our work. If 
we are prepared to sacrifice our lives for the caus e, money is nothing. We must 
have faith and we must be true to ourselves. If we have these, we shall be able 
by decentralizing our capital of Rs. 30 lakhs in vi llages to create national 
wealth amounting to Rs. 300 crores. To do that main  thing, what is necessary is 
to make the villages self-sufficient and self-relia nt. But mind you, my idea of 
self-sufficient is not a narrow one. There is no sc ope for selfishness and 
arrogance in my self-sufficiency. 
I am not preaching isolation. We have to be humble as the dust for the 
fulfillment of our cause. We have to mix with peopl e even as sugar mixes itself 
with milk. Though villagers will be self-sufficient  so far as it is possible, they 
will devote their time also to their intellectual d evelopment for creation of 
consciousness for the contemplated nonviolent socie ty of the future. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 166  Cloth stands second to food as matter of necessity.  If every village begins to 
produce its own cloth, its strength will greatly be  enhanced. But to achieve 
that we don’t want to close down the textile factor ies by legislation. We want 
to achieve our purpose. By decentralizing, we want to produce cloth wherever 
cotton is grown. 
But what of the city people who have taken to Khadi  now? I would ask them to 
spin their own yarn and to find out for themselves weavers to weave that yarn 
into cloth. It is absurd that cloth should come fro m Manchester for those poor 
who produce cloth for the Bombay people. It is also  not proper to compel the 
poor to accept part of their wages in the form of K hadi. They should be so 
educated that they may spin voluntarily and intelli gently, and may used with 
love and pride the cloth produced by themselves. If  the people of Bombay want 
to wear Khadi, they should spin for themselves or g et their children and other 
dependents to spin. If the people, pledged to Khadi , spin for themselves, the 
practice will be contagious. Even if we are able to  produce khadi worth ten 
crores instead of one crore as at present, our obje ct of reaching the whole of 
India will not be achieved. 
405.The only form of nonviolent work to be done by the largest number of men, 
women and children of the land, in order to regain the lost trade with its 
attendant activities, is the spinning wheel. Thus c onceived it easily becomes 
the symbol par excellence of nonviolence. To be an instrument of Swaraj, 
naturally it must not flourish under the Government  or any other patronage. It 
must flourish, if need be, even in spite of the res istance from the government 
or the capitalist who is interested in his spinning  and weaving mills. The 
spinning wheel represents the millions in the villa ges as against the classes 
represented by the mill-owners  and the like.-Gram Udyog Patrika, Aug.1945. 
 
406. The true building up of Swaraj consists in the  millions of India 
wholeheartedly working out the constructive program me. Without it the whole 
nation cannot rise its age-long torpor. Whether the  British remain or not, it is 
our duty always to wipe out unemployment, to bridge  the gulf between rich Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 167  and poor, to banish communal strife, to exorcize th e demon of untouchability, 
to reform dacoits and save the people from them. If  crores of people from 
them. If crores of people do not take a living inte rest in this nation-building 
work, freedom must remain a dream and unattainable by either non-violence or 
violence. - GC,354.  
 
(D) THE QUESTION OF LITERACY  
407. No doubt I regard illiteracy among my people a s deplorable and I consider 
it necessary to educate them, but it is not at all impossible to imbibe the 
satyagraha principle in an absolutely illiterate ma n. This is my long-standing 
experience. – YI, Nov. 1919, Tagore, 37.  
 
408. The ryots do not need to be literate to apprec iate their rights and their 
duties. –  Nat, 290.  
 
409. Our love of the English language in preference  to our own mother tongue 
has caused a deep chasm between the educated and th e politically-minded 
classes and the masses. The languages of India have  suffered impoverishment. 
We flounder when we make the vain attempt to expres s abstruse thought in the 
mother tongue. There are no equivalents for scienti fic terms. The result has 
been disastrous. The masses remain cut off from the  modern mind. We are too 
near our own times correctly to measure the disserv ice caused to India by this 
neglect of its great languages. It is easy enough t o understand that, unless we 
undo the mischief, the mass mind must remain impris oned. The masses can 
make no solid contribution to the construction of S waraj. It is inherent in 
Swaraj based on nonviolence that every individual m akes his own direct 
contribution to the Independence movement. The mass es cannot do this fully 
unless they understand every step with all its impl ications. This is impossible 
unless every step is explained in their own languag es.—CP, I6.  
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 168   
(E) LABOUR ORGANIZATION  
410. We must not tamper with the masses. It is dang erous to make political use 
of factory labourers or the peasantry not that we a re not entitled to do so, but 
we are not ready for it. We have neglected their po litical (as distinguished from 
literary) education all these long years. We have n ot got enough honest, 
intelligent, reliable, and brave workers to enable us to act upon these 
countrymen of ours. – YI, 9-2-2I, 43.  
 
411. Labour in India is still extremely unorganized . The labourers have no mind 
of their own when it comes to national policy or ev en the general welfare of 
labour itself. Labourers in various parts of India have no social contact and no 
other mutual ties. It provincial and even in the sa me city it is highly communal. 
It is not everywhere wisely guided. In many places it is under selfish and highly 
unscrupulous guidance. 
There is no absolute cohesion amongst provincial la bour leaders, and there is 
little discipline among sub-leaders. The latter do not uniformly tender 
obedience to their provincial chiefs. Leaders in di fferent provinces have no 
single policy to follow. In these circumstances an All India Union can only exist 
on paper. 
If the Ahmedabad Labour Union can succeed in perfec ting its own organization 
it is bound to serve as a model to the rest of Indi a, and its success is bound to 
prove highly infectious. 
But I am free to confess that there is as no assura nce of success in the near 
future. The energy of the workers is sorely tried i n combating disruptive forces 
that ever continue to crop up. 
One word as to policy. It is not anti-capitalistic.  The idea is to take from capital 
labour’s due share and no more and this, not by par alyzing capital, but by 
reform among labourers from within and by their own  self-consciousness; not 
again through the cleverness and maneuvering of non -labour leaders, but by Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 169  educating labour to evolve its own leadership and i ts own self-reliant, self-
existing organization. Its direct aim is not in the  least degree political. Its 
direct aim is internal reform and evolution of inte rnal strength. The indirect 
result of this evolution when, and if it ever becom es complete, will naturally 
be tremendously political. 
I have not, therefore, the remotest idea or exploit ing labour or organizing it for 
any direct political power of first-class importanc e when it becomes a self-
existing unit. Labour, in my opinion, must not beco me a pawn in the hands of 
the politician on the political chessboard. It must , by its sheer strength, 
dominate the chessboard. 
This is my dream. I hug it because it because it gi ves me all the consolation I 
need, and the policy I have outlined, you will reco gnize, is a direct outcome of 
my implicit belief in an acceptance of nonviolence.  It may be all a delusion but 
it is as much a reality with me as life itself so l ong as I do not see it as delusion, 
but see it as the only life-giving force. (Letter d ated My I0th, I927)— Is India 
Different?, 25.  
 
412. It is a most dangerous thing to make political  use of labour until labourers 
the political condition of the country and are prep ared for the common good. 
Labour, in my opinion, must not become a pawn in th e hands of the politician 
on the political chessboard. 
–(Indian Annual Register, I927, Part II, p. 118-22.)  
 
413. The Ahmedabad Labour Union has of late started  a great experiment which 
is likely to prove of great interest and importance  to all labour organizations. 
The essence of the experiment consists in training its members to a 
supplementary occupation in addition to their princ ipal occupation in the mills 
so that in the event of a lock-out, strike or loss of employment otherwise, they 
would always have something to fall back upon inste ad of being faced with the 
prospect of starvation. A mill-hand’s life is ever full of vicissitudes. Thrift and 
economy no doubt provide a sort of remedy and it wo uld be criminal to neglect Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 170  them. But the savings thus made cannot carry one fa r, seei9ng that the vast 
bulk of our mill labourers are always struggling on  the margin of bare 
subsistence. Moreover it would never do for a worki ng man during strike or 
unemployment to rest idly at home. There is nothing  more injurious to his 
morale and self-respect than enforced idleness. The  working class sill never 
feel secure or develop a sense of self-assurance an d strength unless its 
members are armed with and unfailing subsidiary mea ns of subsistence to serve 
as second string to their bow in a crisis. 
The idea of a subsidiary occupation for the mill-ha nds was first conceived by 
me during the eventful twenty-three day’s strike of  the Ahmedabad mill-hands 
in the year 1918. It occurred to me then that if th e strike was to be successful 
the mill-hands must have an occupation that would m aintain them wholly or 
partly. They must not rely upon doles. During the s trike many of them were 
employed on unskilled labour. It was then that I mo oted my suggestion to teach 
mill-hands a subsidiary occupation. But my suggesti on remained a dead letter 
till the next strike came. A sort of beginning was made then. But it was difficult 
to bring into being all of a sudden an effective or ganization for teaching 
subsidiary occupations. With the end of the second strike died also the effort to 
find and teach suitable occupations. 
An organized and systematic effort is now being mad e by the labour Union that 
direction. Mill-hands are being taught to select oc cupations which they can 
practice in their leisure hours at home and which w ould give them substantial 
relief in times of unemployment. These are ginning cleaning, carding and 
spinning of cotton, weaving, tailoring, soap and pa per making typesetting, etc. 
I hold that a working knowledge of a variety of occ upations is to the working 
class what metal is to the capitalist. A laborer's skill is his capital. Just as the 
capitalist cannot make his capital fructify without  the co-operation of capital. 
And if both labour and capital have the gift of int elligence equally developed in 
them and have confidence in their capacity to secur e a fair deal, each at the 
hands of the other, they would get to respect and a ppreciate each other as 
equal partners in a common enterprise. They need no t regard each other as 
inherently irreconcilable antagonists. But the diff iculty is that whilst today Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 171  capital is organized and seems to be securely entre nched, labour is not. The 
intelligence of the working man is cramped by his s oulless, mechanical 
occupation which leaves him little scope or chance to develop his mind. It has 
prevented him from realizing the power and full dig nity of his status. He has 
been taught to believe that his wages have to be di ctated by capitalists instead 
of his demanding his own terms. Let him only be org anized along right lines and 
have his intelligence quickened, let him learn a va riety of occupations, and he 
will be able to go about with his head erect and ne ver be afraid of being 
without means of sustenance. 
It is the grossest of superstitions for the working  man to believe that he is 
helpless before the employers. The effort of the La bour Union in Ahmedabad is 
to dispel this superstition in a concrete manner. I ts experiment, therefore, 
ought to be welcomed by all concerned. Success will  depend on an inflexible 
determination on the part of the Labour Union to fo llow up the good beginning 
that has been made, with unflagging perseverance. I t must have the right sort 
of instructors who can arouse among the workers an intelligent interest in their 
work. A handicraft plied merely mechanically can be  as cramping to the 
mind and soul as any other pursuit taken up mechani cally. An unintelligent 
effort is like a corpse from which the spirit has d eparted. – H, 3-7-37, 161.  
 
Swaraj, Constructive Work & Civil Disobedience  
414. Workers should definitely realize that the con structive programme is the 
nonviolent and truthful way of winning ‘Poorna Swar aj’. Its wholesale 
fulfillment is complete independence. Imagine all t he forty crores of people 
engaged in the whole of the constructive programme which is designed to build 
up the nation from the very bottom upward! 
Can anybody dispute the proposition that it must me an complete independence 
in every sense of the expression, including the ous ting of foreign domination? 
When the critics laugh at the proposition, what the y mean is that forty crores 
of people will never co-operate in the effort to fu lfill the programme. No doubt 
there is considerable truth in the scoff. My answer  is, it worth the attempt. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 172  Given an indomitable will on the part of a band of earnest workers, the 
programme is as workable as any other and more so t han most. Anyway, I have 
no substitute for it, if it is to be based on non-v iolence. 
 Civil disobedience, mass or individual, is an aid to constructive effort and is a 
full substitute for armed revolt. Just as military training is necessary for armed 
revolt, training in constructive effort is equally necessary for civil resistance. 
And just as the use of arms becomes necessary only when occasion demands it, 
even so is the use of civil resistance only occasio nal. 
Therefore workers will never be on the look-out for  civil resistance. They will 
hold themselves in readiness, if the constructive e ffort is sought to be 
defeated. To take one or two illustrations, effort for communal friendship 
cannot be defeated, political pacts can. 
But political pacts are required because of the pre vious lack of friendship. 
Again Khadi manufacture and its use cannot be defea ted if both become fairly 
universal. The manufacture and use are not to be br ought about by being 
imposed upon the people, but they have to be intell igently accepted by them 
as one of the necessary items of the freedom moveme nt, when it is worked 
from the villages as units. Pioneers even in such p rogrammes can be 
obstructed. They have had to go through the fire of  suffering throughout the 
world. 
There is no Swaraj without suffering. In violence t ruth is the greatest sufferer: 
in nonviolence truth is ever triumphant. He will fi nd the constructive 
programme to be full of deep interest. It should pr ove as absorbing as politics 
so-called and platform oratory. 
The detailed constructive programme is to be found in my pamphlet on it, and 
Dr. Rajendra Prasad’s which is a running commentary  on it. It should be 
remembered that it is illustrative, not exhaustive.  Local circumstances may 
suggest many more items not touched in the printed programme. These are 
beyond the scope of a treatise on an All India prog ramme. They are necessarily 
for local workers to find out and do the needful. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 173  In these hints I have singled out some items for fu ller emphasis in the light of 
experience gained since the publication of the prog ramme. 
The Kisan or the peasant, whether as a landless lab ourer or a labouring 
proprietor, comes first. He is the salt of the eart h which rightly belongs or 
should belong to him, not to the absentee landlord or zamindari. But in the 
non-violent way the labourer cannot forcible eject the absentee landlord. He 
has so to work as to make it impossible for the lan dlord to exploit him. Closest 
co-operation amongst the peasants is absolutely nec essary. To this end special 
organizing bodies or committees should be formed wh ere there are none and 
those already in existence should be reformed where  necessary. The kisans are 
for the most part illiterate. Both adults and young  persons of school-going age 
should be educated. This applies to men and women. When they are landless 
labourers their wages should be brought to a level that would ensure a decent 
living which should mean balanced food, dwelling ho uses and clothing, which 
should satisfy health requirements. 
Land laws should be investigated. The peasant indeb tedness offers a limitless 
field for research. The problem of cattle too is an  integral part of agriculture in 
India and therefore requires the attention of worke rs skilled in this very 
intricate and somewhat baffling problem. 
Closely allied to the kisan work is ‘labour’. Here labour means industrial labour 
and therefore concentrated and centralized and much  more limited in scope. 
Moreover, it lends itself readily to political hand ling. 
Being necessarily confined to cities it attracts wo rkers more easily than kisan 
work. As part of constructive programme its primary  aim is elevation of labour 
to its deserved status. Therefore a labour worker’s  aim should be to raise the 
moral and intellectual height of labour and thus by  sheer merit to make him or 
her capable not merely of bettering his or her mate rial condition but making 
labour master of the means of production instead of  being the slave that it is. 
Capital should be labour’s servant not its master. Labour should be made 
conscious of its duty from whose performance rights  follow as a matter of 
course. In a concrete form: Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 174  (a) Labour should have its own unions. 
(b) Education both general and scientific, of both men and women, should be 
regularly undertaken through night schools. 
(C) Children of labourers should be educated after the basic education style. 
(D) There should be a hospital, a crèche and a mate rnity home attached to 
every centre. 
(e) Labour should be able to support itself during strikes. (Labour should be 
taught the science of conducting a successful non - violent strike.) 
All the work I have mentioned could be done only th rough unions mentioned in 
(a). To my knowledge Union is the best managed unio n. This does not mean 
that it has reached my ideal. It is trying to. If a ll the unions worked in the same 
direction, the lot of labour would be infinitely be tter than it is today. Labour 
united and morally and intellectually trained would  any day be superior to 
capital. 
Next in importance is the ‘student’ class above the  age of 12. Indeed if we had 
enough workers of the right type, I would go so far  as to say that we should 
work among them as soon as they begin learning as i nfants. For they have to be 
taken in hand from the school-going age. I need not  say that I have not in mind 
their political use. For the present the schools ar e largely under Government 
control or are influenced by them. Hence the studen ts’ education is defective 
in a vital matter. They are untouched by the politi cal condition of the country 
save what they learn from the newspapers of platfor m orators. They should 
have, in a systematic manner, their present educati on supplemented by the 
Congress workers. How this can be fitted into the p resent system of education 
is a serious question. But it has to be tackled. Up  to the Matriculation standard 
co-operation of parents is necessary. I adhere to t he view often expressed by 
me that the student world should be aloof from the political turmoil. It would 
be different if there was mass civil disobedience. But that is out of the question 
for the time being at any rate. But they should hav e education in national 
consciousness. It is the duty of an independent Sta te to teach its citizens to be 
patriotic. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 175  The education imparted is by a foreign agency. It r uns contrary to the national 
aspirations. 
There should, therefore, be a body of workers whose  duty it would be to 
undertake the big task of taking in hand the work m entioned above. In this 
sense it is a new field and it is of vital are not to be weaned from schools and 
colleges. The rapidly increasing number of entrants  is proof positive of it. The 
best course, therefore, is to supplement their stud ies in an orderly manner. 
Deliverance lies through national effort in this di rection showing marked 
superiority over the foreign method. –HS, 28-I0-44.  
 
415. I know that many have refused to see any conne ction between the 
constructive programme and civil disobedience. But for one who believes in 
nonviolence it does not need hard thinking to reali ze the essential connection 
between the constructive programme and civil disobe dience for Swaraj. I want 
the reader to mark the qualification. Constructive programme is not essential 
for local civil disobedience for specific relief as  in the case of Bardoli. Tangible 
common grievance restricted to a particular localit y is enough. But for such an 
indefinable thing as Swaraj people must have previo us training in doing things 
of all-India interest. Such work must throw togethe r the people and their 
leaders whom they would trust implicitly. Trust beg otten in the pursuit of 
continuous constructive work becomes a tremendous a sset at the critical 
moment. Constructive work therefore is for a non-vi olent army what drilling 
etc. is for an army designed for bloody warfare. In dividual civil disobedience 
among an unprepared people and by leaders not known  to or trusted by them is 
of no avail, and mass civil disobedience is impossi bility. The more therefore the 
progress of the constructive programme. The more th erefore the progress of 
the constructive programme, the greater is there th e chance for civil 
disobedience. – YI, 9-3-30, 13.  
 
416. I have said and I repeat that there is no Swar aj for the masses except 
through khadi and village crafts. For there is no n onviolent disobedience Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 176  without sustained constructive effort. A living, co ntinuous mass contact is 
impossible without some constructive programme requ iring almost daily contact 
of the workers with the masses. –H, 23-3-40, 56.  
 
417. Our countrymen in America too are actively hel ping the country’s cause. 
Two cablegrams have been received of late from New York. I reproduce the 
latest. 
‘Greetings from one thousand Americans open air mee ting. We wish civil 
disobedience programme a success.’ 
To all the young students and others living in the far West I would like to say 
one word. They would best serve the country by inte rpreting the movement as 
it is and in terms of the East instead of seeking t o find Western parallels and 
giving it a Western colour. It is my conviction tha t in its present form it has no 
parallel. It is too early to say how the West with its modern rush will receive it 
when it has taken deep root enough to spread its br anches to the West. As yet 
it is still in its infancy and often appears in a W estern setting. It has 
unfortunately to be confessed that it still appears  and commends itself to many 
only in its destructive form. Whilst the latter is absolutely essential, it is the 
constructive which is permanent and the best part o f it. I am painfully 
conscious of the fact that to many it appears only to be a preparation for 
violence, whereas nonviolence is not only an integr al but the only sustaining 
part of non-co-operation. It is by itself the large st part of construction. Non-
violence at once makes it a religious movement and throws man on God as his 
only Rock and Refuge. By non-violence the non-co-op erator burns his boats and 
makes steady headway in all weathers. By non-violen ce the non-co-operator 
appears before his Maker in his nakedness and comma nds divine help. He may 
not appear before Him with his Bible or Koran or th e Gita in the one hand and 
his gun in the other. He appears on the contrary wi th his hands folded, a 
humble suppliant before the great white Throne. Let  the young men abroad 
understand the essential part of the Movement and t hen attempt to interpret it Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 177  to the west. Help thus intelligently given will, th ey will find, bear the richer 
results than what they have already achieved. YI, 17-11-21,  370. 
 
418. Civil Disobedience is but a minor part of Saty agraha. – H, 25-3-39, 6I  
 
419. Civil Disobedience is not absolutely necessary  to win freedom through 
purely non-violent efforts, if co-operation of the whole nation is secured in the 
constructive programme. But such good luck favors n ations or individuals. 
Therefore it is necessary to know the place of Civi l Disobedience in a nation-
wide non-violent effort. 
It has three definite functions: 
1. It can be effectively offered for the redress of  a local wrong. 
2. It can be offered without regard to effect, thou gh aimed at a particular 
wrong or evil, by way of self-immolation in order C hamparan when I offered 
Civil Disobedience without any regard to the effect  and well knowing than even 
the people might remain apathetic. That it proved o therwise may be taken, 
according to taste, as God’s grace or a stroke of g ood luck. 
3. In the place of a full response to constructive effort, it can be offered as it 
was in 1941. (Here the reference is to the Individu al Civil Disobedience 
Movement.-N.K.B) Though it was a contribution to an d part of the battle for 
freedom. It was purposely centered round a particul ar issue, i.e. free speech. 
Civil disobedience can never be directed for a gene ral cause such as for 
Independence. The issue must be definite and capabl e of being clearly 
understood and within the power of the opponent to yield. This method 
properly applied must lead to the final goal. 
I have not examined the full scope and possibilitie s of Civil Disobedience. I have 
touched enough of it to enable the reader to unders tand the connection 
between the constructive programme and Civil Disobe dience. In the first two 
cases, no elaborate constructive programme was or c ould be necessary. But 
when Civil Disobedience is itself devised for the a ttainment of Independence, Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 178  previous preparation is necessary, and it has to be  backed by the visible and 
conscious effort of those who are engaged in battle . Civil Disobedience is thus a 
stimulation for the fighters and a challenge to the  opponent. It should be clear 
to the reader that Civil Disobedience in terms of I ndependence without the co-
operation of the millions by way of constructive ef fort is mere bravado and 
worse than useless. —CP, 28.  
 
The true building up of Swaraj consists in the mill ions of India wholeheartedly 
working the constructive programme without it the w hole nation cannot rise 
from its age-long torpor. Whether the British remai n or not it is our duty always 
to wipe out unemployment, to bridge the gulf betwee n rich and poor, to banish 
communal strife, to exorcise the demon of untouchab ility, to reform dacoits 
and save the people from them. If crores of people do not take a living interest 
in this nation-building work, freedom must remain a  dream and unattainable by 
either nonviolence or violence. –GC, 354. 
 
Regarding Workers  
420. Real politics are not a game. The late Mr. Gok hale used to deplore that we 
had not gone beyond treating politics as a pastime.  We have no notion as to 
how much the country has lost by reason of amateurs  having managed its 
battles with the serious-minded, trained and whole- time working bureaucracy. 
A movement lacks sincerity when it is supported by unwilling workers under 
pressure. – YI, 11-8-20, Tagore, 409.  
 
421. Unless the Congress can produce proud, defiant , self-respecting, sensitive, 
selfless and self-sacrificing patriots who count no  cost too great, there is, for 
this poor country of ours, for a long time to come,  no swaraj in which the 
poorest can participate. You and I may get a larger  share in the spoils of 
exploitation, but I am sure you will refuse to call  that swaraj. –YI, 26-6-24, 210 . 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 179  422. ‘what are the civil resisters thus freed to do  if they are to be ready for the 
call whenever it comes?’ They must learn the art an d the beauty of self-denial 
and voluntary poverty. They must engage themselves in nation-building 
activities, the spread of Khaddar through personal hand-spinning and hand-
weaving, the spread of communal unity of hearts by irreproachable personal 
conduct towards one another in every walk of life, the banishing of 
untouchability in every shape or form in one’s own person, the spread of total 
abstinence from intoxicating drinks and drugs by pe rsonal contact with 
individual addicts, and generally by cultivating pe rsonal purity. These are 
services which provide maintenance on the poor man’ s scale. Those for whom 
the poor man’s scale is not feasible should find a place in small unorganized 
industries of national importance which give a bett er wage. 
Let it be understood that civil resistance is for t hose who know and perform the 
duty of voluntary obedience to law and authority. 
–ABC, 8-4-34.  
 
423. Q. Don’t you think that only those who work wi thout any remuneration or 
allowance can inspire confidence in them, (i.e. the  common villager. –N.K.B.) 
i.e. those who accept nothing from any association of from the village? 
A. No. They do not even know who is and who is not working for remuneration. 
What does impress them is the way in which we live,  our habits, our talks, even 
our gestures. There may be a few who suspect us of a desire to earn; we have 
to dispel their suspicion no doubt. And then do not  run away with the feeling 
that he who accepts nothing from an association of from the village is by any 
means an ideal servant. He is often prey to self-ri ghteousness which debases 
one. –H, 25-7-36, I87.  
 
424. Any occupation, clean, honorable and calculate d to serve as an example to 
the people would be good enough. I may give as exam ples, scavenging, spinning 
and weaving. The occupation should, if possible, be  such as touches the 
interest of the masses and may spur them o to use t heir hands and feet. One Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 180  may win one’s livelihood by teaching and similar ot her pursuits, but it all 
depends on one’s needs, of which the maximum must a lways be fixed. – H, 3-6-
39, 145.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 181   
11. NON-VIOLENCE 
 
425. The world is weary of hate. We see the fatigue  overcoming the Western 
nations. We see that this song of hate has not bene fited humanity. Let it be the 
privilege of India to turn a new leaf and set a les son to the world. –IV, I66. 
 
My Task  
426. In the past, non-co-operation has been deliber ately expressed in violence 
to the evil-doer. I am endeavoring to show to my co untrymen that violent non-
co-operation only multiplies evil and that as evil can only be sustained by 
violence, withdrawal of support of evil requires co mplete abstention from 
violence. Non-violence implies voluntary submission  to the penalty for non-co-
operation with evil.– YI, 23-3-22, I68.  
 
427. I am not a visionary. I claim to be practical idealist. The religion of non-
violence is not meant merely for the rishis and sai nts. It is meant for the 
common people as well. Non-violence is the law of o ur species as violence is 
the law of the brute. The spirit lies dormant in th e brute and he knows no law 
but that of physical might. The dignity of man requ ires obedience to a higher 
law-to the strength of the spirit. 
I have therefore ventured to place before India the  ancient law of self-
sacrifice. For satyagraha and its off-shoots, non-c o-operation and civil 
resistance, are nothing but new names for the law o f suffering. The rishis, who 
discovered the law of nonviolence in the midst of v iolence, were greater 
geniuses than Newton. They were themselves greater warriors than Wellington. 
Having themselves known the use of arms, they reali zed their uselessness and 
taught a weary world that its salvation lay not thr ough violence but through 
non-violence. – YI, II-8-20, Tagore, 7I2.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 182  Non-violence as a World-force  
428. You might of course say that there can be no n on-violent rebellion and 
there has been none known to history. Well, it is m y ambition to provide an 
instance, and it is my dream that my country may wi n its freedom through non-
violence. And, I would like to repeat to the world times without number, that I 
will not purchase my country’s freedom at the cost of non-violence. My 
marriage to non-violence is such an absolute thing that I would rather commit 
suicide than be deflected from my position. I have not mentioned truth in this 
connection, simply because truth cannot be expresse d excepting by non-
violence. –YI, I2-II-3I, 354.  
 
429. Science of war leads one to dictatorship pure and simple. Science of 
nonviolence alone can lead one to pure democracy. E ngland, France and 
America have to make their choice. That is the chal lenge of the two dictators. 
Russia is out of the picture just now. Russia has a  dictator who dreams of peace 
and thinks he will wade to it through a sea of bloo d. No one can say what 
Russian dictatorship will mean to the world. 
 
430. True democracy or the Swaraj of the masses can  never come through 
untruthful and violent means, for the simple reason  that the natural corollary 
to their use would be to remove all opposition thro ugh the suppression or 
extermination of the antagonists. That does not mak e for individual freedom. 
Individual freedom can have the fullest play only u nder a regime of 
unadulterated ahimsa. –H, 27-5-39, 43.  
 
431. Granted that India produced sufficient arms an d ammunition and men who 
knew the art of war, what part or lot will those wh o cannot bear arms have in 
the attainment of Swaraj? I want Swaraj in the winn ing of which even women 
and children would contribute an equal share with p hysically the strongest. 
That can be under ahimsa only. I would, therefore, stand for ahimsa as the only 
means for obtaining India’s freedom even if I were alone.—H, 3-3-47, 27.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 183   
432. And so I plead for non-violence and yet more n on-violence. I do so not 
without knowledge but with sixty years’ experience behind me. 
–H, 24-2-26, 20.  
 
433. The accumulated experience of the past thirty years, fills me with the 
greatest hope that in the adoption of non-violence lies the future of India and 
the world. It is the most harmless and yet equally effective way of dealing with 
the political and economic wrongs of the downtrodde n portion of humanity. I 
have known from early youth that non-violence is no t a cloistered virtue to be 
practiced by the individual for his peace and final  salvation, but it is a rule of 
conduct for society if it is to live consistently w ith human dignity and make 
progress towards the attainment of peace for which it has been yearning for 
ages past. 
–GC, I70 
 
War Vs. Non-violence  
434. A believer in non-violence is pledged not to r esort to violence or physical 
force either directly or indirectly in defense of a nything, but he is not 
precluded from helping men or institutions that are  themselves not based on 
non-violence. If the reverse were the case, I would , for instance, be precluded 
from helping India to attain Swaraj because the fut ure Parliament of India 
under Swaraj, I know for certain, will be having so me military and police 
forces, or to take a domestic illustration, I may n ot help a son to secure 
justice, because forsooth he is not a believer in n on-violence. 
Mr. Zacharias’ proposition will reduce all commerce  by a believer in non-
violence to an impossibility. And there are not wan ting men, who do believe 
that complete non-violence means complete cessation  of all activity. 
Not such, however, is my doctrine of non-violence. My business is to refrain 
from doing any violence myself, and to induce by pe rsuasion and service as 
many of god’s creatures as I can to join me in the belief and practice. But I Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 184  would be untrue to my faith, if I refused to assist  in a just cause any men or 
measures that did not entirely coincide with the pr inciple of non-violence. I 
would be promoting violence, if finding the Mussalm ans to be in the right, I did 
not assist them by means strictly nonviolent agains t those who had 
treacherously plotted the destruction of the dignit y of Islam. Even when both 
parties believe in violence there is often such a t hing as justice on one side or 
the other. A robbed man has justice on his side, ev en though he may be 
accounted as a triumph of nonviolence, if the injur ed party could be persuaded 
to regain his property by methods of satyagraha, i. e. love or soul-force rather 
than a free fight. – YI, I-6-2I, I73.  
 
435. My resistance to war does not carry me to the point of thwarting those 
who wish to take part in it. I reason with them. I put before them the better 
way and leave them to make the choice. – H, I8-I-42, 4.  
 
436. I accept broad facts of history and draw my ow n lessons for my conduct. I 
do not want to repeat it in so far as the broad fac ts contradict the highest laws 
of life. But positively refuse to judge man from th e scanty material furnished to 
us by history. De mortuis nil nisi bonum . Kamal Pasha and De Valera too I 
cannot judge. But for me as a believer in nonviolen ce out and out they cannot 
be my guides in life in so far as their faith in wa r is concerned. I believe in 
Krishna perhaps more than the writer. But my Krishn a is the Lord of the 
Universe, the creator, preserver and destroyer of u s all. He may destroy 
because He creates. But I must not be drawn into a philosophical or religious 
argument with my friends. I have not the qualificat ion for teaching my 
philosophy of life. I have barely qualifications fo r practicing the philosophy I 
believe. I am but a poor struggling soul yearning t o be wholly good-wholly 
truthful and wholly nonviolent in thought, word and  deed, but ever failing to 
reach the ideal which I know to be true. I admit, a nd assure my revolutionary 
friends, that it is a painful climb, but the pain o f it is a positive pleasure for 
me. Each step upward makes me feel stronger and fit  for the next. But all that Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 185  pain and pleasure are for me. The revolutionaries a re at liberty to reject the 
whole of my philosophy. To them I merely present my  own experiences as a co-
worker in the same cause even as I have successfull y presented them to the Ali 
Brothers and many other friends. They can and do ap plaud whole-heartedly the 
action of Mustafa Kamala Pasha and possibly De Vale ro and Lenin. But they 
realize with me that India is not like Turkey or Ir eland or Russia and that 
revolutionary activity is suicidal at this stage of  the country’s life at any rate if 
not for all time, in a country so vast, so hopeless ly divided and with the masses 
so deeply sunk in pauperism and so fearfully terror -struck. – H, I2-7-42, 2I9.  
 
437. I would say to my critics to enter with me int o the sufferings, not only of 
the people of India but of those, whether engaged i n the war or not, of the 
whole world. I cannot look at this butchery going o n in the world with 
indifference. I have an unchangeable faith that it is beneath the dignity of men 
to resort to mutual slaughter. I have no doubt that  there is a way out.— HS, 20-
7-44.  
 
438. The accumulated experience of the past thirty years, the first eight of 
which were in South Africa, fills me with the great est hope that in the adoption 
of non-violence lies the future of India and the wo rld. It is the most harmless 
and yet equally effective way of dealing with the p olitical and economic wrongs 
of the downtrodden portion of humanity. I have know n from early youth that 
non-violence is not a cloistered virtue to be pract iced by the individual for 
peace and final salvation, but it is a rule of cond uct for society if it is to live 
consistently with human dignity and make progress t owards the attainment of 
peace for which it has been yearning for ages past.  –GC, I70.  
 
Moral Equivalent of War  
439. Up to the year 1906, I simply relied on appeal  to reason. I was a very 
industrious reformer. I was a good draftsman, as I always had a close grip of 
facts which in its turn was the necessary result of  my meticulous regard for Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 186  truth. But I found that reason failed to produce an  impression when the critical 
moment arrived in South Africa. My people were exci ted; even a worm will and 
does sometimes turn-and there was talk of wreaking vengeance. I had then to 
choose between allying myself to violence or findin g out some other method of 
meeting the crisis and stopping the rot and it came  to me that we should refuse 
to obey legislation that was degrading and let them  put us in jail if they liked. 
Thus came into being the moral equivalent of war. I  was then a loyalist, 
because, I implicitly believed that the sum total o f the activities of the British 
empire was good for India and for humanity. Arrivin g in England soon after the 
outbreak of the war I plunged into it and later whe n I was forced to go to India 
as a result of the pleurisy that I had developed, I  led a recruiting campaign at 
the risk of my life, and to the horror of some of m y friends. The disillusionment 
came in 1919 after the passage of the Black Rowlatt  Act and the refusal of the 
Government to give the simple elementary redress of  proved wrongs that we 
had asked for. And so, in 1920, I became a rebel. S ince then the conviction to 
the people are not secured by reason alone but have  to be purchased with their 
suffering. Suffering is the law of human beings; wa r is the law of the jungle. 
But suffering is infinitely more powerful than the law of the jungle for 
converting the opponent and opening his ears, which  are otherwise shut, to the 
voice of reason. Nobody has probably drawn up more petitions or espoused 
more forlorn causes than I and I have come to this fundamental conclusion that 
if you want something really important to be done y ou must not merely satisfy 
the reason, you must move the heart also. The appea l of reason is more to the 
head but the penetration of the heart comes from su ffering. It opens up the 
inner understanding in man. Suffering is the badge of the human race, not the 
sword. –YI, 5-II-3I, 34I.  
 
The Essence of Non-violence  
440. (1) Non-violence is the law of the human race and is infinitely greater than 
and superior to brute force. 
(2) In the last resort it does not avail to those w ho do not possess a living faith 
in the God of Love Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 187  (3) Non-violence affords the fullest protection to one’s self-respect and sense 
of honour, but not always to possession of land or movable property, though its 
habitual practice does prove a better bulwark than the possession of armed 
men to defend them. Non-violence in the very nature  of things is of no 
assistance in the defense of ill-gotten gains and i mmoral acts. 
(4) Individuals and nations who would practiced non -violence must be prepared 
to sacrifice (nations to the last man) their all ex cept honour. It is therefore 
inconsistent with the possession of other people’s countries, i.e. modern 
imperialism which is frankly based on force for its  defense. 
(5) Nonviolence is a power which can be wielded equ ally by all-children, young 
men and women or grown up people, provided they hav e a living faith in the 
God of Love and have therefore equal love for all m ankind. When nonviolence 
is accepted as the law of life it must pervade the whole being and not be 
applied to isolated acts. 
(6) It is a profound error to suppose that whilst t he law is good enough for 
individuals it is not for masses of mankind.— H, 5-9-36, 236.  
 
Is Perfection Possible?  
441. Perfect non-violence is impossible so long as we exist physically, for we 
would want some space at least to occupy. Perfect n on-violence whilst you are 
inhabiting the body is only a theory like Euclid’s point  or straight line, but we 
have to endeavor every moment of our lives. –H, 2I-7-40, 2II.  
 
Ahimsa, distinguished from Non-killing  
442. Let us now examine the root of ahimsa. It is u ttermost selflessness. 
Selflessness means complete freedom from a regard f or one’s body. If man 
desired to realize himself i.e. Truth, he could do so only by completely 
detached from the body i.e. by making all other bei ngs feel safe from him. 
That is the way of ahimsa. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 188  Ahimsa does not simply mean non-killing. Himsa mean s causing pain to or killing 
any life out of anger, or from a selfish purpose. O r with the intention of 
injuring it. Refraining from so doing is ahimsa. –YI, 4-II-26, 385.  
 
443. Violence will be violence for all time, and al l violence is sinful. But what is 
inevitable, is not regarded as a sin, so much so th at the science of daily 
practice has not only declared the inevitable viole nce involved in killing for 
sacrifice as permissible but even regarded it as me ritorious. 
It is no easy thing to walk on the sharp sword-edge  of ahimsa in this world 
which is full of himsa. Wealth does not help; anger  is the enemy of ahimsa; and 
pride is a monster that swallows it up. In this str aight and narrow observance of 
this religion of ahimsa one has often to know so-ca lled himsa as the truest form 
of ahimsa— YI, 2I-I0-26, 363.  
 
444. The sin of himsa consists not in merely taking  life, but in taking life for the 
sake of one’s perishable body. All destruction ther efore involved in the process 
of eating, drinking etc. is selfish and therefore h imsa. But man regards it to be 
unavoidable and puts up with it. But the destructio n of bodies of tortured 
creatures being for their own peace cannot be regar ded as himsa, or the 
unavoidable destruction caused for the purpose of p rotecting one’s wards 
cannot be regarded as himsa. 
1. It is impossible to sustain one’s body without t he destruction of other bodies 
to some extent. 
2. All have to destroy some life, 
   (a) for sustaining their own bodies, 
   (b)  for protecting those under their care, or 
   (c) Something for the sake of those whose life i s taken. 
3. (a) and (b) in ‘2’ mean himsa to a greater or le ss extent. (c) means no himsa 
and is therefore ahimsa. Himsa in (a) and (b) is un avoidable. 
4. A progressive ahimsa-ist will, therefore, commit  the himsa contained in (a) Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 189  and (b) as little as possible, only when it is unav oidable, and after full and 
mature deliberation and having exhausted all remedi es to avoid it. 
Taking life may be a duty. We do destroy as much li fe as we think necessary for 
sustaining our body. Thus for food we take life, ve getable and other, and for 
health we destroy mosquitoes and the like by the us e of disinfectants etc. and 
we do not think that we are guilty of irreligion in  doing so…for the benefit of 
the species, we kill carnivorous beasts…Even man-sl aughter may be necessary 
in certain cases. Suppose a man runs amuck and goes  furiously about sword in 
hand, and killing anyone that comes in his way, and  no one dares to capture 
him alive. Anyone who dispatches this lunatic, will  earn the gratitude of the 
community and be regarded as a benevolent man. – YI, 4—II-26, 385.  
 
445. I see that there is an instinctive horror of k illing living beings under any 
circumstances whatever. For instance, an alternativ e has been suggested in the 
shape of confining even rabid dogs in a certain pla ce and allowing them to die a 
slow death. Now my idea of compassion makes this th ing impossible for me. I 
cannot for a moment bear to see a dog, or for that matter any other living 
being, helplessly suffering the torture of a slow d eath. I do not kill a human 
being thus circumstanced because I have more hopefu l remedies. I should kill a 
dog similarly situated, because in its case I am wi thout a remedy. Should my 
child be attacked with rabies and there was no help ful remedy to relieve his 
agony, I should consider it my duty to take his lif e. Fatalism has its limits. We 
leave things to Fate after exhausting all the remed ies. One of the remedies and 
the final one to relieve the agony of a tortured ch ild is to take his life. – YI, I8-
II-26, 395.  
 
Why then not Kill Those Who Oppress Mankind?  
446. No human being is so bad as to be beyond redem ption, no human being is 
so perfect as to warrant his destroying him whom he  wrongly considers to be 
wholly evil.— YI, 26-3-3I, 49.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 190  447. A Satyagrahi must never forget the distinction  between evil and the evil-
doer. He must not harbour ill-will or bitter ness a gainst the latter. He may not 
even employ needlessly offensive language against t he evil person, however 
unrelieved his evil might be. For it is an article of faith with every satyagrahi 
that there is no one so fallen in this world but ca n be converted by love. A 
satyagrahi will always try to overcome evil by good , anger by love, untruth by 
truth, himsa by ahimsa. There is no other way of pu rging the world of evil— YI, 
8-8-29, 263.  
 
Absence of Hatred  
448. I hold myself to be incapable of hating any be ing on earth. By a long 
course of prayerful discipline, I have ceased for o ver forty years to hate 
anybody. I know this is a big claim. Nevertheless, I make it in all humility. But I 
can and do hate evil wherever it exists. I hate the  system of government that 
he British people have set up in India. I hate the ruthless exploitation of India 
even as I hate from the bottom of my heart the hide ous system of 
untouchability for which millions of Hindus have ma de themselves responsible. 
But I do not hate the domineering Hindus. I seek to  reform them in all the 
loving ways that are open to me. My non-co-operatio n has its roots not in 
hatred, but in love. My personal religion peremptor ily forbids me to hate 
anybody. – YI, 6-8-25, 272.  
 
449. We can only win over the opponent by love, nev er by hate. Hate is the 
subtlest form of violence. We cannot be really non- violent and yet have hate in 
us. –H, I7-8-34, 2I2.  
 
Truth in Speech and Non-violence  
450. To say or write a distasteful word is surely n ot violent especially when the 
speaker or writer believes it to be true. The essen ce of violence is that there 
must be a violent intention behind a thought, word or act, i.e. an intention to 
do harm to the opponent so-called. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 191  False notions of propriety or fear of wounding susc eptibilities often deter 
people from saying what they mean and ultimately la nd them on the shores of 
hypocrisy. But if nonviolence of thought is to be e volved in individuals or 
societies or nations, truth has to be told, however  harsh or unpopular it may 
appear to be for the moment.— H, I9-I2-36, 362.  
 
Satyam bruyat, Priyam bruyat na bruyat Satyam apriy am  
451. In my opinion the Sanskrit text means that one  should speak the truth in 
gentle language. One had better not speak it, if on e cannot do so in a gentle 
way; meaning thereby that there is no truth in a ma n who cannot control his 
tongue.— YI, I7-9-25 3I8.  
 
Positive Aspects of Ahimsa: Love and Patience  
452. In its positive form, ahimsa means the largest  love, greatest charity. If I 
am a follower of ahimsa, I must love my enemy. I mu st apply the same rules to 
the wrong-doer who is my enemy or a stranger to me,  as I would to my wrong-
doing father or son. This active necessarily includ es truth and fearlessness. As 
man cannot deceive the love one, he does not fear o r frighten him or her. Gift 
of life is the greatest of all gifts; a man who giv es it in reanty, disarms all 
hostility. He has paved the way for an honourable u nderstanding. And none who 
is himself subject to fear can bestow that gift, He  must therefore be himself 
fearless. A man cannot practised ahimsa and be a co ward at the same time. 
The practice of ahimsa calls forth the greatest cou rage.—Nat, 346. 
 
453. Having flung aside the sword, there is nothing  except the cup of love 
which I can offer to those who oppose me. It is by offering that cup that I 
expect to draw them close to me. I cannot think of permanent enmity between 
man and man, and believing as I do in the theory of  rebirth, I live in the hope 
that if not in this birth, in some other birth, I s hall be able to hug all humanity 
in friendly embrace.— YI, 2-4-3I, 54.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 192  454. Love is the strongest force the world possesse s and yet it is the humblest 
imaginable. – YI, 6-8-25, 272.  
 
455. The hardest heart and the grossest ignorance m ust disappear before the 
rising sun of suffering without anger and without m alice. 
–YI, I9-2-25, 6I.  
 
456. Love has special quality of attracting abundan ce of love in return. – Ceylon, 
I50 
 
Non-violent Resistance  
457. My goal is friendship with the whole world and  I can combine the greatest 
love with the greatest opposition to wrong. 
—YI, I0-3-20, Tagore, I39.  
 
458. Non-violence is ‘not a resignation from all re al fighting against 
wickedness’. On the contrary, the non-violence of m y conception is a more 
active and real fight against wickedness than retal iation whose very nature is to 
increase wickedness. I contemplate, a mental and th erefore a moral opposition 
to immoralities. I seek entirely to blunt the edge of the tyrant’s sword, not by 
putting up against it a sharper-edged weapon, but b y disappointing his 
expectation that I would be offering physical resis tance. The resistance of the 
soul that I should offer would elude him. It would at first dazzle him and at last 
compel recognition from him, which recognition woul d not humiliate him but 
would uplift him. It may be urged that this is an i deal state. And so it is. 
—YI, 8-I0-25, 346. cf. I33, 386, 426, 55I.  
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 193  Non-violence, Militant in Character  
459. Non-violence in its dynamic condition means co nscious suffering. It does 
not mean meek submission to the will of the evil-do er, but it means the putting 
of one’ whole soul against the will of the tyrant. Working under this law of our 
beings, it is possible for a single individual to d efy the whole might of an unjust 
empire to save his honour, his religion, his soul a nd lay the foundation for that 
empire’s fall or its regeneration. 
–YI, II-8-20, Tagore, 7I3. Cf. 5I6.  
 
460. Yours should not merely be a passive spiritual ity that spends itself in idle 
meditation, but it should be an active thing which will carry war into the 
enemy’s camp.* 
461. Never has anything been done on this earth wit hout direct action. I reject 
the word ‘passive resistance’, because of its insuf ficiency and its being 
interpreted as a weapon of the weak. 
What was the larger ‘symbiosis’ that Buddha and Chr ist preached? Gentleness 
and love. Buddha fearlessly carried the war into th e enemy’s camp and brought 
down on its knees an arrogant priesthood. Christ dr ove out the money-changers 
from the temple of Jerusalem and drew down curses f rom heaven upon the 
hypocrites and the Pharisees. Both were for intense ly direct action. But even as 
Buddha and Christ chastised, they showed unmistakab le love and gentleness 
behind every act of theirs. 
—YI, I2-5-20, Tagore, 1072, and 1070.  
 
462. Our aim is not merely to arouse the best in th e Englishman but to do so 
whilst we are prosecuting our cause. If we cease to  pursue our course, we do 
not evoke the best in him. The best must not be con founded with good temper. 
When we are dealing with any evil, we may have to r uffle the evil-doer. We 
have to run the risk, if we are to bring the best o ut of him. I have likened 
nonviolence to aseptic and violence to antiseptic t reatment. Both are intended Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 194  to ward off the evil, and therefore cause a kind of  disturbance which is often 
inevitable. The first never harms the evil-doer.— H, 30-3-40, 72.  
 
NON-Violence, the Virtue of the Strong  
463. Non-violence presupposes ability to strike. It  is a conscious, deliberate 
restraint put upon one’s desire for vengeance. But vengeance is any day 
superior to passive, effeminate and helpless submis sion. Forgiveness is higher 
still. Vengeance too is weakness. The desire for ve ngeance comes out of fear of 
harm, imaginary or real. A man who fears no one on earth would consider it 
troublesome even to summon up anger against one who  is vainly trying to injure 
him. –YI, I2-8-26, 285.  
 
464. Ahimsa is the extreme limit of forgiveness. Bu t forgiveness is the quality of 
the brave. Ahimsa is impossible without fearlessnes s. 
–YI, 4-II-26, 384.  
 
465. My creed of non-violence is an extremely activ e force. It has no room for 
cowardice or even weakness. There is hope for a vio lent man to be some day 
non-violent but there is none for a coward. I have therefore said more than 
once in these pages that if we do not know how to d efend ourselves, our 
women and our places of worship by the force of suf fering, i.e. non-violence, 
we must, if we are men, be at least able to defend all these by fighting. – YI, I6-
6-27, I96.  
 
466. There are two ways of defense. The best and th e most effective is not to 
defend at all, but to remain at one’s post risking every danger. The next best 
but equally honourable method is to strike bravely in self-defense and put one’s 
life in the most dangerous positions. 
—YI, I8-I2-24, 4I4, cf. 495.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 195  467. The strength to kill is not essential for self -defense; one ought to have the 
strength to die. When a man is fully ready to die, he will not even desire to 
offer violence. Indeed I may put it down as a self- evident proposition that the 
desire to kill is in inverse proportion to the desi re to die. And history is replete 
with instances of men who by dying with courage and  compassion on their lips 
converted the hearts of their violent opponents.— YI, 23-I-30, 27.  
 
468. Non-violence and cowardice go ill together. I can imagine a fully armed 
man to be at heart a coward. Possession of arms imp lies an element of fear, if 
not cowardice. But true non-violence is an impossib ility  without the possession 
of unadulterated fearlessness.— H, 15-7-39, 201 . 
 
True and False Nonviolence  
469. Non-violence to be a potent force must begin w ith the mind. Non-violence 
of the mere body without the co-operation of the mi nd is non-violence of weak 
or the cowardly, and has therefore no potency. If w e hear malice and hatred in 
our bosoms and pretend not to retaliate, it must re coil upon us and lead to our 
destruction. For abstention from mere body violence  not to be injurious, it is at 
least necessary not to entertain hatred if we canno t generate active love. 
All the songs and speeches betokening hatred must b e taboo. 
—YI, 2-4-3I, 58.  
 
470. The mysterious effect of non-violence is not t o be measured by its visible 
effect. But we dare not rest content so long as the  poison of hatred is allowed 
to permeate society. This struggle is a stupendous effort at conversion. We aim 
at nothing less than the conversion of the English.  It can never be done by 
harbouring ill-will and still pretending to follow nonviolence. Let those 
therefore who want to follow the path of nonviolenc e and yet Harbour ill-will 
retrace their steps and repent of the wrong they ha ve done to themselves and 
the country.— YI, 2-4-3I, 58.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 196   
471. If we are unmanly today, we are so, not becaus e we do not know how to 
strike, but because we fear to die. He is no follow er of Mahavira, the apostle of 
Jainism, or of Buddha or of the Vedas who, being af raid to die, takes flight 
before any danger, real or imaginary, all the while  wishing that somebody else 
would remove the danger by destroying the person ca using it. He is no follower 
of ahimsa who does not care a straw if he kills a m an by inches by deceiving 
him in trade, or who would protect by force of arms  a few cows and make away 
with the butcher or who, in order to do a supposed good to his country, does 
not mind killing off a few officials. All these are  actuated by hatred, cowardice 
and fear. Here the love of the cow or the country i s a vague thing intended to 
satisfy one’s vanity or soothe a stinging conscienc e. 
Ahimsa, truly understood, is in my humble opinion a  panacea for all evils 
mundane and extra-mundane. We can never over do it.  Just at present we are 
not doing it at all. Ahimsa does not displace the p ractice of other virtues, but 
renders their practice imperatively necessary befor e it can be practiced even in 
its rudiments. Mahavira and Buddha were soldiers, a nd so was Tolstoy. Only, 
they saw deeper and truer into their profession and  found the secret of a true, 
happy, honourable and godly life. Let us be joint-s harers with these teachers, 
and this land of ours will once more be the abode o f gods. –Nat, 348.  
 
Violence, rather than Cowardice  
472. I do believe that, where there is only a choic e between cowardice and 
violence, I would advise violence. I would rather h ave India resort to arms in 
order to defend her honour than that she should, in  a cowardly manner, 
become or remain a helpless witness to her own dish onour. 
But I believe that non-violence is infinitely super ior to violence, forgiveness is 
more manly than punishment. Forgiveness adorns the soldier. But abstinence is 
forgiveness only when there is the power to punish;  it is meaningless when it 
pretends to proceed from a helpless creature. But I  do not believe India to be 
helpless. I do not believe myself to be a helpless creature. Strength does not Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 197  come from physical capacity. It comes from an indom itable will. – YI, II-8-20, 
Tagore, 7II  
 
473. The people of a village near Bettiah told me t hat they had run away whilst 
the police were looting their houses and molesting their womenfolk. When they 
said that they had run away because I had told them  to be non-violent, I hung 
my head in shame. I assured them that such was not the meaning of my 
nonviolence. I expected them to intercept the might iest power that might be in 
the act of harming those who were under their prote ction, and draw without 
retaliation all harm upon their own heads even to t he point of death, but never 
to run away from the storm centre. It was manly eno ugh to defend one’s 
property, honour o0r religion at the point of the s word. It was manlier and 
nobler to defend them without seeking to injure the  wrongdoer. But it was 
unmanly, unnatural and dishonorable to forsake the post of duty and, in order 
to save one’s skin, to leave property, honour or re ligion to the mercy of the 
wrongdoer. I could see my way of delivering the mes sage of ahimsa to those 
who knew how to die, not to those who were afraid o f death.— IV, 254.  
 
474. The weakest of us physically must be taught th e art of facing dangers and 
giving a good account of ourselves. I want both the  Hindus and the Mussalman 
to cultivate the cool courage, to die without killi ng. But if one has not that 
courage, I want him to cultivate the art of killing  and being killed, rather than 
in a cowardly manner flee from danger. For the latt er in spite of his flight does 
commit mental himsa. He flees because he has not th e courage to be killed in 
the act of killing.— YI, 20-I0-2I, 335.  
 
475. Self-defense is the only honourable course whe re there is unread ness for 
self-immolation. – H, 20-7-35, 181.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 198  476. I would risk violence a thousand times than th e emasculation of a whole 
race.—YI, 4-8-20, Tagore, 32I  
 
477. The Hindus think that they are physically weak er than the Mussalman. The 
latter consider themselves weak in educational and earthly equipment. They 
are now doing what all weak bodies have done hither to. This fighting, 
therefore, however unfortunate it may be, is a sign  of growth. It is like the 
Wars of the Roses. Out of it will rise a mighty nat ion.—YI, 9-9-26, 3I6.  
 
Limitations of Violence  
478. Hitherto I have given historical instances of bloodless non-co-operation. I 
will not Insult the intelligence of the reader by c iting historical instances on 
non-co-operation combined with violence, but I am f ree to confess that there 
are on record as many successes as failures in viol ent non-co-operation.— YI, 4-
8-20, Tagore, 320.  
 
479. Revolutionary crime is intended to exert press ure. But it is the insane 
pressure of anger and ill-will. I contend that non- violent acts exert pressure far 
more effective than violent acts, for that pressure  comes from goodwill and 
gentleness. –YI, 26-I2-24, 420 . 
 
480. I do not blame the British. If we were weak in  numbers as they are, we too 
would perhaps have resorted to the same methods as they are now employing. 
Terrorism and deception are weapons not of the stro ng but of the weak. The 
British are weak in numbers, we are weak in spite o f our numbers. The result is 
that each is dragging the other down. It is common experience that Englishmen 
lose in character after residence in India and that  Indians lose in courage and 
manliness by contact with Englishmen. This process of weakening is good 
neither for us two nations, nor for the world.— YI, 22-9-20, Tagore, I092.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 199  481. I object to violence because when it appears t o do good, the good is only 
temporary; the evil it does is permanent. I do not believe that the killing of 
even every Englishman can do the slightest good to India. The millions will be 
just as badly off as they are today, if someone mad e it possible to kill of every 
Englishman tomorrow. The responsibility is more our s than that of the English 
for the present state of things. The English will b e powerless to do evil if we 
will but be good. Hence my incessant emphasis o ref orm from within.— YI, 2I-5-
25, I78.  
 
482. Good brought through force destroyed individua lity. Only when the change 
was effected through the persuasive power of non-vi olent non-co-operation, 
i.e. love, could the foundation of individuality be  preserved, and real, abiding 
progress be assured for the world.— H, 9-3-47, 58.  
 
483. History teaches one that those who have, no do ubt with honest motives, 
ousted the greedy by using brute force against them , have in their turn become 
a prey to the disease of the conquered. 
—YI, 6-5-26, I64.  
 
To the Revolutionary  
484. Those whom you seek to depose are better armed  and infinitely better 
organized than you are. You may not care for your o wn loves, but you dare not 
disregard those of your countrymen who have no desi re to die a martyr’s 
death.—YI, 26-I2-24, 428.  
 
485. Form violence done to the foreign ruler, viole nce to our own people whom 
we may consider to be obstructing the country’s pro gress is an easy natural 
step. Whatever may have been the result of violent activities in other countries 
and without reference to the philosophy of nonviole nce, it does not require 
much intellectual effort to see that if we resort t o violence for ridding society Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 200  of the many abuses which impede our progress, we sh all add to our difficulties 
and postpone the day of freedom. The people unprepa red for reform because 
unconvinced of their necessity will be maddened wit h rage over their coercion, 
and will seek the assistance of the assistance of t he foreigner in order to 
retaliate. Has not this been happening before our e yes for the past many years 
of which we have still painfully vivid recollection s?—YI, 2-I-30, 4.  
 
486. I hold that the world is sick of armed rebelli ons. I hold too that whatever 
may be true of other countries, a bloody revolution  will not succeed in India. 
The masses have no active part can do no good to th em. A successful bloody 
revolution can only mean further misery for the mas ses. For it would be still 
foreign rule for them. The nonviolence I teach is a ctive nonviolence of the 
strongest. But the weakest can partake in it withou t becoming weaker. They 
can only be the stronger for having been in it. The  masses are far bolder today 
than ever were. A nonviolent struggle necessarily i nvolves construction on a 
mass scale. It cannot therefore lead to tamas or da rkness or inertia. It means a 
quickening of the national life. That movement is s till going on silently almost 
imperceptibly, but none the less surely. 
I do not deny the revolutionary’s heroism and sacri fice. But heroism and 
sacrifice in a bad cause are so much waste of splen did energy and hurt the good 
cause by drawing away attention from it by the glam our of the misused heroism 
and sacrifice in a bad cause. 
I am not ashamed to stand erect before the heroic a nd self-sacrificing 
revolutionary because I am able to pit an equal mea sure of nonviolent men’s 
heroism and sacrifice untarnished by the blood of t he innocent. Self-sacrifice of 
one innocent man is a million times more potent tha n the sacrifice of million 
men who die in the act of killing others. The willi ng sacrifice of the innocent is 
the most powerful retort to insolent  tyranny that has yet been conceived by 
God or man.—YI, I2-2-25, 60. 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 201  Nonviolence, the Swifter Way  
487. The spiritual weapon of self-purification, int angible as it seems, is the 
most potent means of revolutionizing one’s environm ent and loosening external 
shackles. It works subtly and invisibly; it is an i ntense process though it might 
often seem a weary and long-drawn process, it is th e straightest way to 
liberation. The surest and quickest and no effort c an be too great for it. What 
it requires is faith-an unshakable mountain-like fa ith that flinches from 
nothing. 
488. You need not be afraid that the method of nonv iolence is a slow long-
drawn out process. It is the swiftest the world has  seen, for it is the surest.— YI, 
30-4-25, I53.  
 
489. India’s freedom is assured if she has patience . That way will be found to 
be the shortest even though it may appear to be the  longest to our impatient 
nature. The way of peace insures internal growth an d stability.— YI, 20-5-26, 
I84.  
 
Non-violence also the Noble Way  
490. I am more concerned in preventing the brutaliz ation of human nature than 
in the prevention of the sufferings of my own peopl e. I know that people who 
voluntarily undergo a course of suffering raise the mselves and the whole of 
humanity; but I also know that people who become br utalized in their 
desperate efforts to get victory over their opponen ts or to exploit weaker 
nations or weaker men, not only drag down themselve s but mankind also. And 
it cannot be a matter of pleasure to me or anyone e lse to see human nature 
dragged to the mire. If we are all sons of the same  God and partake of the 
same divine essence, we must partake of the sin of every person whether he 
belongs to us or to another race. You can understan d how repugnant it must be 
to invoke the beast in any human being, how much mo re so in Englishmen, 
among whom I count numerous friends. I invite you a ll to give all the help that 
you can in the endeavour that I am making.— YI, 29-I0-3I, 325.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 202   
491. The doctrine of violence has reference only to  the doing of injury by one 
to another. Suffering injury in one’s own person is  on the contrary of the 
essence of non-violence and is the chosen substitut e for violence to others. It is 
not because I value life low that I can countenance  with joy thousands 
voluntarily losing their lives for satyagraha, but because I know that it results in 
the long run in the least loss of life and what is more, it ennobles those who 
lose their lives and morally enriches the world for  their sacrifice. – YI, 8-I0-25, 
345  
 
492. The method of passive resistance is the cleare st and safest, because, if 
the cause is not true, it is the resisters, and the y alone, who suffer.— Nat. 305.  
 
493. Passive resistance is an all-sided sword; it c an be used anyhow; it blesses 
him who uses it and him against whom it is used.— IHR, 48.  
 
494. The beauty of satyagraha, of which non-co-oper ation is but a chapter, is 
that it is available to either side in a fight; tha t it has checks that automatically 
work for the vindication of truth and justice for t hat side, whichever it may be, 
that has truth and justice in preponderating measur e. It is as powerful and 
faithful a weapon in the hand of the capitalist as in that of the labourer. It is as 
powerful in the hands of the government, as in that  of the people, and will 
bring victory to the government, if people are misg uided or unjust, as it will 
win the battle for the people if the government be in the wrong. Quick 
disorganization and defeat are bound to be the fate  of bolstered up cases and 
artificial agitations, if the battle is fought with  satyagraha weapons. Suppose 
the people are unfit to rule themselves, or are unw illing to sacrifice for a 
cause, then, no amount of noise will bring them vic tory in non-co-operation. —
YI, 23-6-20. Tagore, 42.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 203  Criminal Assaults  
495. The main thing, however, is for women to know how to be fearless. It is 
my firm conviction; that a fearless woman who knows  that her purity is her best 
shield can never be dishonored. However beastly the  man, he will bow in 
shame before the flame of her dazzling purity. Ther e are examples even in 
modern times of women who have thus defended themse lves. I can, as I write, 
recall two such instances. I therefore recommend wo men who read this article 
to try to cultivate this courage. They will become wholly fearless, if they can 
and cease to tremble as they do today at the mere t hought of assaults. It is 
not, however, necessary for a woman to go through a  bitter; experience for the 
sake of passing a test of courage. These experience s mercifully do not come in 
the way of lakhs or even thousands. Every soldier i s not a beast. It is a minority 
that loses all sense of decency. Only twenty per ce nt of snakes are poisonous, 
and out of these a few only bite. They do not attac k unless trodden on. But this 
knowledge does not help those who are full of fear and tremble at the sight of 
a snake. Parents and husbands should, therefore, in struct women in the art of 
becoming fearless. It can best be learnt from a liv ing faith in God. Though He is 
invisible, He is one’s unfailing protector. He who has this faith is the most 
fearless of all. 
But such faith or courage cannot be acquired in a d ay. Meantime we must try to 
explore4 other means. When a woman is assaulted she  may not stop to think in 
terms of himsa or ahimsa. Her primary duty is self- protection. She is at liberty 
to employ every method or means that come to her mi nd in order to defend her 
honour. God has given her nails and teeth. She must  use them with all her 
strength and, if need be, die in the effort. The ma n or woman who has shed all 
fear of death will be able not only to protect hims elf or herself but others also 
through laying down his life. In truth we fear deat h most, and hence we 
ultimately submit to superior physical force. Some will bend the knee to the 
invader, some will resort to bribery, some will cra wl on their bellies or submit 
to other forms of humiliation, and some women will even give their bodies 
rather than die. I have not written this in a carpi ng spirit. I am only illustrating 
human nature. Whether we crawl on our beliefs or wh ether a woman yields to Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 204  the lust of man it is symbolic of that same love of  life which makes us stoop to 
anything. Therefore only he who loses his life shal l save it; (tena tyaktena 
bhunjithah). Every reader should commit this matchl ess shloka to memory. But 
mere lip loyalty to it will be of no avail. It must  penetrate deep down to the 
innermost recesses of his heart. To enjoy life one should give up the lure of 
life. That should be part of our nature.  
So much for what a woman should do. But what about a man who is witness to 
such crimes? The answer is implied in the foregoing . He must not be a passive 
onlooker. He must protect the woman. He must not ru n for police help; he 
must not rest satisfied by pulling the alarm chain in the train. If he is able to 
practiced non-violence, he will die in doing so and  thus save the woman in 
jeopardy. If he does not believe in non-violence or  cannot practiced it, he must 
try to save her by using all the force he may have.  In either way there must be 
readiness on his part to lay down his life. –H, 1-3-42, 60.  
 
496. Q. what is a woman to do when attacked by misc reants? To run away, or 
resist with violence? To; have boats in readiness t o fly or prepare to defend 
with weapons? 
A: My answer to this question is very simple. For m e there can be no 
preparation for violence. All preparation must be f or nonviolence if courage of 
the highest type is to be developed. Violence can o nly be tolerated as being 
preferable always to cowardice. Therefore I would h ave no boats ready for a 
flight in emergency. For a nonviolent person there is no emergency, but quiet 
dignified preparation for death. Hence whether it I s a man or a woman he or 
she will defy death even when he or she is unassist ed; for the real assistance is 
from God. I can preach no other thing and I am here  to practiced what I 
preach. Whether such an opportunity will occur to m e or be given to me I do 
not know. If there are women who when assailed by m iscreants cannot resist 
themselves without arms they do not need to be advi sed to carry arms. They 
will do so. There is something wrong in this consta nt enquiry as to whether to 
bear arms or not. People have to learn to be natura lly independent. If they will Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 205  remember the central teaching, namely, that the rea l effective resistance lies 
in nonviolence, they will model their conduct accor dingly. And that is what the 
world had been doing although unthinkingly. Since i t is not the highest courage, 
namely, courage born of nonviolence, it arms itself  even unto the atom bomb. 
Those who do not see in it the futility of violence  will naturally arm themselves 
to the best of their ability.  
In India since my return from South Africa, there h as been conscious and 
constant training in non-violence with the result w e have seen. 
Q. Can a woman be advised to take her own life rath er than surrender? 
A. The question requires a definite answer. I answe red it in Delhi just before 
leaving for Noakhali. A woman would most certainly take her own life rather 
than surrender. In other words, Surrender has no ro om in my plan of life. But I 
was asked in what way to take one’s own life. I pro mptly said it was not for me 
to prescribe the means, and behind the approval of suicide under such 
circumstances was and is the belief that one whose mind is prepared for even 
suicide will have the requisite courage for such me ntal resistance and such 
internal purity that her assailant will be disarmed . I could not carry the 
argument any further because it does not admit of f urther development. It 
requires positive proof which, I own, is lacking. 
Q. If the choice is between taking one’s own life a nd that of the assailant. 
which would you advise? 
A. When it is a question of choice between killing oneself or the assailant, I 
have no doubt in my mind that the first should be t he choice. 
–H, 9-2-47, 13.  
 
Non-violence during Riots  
497. To quell riots non-violently, there must be tr ue ahimsa in one’s heart, an 
ahimsa that takes even the erring hooligan in its w arm embrace. Such an 
attitude cannot be cultivated. It can only come as a result of prolonged and 
patient effort which must be made during peaceful t imes. The would-be 
members of a peace brigade should come into close t ouch and; cultivate Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 206  acquaintance with the so-called goonda element in h is vicinity. He should know 
all and be known to all and win the hearts of al by  his living and selfless 
service. No section should be regarded as too conte mptible or mean to mix 
with. Goondas do not drop from the sky, nor do they  spring from the earth like 
evil spirits. They are the product of social disorg anization, and society is 
therefore responsible for their existence. In other  words, they should be looked 
upon as a symptom of corruption in our body politic . To remove the disease we 
must first discover the underlying cause. To find t he remedy will then be a 
comparatively easy task.  –H, 15-9-40, 285.  
 
Can Aggression Be Stopped by Non-violence?  
498. Q. How could a disarmed neutral country allow other nations to be 
destroyed? But for our army which was waiting ready  at our frontier during the 
last war we should have been ruined.  
A. At the risk of being considered a visionary or a  fool I must answer this 
question in the only manner I know. It would be cow ardly of a neutral country 
to allow an army to devastate a neighboring country . But there are two ways in 
common between soldiers of war and soldiers of non- violence, and if I had been 
a citizen of Switzerland and a President of the Fed eral State what I would have 
done would be to refuse passage to the invading arm y by refusing al supplies. 
Secondly, by re-enacting a Thermopylae in Switzerla nd, you would have 
presented a living wall of men and women and childr en and inviting the 
invaders to walk over your corpses. You may say tha t such a thing is beyond 
human experience and endurance. I say that it is no t so. It was quite possible. 
Last year in Gujarat, women stood lathi charges unf linchingly and in Peshawar 
thousands stood hails of bullets without resorting to violence. Imagine these 
men and women staying in front of an army requiring  a safe passage to another 
country. The army would be brutal enough to walk ov er them, you might say. I 
would then say you will still have done your duty b y allowing yourselves to be 
annihilated. An army that dares to pass over the co rpses of innocent men and 
women would not be able to repeat that experiment. You may, if you wish, 
refuse to believe in such courage on the party of t he masses of men and Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 207  women; but then you would have to admit that nonvio lence is made of sterner 
stuff. It was never conceived as a weapon of the we ak, but of the stoutest 
hearts. 
Q. Is it open to a soldier to fire in the air and a void violence? 
A. A soldier who having enlisted himself flattered himself that he was avoiding 
violence by shooting in the air did no credit to hi s courage or to his creed of 
non-violence. In my scheme of things, such a man wo uld be held guilt of 
untruth and cowardice both—cowardice in that in ord er to escape punishment 
he enlisted, and untruth in that he enlisted to ser ve as soldier and did not fire 
as expected. Such a thing discredits the cause of w aging war against war. The 
war-resisters have to be like Caesar's wife –above suspicion. Their strength lies 
in absolute adherence to the morality of the questi on. –YI, 31-12-31, 427.  
 
499. Indeed the weakest State can render itself imm une from attack if it learns 
the art of non-violence. But a small State, no matt er how powerfully armed it 
is, cannot exist in the midst of a powerful combina tion of well-armed States. It 
has to be absorbed by or be under the protection of  one of the members of 
such a combination. –H, 7-10-39, 293.  
 
500. Whatever Hitler may ultimately prove to be, we  know what Hitlerism has 
come to mean, It means naked, ruthless force reduce d to an exact science and 
worked with scientific precision. In its effect it becomes almost irresistible.  
Hitlerism will never be defeated by counter-Hitleri sm. It can only breed 
superior Hitlerism raised to nth degree. What is go ing on before our eyes is the 
demonstration of the futility of violence as also o f Hitlerism. 
What will Hitler do with his victory? Can he digest  so much power? Personally he 
will go as empty-handed as his not very remote pred ecessor Alexander. For the 
Germans he will have left not the pleasure of ownin g a mighty empire but the 
burden of sustaining its crushing weight. For they will not be able to hold all 
the conquered nations in perpetual subjection. And I doubt if the Germans of 
future generations will entertain unadulterated pri de in the deeds for which Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 208  Hitlerism will be deemed responsible. They will hon our Herr Hitler as genius, as 
a brave man, a matchless organizer and much more. B ut I should hope that the 
Germans of the future will have learnt the art of d iscrimination even about 
their heroes. Anyway I think it will be allowed tha t all the blood that has been 
spilled by Hitler has added not a millionth part of  an inch to the world’s moral 
stature. 
As against this imagine the state of Europe today i f the Czechs, the Poles, the 
Norwegians, the French and the English had all said  to Hitler: ‘You need not 
make your scientific preparation for destruction. W e will meet your violence 
with non-violence. You will therefore be able to de stroy our non-violent army 
without tanks, battleships and airships.’ It may be  retorted that the only 
difference would be that Hitler would have got with out fighting what he has 
gained after a bloody fight. Exactly, the history o f Europe would then have 
been written differently. Possession might (but onl y might) have been taken 
under non-violent resistance, as it has been taken now after perpetration of 
untold barbarities. Under non-violence, only those would have been killed who 
had trained themselves to be killed, if need be, bu t without killing anyone and 
without bearing malice towards anybody. I dare say that in that case Europe 
would have added several inches to its moral statur e. And in the end I expect it 
is moral worth that will count. All else is dross.— H, 22-6-40, I72.  
 
*No passive spirituality that speeds itself in idle meditation , but an active thing 
that carries war into the enemy camp. The enemy cam p is first of all oneself, 
and one most continue to turn the search-light inwa rds. - (Quoted in The Moral 
Challenge of Gandhi, by Dorothy Hogg, Allahabad, 19 46, p.19). 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 209   
12. DUTY IN THE MIDST OF WORLD WARS 
 
His Attitude during the First World War  
501. Not only did I offer my services at the time o f the Zulu revolt but before 
that at the time of the Boer war, and not only did I raise recruits in India during 
the late war, but I raised an ambulance corps in 19 14 in London. If therefore I 
have sinned, the cup of my sins is full to the brim . I lost no occasion for serving 
the Government at all times. Two questions presente d themselves to me during 
all these crises. What was my duty as a citizen of the empire as I then believed 
myself to be, and what was my duty as an out-and-ou t believer in the religion 
of ahimsa—non-violence? 
I know now, that I was wrong in thinking that I was  a citizen of the empire. But 
on those four occasions I did honestly believe that  in spite of the many 
disabilities that my country was labouring under, i t was making its way towards 
freedom, and that on the whole the Government from the popular standpoint 
was not wholly bad and that the British administrat ors were honest though 
insular and dense. Holding that view, I set about d oing what an ordinary 
Englishman would do in the circumstances. I was not  wise or important enough 
to take independent action. I had no business to ju dge or scrutinize ministerial 
decisions with the solemnity of a tribunal. I did n ot impute malice to the 
ministers either at the time of the Boer war, the Z ulu revolt or the late war. I 
did not consider Englishmen nor do I now consider t hem as particularly bad or 
worse than other human beings. 
I considered and still consider them as capable of high motives and actions as 
any other body of men and equally capable of making  mistakes. I therefore felt 
that I sufficiently discharged my duty as a man and  a citizen by offering my 
humble services to the empire in the hour of its ne ed whether local or general. 
That is how I would expect every Indian to act by h is country under Swaraj. I 
would be deeply distressed, if on every conceivable  occasion every one of us 
were to be a law unto oneself and to scrutinize in golden scales every action of Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 210  our future National Assemble. I would surrender my judgment in most matters 
to national representatives, taking particular car in making my choice of such 
representatives. I know that in no other manner wou ld a democratic 
government be possible for one single day. 
The whole situation is now changed for me. My eyes,  I fancy, are opened. 
Experience has made me wiser. I consider the existi ng system of Government to 
be wholly bad and requiring special national effort  to end or mend it. It does 
not possess within itself any capacity for self-imp rovement. That I still believe 
many English administrators to be honest does not a ssist me, because I consider 
them to be as blind and deluded as I was myself. Th erefore I can take no pride 
in calling the empire mine or describing myself as a citizen. On the contrary, I 
fully realize that I am a pariah, untouchable of th e empire. I must therefore 
constantly pray for its radical reconstruction or t otal destruction, even as a 
Hindu pariah would be fully justified in so praying  about Hinduism or Hindu 
society. 
The next point, that of ahimsa, is more abstruse. M y conception of ahimsa 
impels me always to dissociate my soul refuses to b e satisfied so long as it is a 
helpless witness of a single wrong or a single mise ry. But it is not possible for 
me, a weak, frail, miserable being, to mend every w rong or to hold myself free 
of blame for all the wrong I see. The spirit in me pulls one way, the flesh in me 
pulls in the opposite direction. There is freedom f rom the action of these two 
forces, but that freedom is attainable only by slow  and painful stages. I cannot 
attain freedom by a mechanical refusal to act, but only by intelligent action in 
a detached manner. This struggle resolves itself in to an incessant crucifixion of 
the flesh so that the spirit may become entirely fr ee. 
I was again an ordinary citizen no wiser than my fe llows, myself believing in 
ahimsa and the rest not believing in it at all but refusing to do their duty of 
assisting the Government because they were actuated  by anger and malice. 
They were refusing out of their ignorance and weakn ess. As a fellow worker, it 
became my duty to guide them aright. I therefore pl aced before them their 
clear duty, explained the doctrine of ahimsa to the m and let them make their 
choice which they did. I do not repent of my action  in terms of ahimsa. For Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 211  under Swaraj too I would not hesitate to advise tho se who would bear arms to 
do so and fight for the country. 
That brings to me the second question. Under Swaraj  of my dream there is no 
necessity for arms at all. But I do not expect that  dream to materialize in its 
fullness as a result of the present effort, first b ecause the present effort is not 
directed to that end as an immediate goal and secon dly because I do not 
consider myself advanced enough to be able to presc ribe a detailed course of 
conduct to the nation for such preparation. I am st ill myself too full of passion 
and other frailties of human nature to feel the cal l or the capacity. All I claim 
for myself is. That I am incessantly trying to over come every one of my 
weaknesses. I have attained great capacity, I belie ve, for suppressing and 
curbing my senses, but I have not become incapable of sin, i.e. of being acted 
upon by my senses. I believe it to be possible for every human being to attain 
that blessed and indescribable sinless state in whi ch he feels within himself the 
presence of God to the exclusion of everything else . It is, I must confess, as yet 
a distant scene. And therefore, it is not possible for me to show the nation a 
present way to complete non-violence, in   practice.— YI, 17-11-21, 367.  
 
502. Q. Were you not helping the cause of war when you, both while in Africa 
and here, enlisted men for field service? How does it tally with your principle of 
ahimsa? 
A. By enlisting men for ambulance work in south Afr ica and in England, and 
recruits for field service in India, I helped not t he cause of war, but I helped 
the institution called the British Empire in whose ultimate beneficial character I 
then believed. My repugnance to war was as strong t hen as it is today; and I 
could not then have and would not have shouldered a  rifle. But one’s life is not 
a single line; it is a bundle of duties very often conflicting. And one is called 
upon continually to make one’s between one duty and  another. As a citizen not 
then, and not even now, are former leading an agita tion against the institution 
of war, I had to advise and lead men who believed i n war but who from 
cowardice or from base motives, or from anger again st the British Government Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 212  refrained from enlisting. I did not hesitate to adv ise them that so long as they 
believed in war and professed loyalty to the Britis h constitution they were in 
duty bound to support it by enlistment. Though I do  not believe in the use of 
arms, and though it is contrary to the religion of ahimsa which I profess, I 
should not hesitate to join an agitation for a repe al of the debasing Arms Act 
which I have considered amongst the blackest crimes  of the British Government 
against India. I do not believe in retaliation, but  I did not hesitate to tell the 
villagers near Bettie four years ago that they who knew nothing of ahimsa were 
guilty of cowardice in failing to defend the honour  of their womenfolk and their 
property by force of arms. And I have not hesitated , as the correspondent 
should know, only recently to tell the Hindus that if they do not believe in out-
and-out ahimsa and cannot practiced it they will be  guilty of a crime against 
their religion and humanity if they failed to defen d by force of arms the honour 
of their women against any kidnapper who chooses to  take away their women. 
And all this advice and my previous practice I hold  to be not only consistent 
with my profession of the religion of ahimsa out-an d-out, but a direct result of 
it. To state that noble doctrine is simple enough; to know it and to practise it 
in the midst of a world full of strife, turmoil and  passions is a task whose 
difficulty I realize more and more day by day. And yet the conviction too that 
without it life is not worth living is growing dail y deeper.— YI, 5-11-25, 379.  
 
503. There is no defense for my conduct weighed onl y in the scales of ahimsa. I 
draw no distinction between those who wield the wea pons of destruction and 
those who do red-cross work. Both participate in wa r and advance its cause. 
Both are guilty of the crime of war. But even after  introspection during all 
these years, I feel that I the circumstances in whi ch I found my-self I was bound 
to adopt the course I did both during the Boer war and the Great European War 
and for that matter the so called Zulu ‘Rebellion’ of  Natal in 1906 . 
Life is governed by a multitude of forces. It would  be smooth sailing, if one 
could determine the course of one’ actions only by one general principle whose 
application at a given moment was too obvious to ne ed even a moment’s 
reflection. But I cannot recall a single act which could be so easily determined. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 213  Being a confirmed war resister I have never given m yself training in the use of 
destructive weapons in spite of opportunities to ta ke such training. It was 
perhaps thus that I escaped direct destruction of h uman life. But so long as I 
live under a system of government based on force an d voluntarily partook of 
the many facilities and privileges it created for m e, I was bound to help that 
government to the extent of my ability when it was engaged in a war unless I 
non-co-operated with that government and renounced to the utmost of my 
capacity the privileges it offered me.* 
Let me take an illustration. I am member of an inst itution that holds a few 
acres of land whose crop are in imminent peril from  monkeys. I believe in the 
sacredness of all life and hence I regard it a brea ch of ahimsa to inflict any 
injury on the monkeys. But I do not hesitate to ins tigate and direct an attack on 
the monkeys in order to save the crops. I would lik e to avoid this evil. I can 
avoid it by leaving or breaking up the institution.  I do not do so because I do 
not expect to be able to find a society where there  will be no agriculture and 
therefore no destruction of some life. In fear and trembling, in humility and 
penance, I therefore participate in the injury infl icted on the monkeys. Hoping 
some day to find a way out. 
Even so did I participate in the three acts of war.  I could not, it would be 
madness for me to sever my connection with the soci ety to which I belong. And 
on those three occasions I had no thought of non-co -operating with the British 
Government. 
My position regarding the Government is totally dif ferent today and hence I 
should not voluntarily participate in its wars and I should risk imprisonment and 
even the gallows if I was forced to take up arms or  otherwise take part in its 
military operations. 
But that still does not solve the riddle. If there was a national government, 
whilst I should not take any direct part in any war  I can conceive occasions 
when it would be my duty to vote for the military t raining of those who wish to 
take it. For I know that all its members do not bel ieve in nonviolence to the Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 214  extent I do. It is not possible to make a person or  a society non-violent by 
compulsion. 
Non-violence works in a most mysterious manner. Oft en a man’s actions defy 
analysis in terms of non-violence; equally often hi s actions may wear the 
appearance of violence when he is absolutely non-vi olent in the highest sense 
of the term and is subsequently found so to be. All  I can then claim for my 
conduct is that it was, in the instances cited, act uated in the interests of 
nonviolence. There was no thought of sordid nationa l or other interest. I do not 
believe in the promotion of national or any other i nterest at the sacrifice of 
some other interest. 
I may not carry my argument any further. Language a t best is but a poor vehicle 
for expressing one’s thoughts in full. For me nonvi olence is not a mere 
philosophical principle. It is the rule and the bre ath of my life. I know I fail 
often, sometimes consciously, more often unconsciou sly. It is a matter not of 
the intellect but of the heart. True guidance comes  by constant waiting upon 
God, by utmost humility, Self-abnegation, by being ever ready to sacrifice 
one’s self. Its practice requires fearlessness and courage of the highest order. I 
am painfully aware of my failings. 
But the Light within me is steady and clear. There is no escape for any of us 
save through truth and non-violence. I know that wa r is wrong, is an 
unmitigated evil. I know too that it has got to go.  I firmly believe that freedom 
won through bloodshed or fraud is no freedom. Would  that all acts alleged 
against me were found to be wholly indefensible rat her than that by any act of 
mine non-violence was held to be compromised or tha t I was ever thought to be 
in favour of violence or untruth in any shape or fo rm! Not violence, not untruth 
but non-violence, Truth is the law of our being.— YI, 13-9-28, 308.  
 
In Relation to the Second World War  
(A) SYMPATHY WITH THE ALLIES  
And yet, strange as it may appear, my sympathies ar e wholly with the Allies. 
Willy-nilly this war is resolving itself into one b etween such democracy as the Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 215  west has evolved and totalitarianism as it is typif ied in Herr Hitler.— H, 30-9-39, 
288.  
 
505. Both are fighting for their existence and for the furtherance of their 
policies. There is, however, this great difference between the two: However 
incomplete or equivocal the declarations of the All ies are, the world has 
interpreted them to mean that they are fighting for  saving democracy. Herr 
Hitler is fighting for the extension of the German boundaries, although he was 
told that he should allow his claims to be submitte d to an impartial tribunal for 
examination. He contemptuously rejected the way of peace or persuasion and 
chose that of the sword. Hence my sympathy for the cause of the Allies. But my 
sympathy must not be interpreted to mean endorsemen t, in any shape or form, 
of the doctrine of the sword for the defense of eve n proved right. Proved right 
should be capable of being vindicated by right mean s as against the rude. i.e. 
sanguinary, means.— H,14-10-39, 301.  
 
506. One more question of the writer remains to be answered. If war is itself a 
wrong act, how can it be worthy of moral support or  blessings? I believe all war 
to be worthy wrong. But if we scrutinize the motive s of two warring parties, we 
may find one to be in the right and the other in th e wrong. For instance if A 
wishes to seize B’s country, B is obviously the wro nged one. Both fight with 
arms. I do not believe in violent warfare, but all the same B, whose cause is 
just, deserves my moral help and blessings.— H, 18-8-40, 250.  
 
507. The writer cavils at my sympathy with the Alli es. I have shown it as an out-
and-out believer in non-violence, even because of m y belief. Whilst all violence 
is bad and must be condemned in the abstract, it is  permissible for, it is even 
the duty of, a believer in ahimsa to distinguish be tween the aggressor and the 
defender. Having done so, he will side with the def ender in a non-violent 
manner, i.e. give his life in saving him. His inter vention is likely to bring a Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 216  speedier end to the duel and may even result in bri nging about peace between 
the combatants.— H, 2I-I0-39, 309.  
 
508. My British friends should have no difficulty i n understanding my position. 
Of course, it is open to them to argue that as a wa r resister I could not even 
give moral support. I have already said in these co lumns that I do not hold such 
a view. It is open to a war resister to judge betwe en two combatants and wish 
success to the one who has justice on his side. By so judging he is more 
spectator. —H, 4-9-39, 327.  
 
509. I do not want England to be defeated or humili ated it hurts me to find St. 
Paul’s Cathedral damaged. It hurts me as much as I would be hurt if I heard 
that the Kashi Vishvanath temple or the Juma Masjid  was damaged. I would like 
to defend both the Kashi Vishvanath temple and the Juma Masjid and even St. 
Paul’s with my life, but would not take a single li fe for their defense. That is 
my life fundamental difference with the British peo ple. My sympathy is there 
with them nevertheless. Let there be no mistake on the part of Englishmen, 
Congressmen, or others whom my voice reaches, as to  where my sympathy lies. 
It is not because I love the British nation and hat e the German. I do not think 
that the Germans as a nation are any worse than the  English, or the Italians are 
any worse. We are all tarred with the same brush; w e are all members of the 
vast human family. I decline to draw any distinctio ns. I cannot claim any 
superiority for Indians. We have the same virtues a nd the same vices. Humanity 
is not divided into watertight compartments so that  we cannot go from one to 
another. They may occupy one thousand rooms, but th ey are all related to one 
another. I would not say, ‘India should be all in a ll, let the whole world perish.’ 
That is not my message. India should be all in all,  consistently with the 
wellbeing of other nations of the world. I can keep  India intact and its freedom 
also intact only if I have goodwill towards the who le of the human family and 
not merely for the human family which inhabits this  little spot of the earth 
called India. It is big enough compared to other sm aller nations, but what is Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 217  India in the wide world or in the universe?— H, 29-9-40, 304.  
 
(B) Need Of India's Freedom  
Letter to Chiang Kai-Shek  
510. Dear Generalissimo, 
I can never forget the five hour’s close contact I had with you and noble wife in 
Calcutta. I had always felt drawn towards brought C hina and her problems still 
nearer to me. Long ago, between 1905 and 1913, when  I was in South Africa, I 
was in constant touch with the small Chinese colony  in Johannesburg. I knew 
them first as clients and then as comrades in the I ndian passive resistance 
struggle in South Africa. I came in touch with them  in Mauritius also. I learnt 
then to admire their thrift, industry, resourcefuln ess and internal unity. Later 
in India I had a very fine Chinese friend living wi th me for a few years and we 
all learnt to like him. 
I have thus felt greatly attracted towards your gre at country and, in common 
with my countrymen, our sympathy has gone out to yo u in your terrible 
struggle. Our mutual friend Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru , whose love of China is 
only excelled, if at all, by his love of his countr y, has kept us in intimate touch 
with the developments of the Chinese struggle. 
Because of this feeling I have towards China and my  earnest desire that our two 
great countries should come closer to one another a nd co-operate to their 
mutual advantage, I am anxious to explain to you th at my appeal to the British 
power to with draw from India is not meant in any s hape or form to weaken 
India’s defense against the Japanese or embarrass y ou in your struggle. India 
must not submit to any aggressor or invader and mus t resist him. I would not be 
guilty of purchasing the freedom of my country at t he cost of your country’s 
freedom. That problem does not arise before me as I  am clear that India cannot 
gain her freedom in this way, and a Japanese domina tion of either India or 
China would be equally injurious to the other count ry and to world peace. That 
domination must, therefore, be prevented, and I sho uld like India to play her 
natural and rightful part in this. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 218  I fell India cannot do so while she is in bondage. India has been a helpless 
witness of the withdrawals from Malaya, Singapore a nd Burma. We must learn 
the lesson from these tragic events and prevent by all means at our disposal a 
repetition of what befell these unfortunate countri es. But unless we are free, 
we can do nothing to prevent it, and the same proce ss might well occur again 
crippling India and China disastrously. I do not wa nt a repetition of this tragic 
tale of woe. 
Our proffered help has repeatedly been rejected by the British Government, 
and the British Government, and the recent failure of the Cripps Mission has 
left a deep wound which is still running. Out of th e anguish has come the cry 
for immediate withdrawal of British power so that I ndia can look after herself 
and help China to the best of her ability.  
I have told you of my faith in non-violence and of my belief in the effectiveness 
of this method if the whole nation could turn to it . That faith in it is as firm as 
ever. But I realize that India today as a whole has  not that faith and belief; and 
the government in free India would be formed from t he various elements 
composing the nation.  
Today the whole of India is impotent and feels frus trated. The Indian army 
consists largely of people who have joined up becau se of economic pressure. 
They have no feeling of a cause to fight for, and i n no sense are they a national 
army. Those of us who would fight for a cause, for India and China, with armed 
forces or with non-violence, cannot, under the fore ign heel, function as they 
want to. And yet our people know for certain that I ndia free can play even a 
decisive part not only on her own behalf, but also on behalf of China and world 
peace. Many, like me, feel that it is not proper or  manly to remain in this 
helpless state and allow events to overwhelm us whe n way to effective action 
can be open to us. They feel, therefore, that every  possible effort should be 
made to ensure independence and that freedom of act ion which is so urgently 
needed. Thais is the origin of my appeal to the Bri tain power to end 
immediately the unnatural connection between Britai n and India.  
Unless we make that effort, there is a grave danger  of public feeling in India 
going into wrong and harmful channels. There is eve ry likelihood of Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 219  subterranean sympathy for Japan growing simply in o rder to weaken and oust 
the British authority in India. This feeling may ta ke the place of robust 
confidence in our ability never to look to outsider s for help in winning our 
freedom, We have to learn self-reliance and develop  the strength to work our 
own salvation. This is only possible if we make det ermined effort to free 
ourselves from bondage. That freedom has become a p resent necessity to 
enable us to take our due place among the free nati ons of the world.  
To make it perfectly clear that we want to prevent in every way Japanese 
aggression, I would personally agree, and I am sure  the government of free 
India would agree, that the Allied powers might, un der treaty with us, keep 
their armed forces in India and use the country as a base for operations against 
the threatened Japanese attack.  
I need hardly give you my assurance that, as the au thor of the new move in 
India, I shall take no hasty action, And whatever a ction I may recommend will 
be governed by the consideration that it should not  injure China, or encourage 
Japanese aggression in India or China. I am trying to enlist world opinion in 
favour of a proposition which to me appears self-pr oved and which must lead to 
the strengthening of India’s and China’s defense. I  am also educating public 
opinion in India and conferring with my colleagues.  Needless to say, any 
movement against the British Government with which I may be connected will 
be essentially nonviolent. I am straining every ner ve to avoid a conflict with 
British authority. But if in the vindication of the  freedom which has become an 
immediate desideratum, this becomes inevitable, I s hall not hesitate to run any 
risk, however great.  
Very soon you shall have completed five years of wa r against Japanese 
aggression and invasion and al the sorrow and miser y that these have brought 
to China. My heart goes out to the people of China in deep sympathy and in 
admiration for their heroic struggle and endless sa crifices in the cause of their 
country’s freedom and integrity against tremendous odds. I am convinces that 
this heroism and sacrifice cannot be in vain; they must bear fruit. To you, to 
Madame Chiang and to the great people of China, I s end my earnest and sincere 
wishes of your success. I look forward to the day w hen a free India and free Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 220  China will co-operate together in friendship and br otherhood for their own good 
and for the good of Asia and the world.  
In anticipation of your permission, I am taking the  liberty of publishing this 
letter in the Harijan. 
Yours sincerely, 
M. K. Gandhi 
- C, 230. 
 
His Appeal to Every Japanese  
511. The end and aim of the movement for British wi thdrawal is to prepare 
India, by making her free for resisting all militar ist and imperialist ambition, 
whether it is called British Imperialism, German Na zism, or your pattern. If we 
do not, we shall have been ignoble spectators of th e militarization of the world 
in spite of our belief that in non-violence we have  the only solvent of the 
militarist spirit and ambition. Personally I fear t hat without declaring the 
Independence of India the Allied powers sill not be  able to beat the Axis 
combination which has raised violence to the dignit y of a religion. The allies 
cannot beat you and your partners unless they beat you n your ruthless and 
skilled warfare. If they copy it, their declaration  that they will save the world 
for democracy and individual freedom must come to n aught. I feel that they 
can only gain strength to avoid copying your ruthle ssness by declaring and 
recognizing now the freedom of India, and turning s ullen India’s forced  
co-operation into freed India’s voluntary co-operat ion. 
To Britain and the Allies we have appealed in the n ame of justice, in proof of 
their professions, and in their own self-interest. To you I appeal in the name of 
humanity. It is a marvel to me that you do not see that ruthless warfare is 
nobody’s monopoly. If not the Allies, some other Po wer will certainly improve 
upon your method and beat you with your own weapon.  Even if you win you will 
leave no legacy to your people of which they would feel proud. They cannot 
take pride in a recital of cruel deeds however skil lfully achieved.  
Even if you win, it will not prove that you were in  the right; it will only prove Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 221  that your power of destruction was greater. This ap plies obviously to the Allies 
too, unless they perform now the just and righteous  act of freeing India as an 
earnest and promise of similarly freeing all other subject peoples in Asia and 
Africa.  
Our appeal to Britain is coupled with the offer of free India’s willingness to let 
the Allies retain their troops in India. The offer is made in order to prove that 
we do not in any way mean to harm the Allied cause,  and in order to prevent 
you from being misled into feeling that you have bu t to step into the country 
that Britain has vacated. Needless to repeat that i f you cherish any such idea 
and will carry it out, we will not fail in resistin g you with all the might that our 
country can muster. I address this appeal to you in  the hope that our movement 
may even influence you and your partners in the rig ht direction and deflect you 
and them from the course which is bound to end in y our moral ruin and the 
reduction of human beings to robots.  
The hope of your response to my appeal is much fain ter than that of response 
from Britain. I know that the British are not devoi d of a sense of justice and 
they know me. I do not know you enough to be able t o judge. All I have read 
tells me that you listen to no appeal but to the sw ord. How I wish that you are 
cruelly misrepresented and that I shall touch the r ight chord in your heart! 
Anyway I have an undying faith in the responsivenes s of human nature. On the 
strength of that faith I have conceived the impendi ng movement in India, and it 
is that faith which has prompted this appeal to you . –H, 26-7-42, 240.  
 
(C) PRESENCE OF FOREIGN TROOPS  
512. Q. You consider it a vital necessity in terms of non-violence to allow the 
Allied troops to remain in India. You also say that , as you cannot present a 
foolproof non-violent method to prevent Japanese oc cupation of India, you 
cannot throw the Allies overboard. But, don’t you c onsider that the non-violent 
force created by your action which will be sufficie nt to force the English to 
withdraw will be sufficiently strong to prevent Jap anese occupation also? And is 
it not the duty of a non-violent resister to equall y consider it a vital necessity Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 222  to see that his country, his home and his all are n ot destroyed by allowing two 
foreign mad bulls to fight a deadly war on his soil ? 
There is an obvious fallacy in the question. I cann ot all of a sudden produce in 
the minds of Britishers, who have been for centurie s trained to rely upon their 
muscle for their protection, a belief which has not  made a very visible 
impression even on the Indian mind. Non-violent for ce must not act in the same 
way as violence. The refusal to allow the Allied tr oops to operate on the Indian 
soil can only add to the irritation already caused by my proposal. The first is 
inevitable, the second would be wanton.  
Again if the withdrawal is to take place, it won’t be due merely to the non-
violent pressure. And in any case what may be enoug h to affect the old 
occupant would be wholly different from what would be required to keep off 
the invader. Thus we can disown the authority of th e British rulers by refusing 
taxes and in a variety of ways. These would be inap plicable to with –stand the 
Japanese onslaught. Therefore, whilst we may be rea dy to face the Japanese, 
we may not ask the Britishers to give up their posi tion of vantage merely on the 
unwarranted supposition that we would succeed by me re non-violent effort in 
keeping off the Japanese.  
Lastly, whilst we must guard ourselves in our own w ay, our non-violence must 
preclude us from imposing on the British a strain w hich must break them. That 
would be a denial of our whole history for the past  twenty-two years. – H, 5-7-
42, 210.  
 
513. I have to pay a heavy price for having drawn u p an entrancing picture of a 
free India without a single British soldier. Friend s are confounded now to 
discover that my proposal admits of the presence of  British and even American 
troops under any circumstance at all. 
It has been pointed out that not to consent to the Allied troops remaining in 
India during the period of the war is to hand over India and China to Japan, and 
to ensure the defeat of the allied powers. This cou ld never have been 
contemplated by me. The only answer, therefore, to give was to suffer the Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 223  presence of the troops but under circumstances the reverse of the existing..... 
My proposal presupposes shedding of all fear and di strust. If we have 
confidence in ourselves, we need neither fear nor s uspect the presence of 
Allied troops.  
It will be most assuredly an event of the century a nd may be a turning-point in 
the war if Britain can honestly perform the act of renouncing India with all that 
the renunciation would mean..... 
As I have said already in the previous issue of Har ijan, the British acceptance of 
my proposal may itself lead to a most honourable pe ace and hence automatic 
withdrawal of the troops..... 
It (non-violence) will express itself in her ambass adors going to the Axis powers 
not to beg for peace but to show them the futility of war for achieving and 
honourable end. This can only be done if and when B ritain sheds the gains of 
perhaps the most organized and successful violence the world has seen.  
All this may not come to pass. I do not mind. It is  worth fighting for, it is worth 
staking all that the nation has. – H, 5-7-42, 212..  
 
(D) MEANING OF WITHDRAWAL  
514. Q. What is the meaning of your appeal to the B ritish power to withdraw 
from India? You have written much recently on the s ubject. But there seems to 
be confusion in the public mind about your meaning.   
A. So far as my own opinion is concerned, British a uthority should end 
completely irrespective of the wishes or demand of various parties. But I would 
recognize their own military necessity. They may ne ed to remain in India for 
preventing Japanese occupation. That prevention is common cause between 
them and us. It may be necessary for the sake also of China. Therefore I would 
tolerate their presence in India not in any sense a s rulers but as allies of free 
India. This of course assumes that after the Britis h declaration of withdrawal 
there will be a stable government established in In dia. Immediately the 
hindrance it the shape of a foreign power is altoge ther removed the union of 
parties should be an easy matter. The terms on whic h the Allied powers may Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 224  operate will be purely for the Government of the fr ee State to determine. The 
existing parties will have dissolved into the Natio nal Government. If they 
survive they will do so for  party purposes and not for dealings with the extern al 
world. 
–H, 21-6-42, 197.  
 
(E) NON-VIOLENT NON-CO-OPERATION  
515. Q. There is a report about some new scheme tha t you want to propound in 
one of your Harijan articles about non-violent non- co-operation if any invader 
came to India. Could you give us an idea? 
A. It is wrong. I have no plan in mind. If I had, I  should give it to you. But I think 
nothing more need be added when I have said that th ere should be 
unadulterated non-violent non-co-operation and if t he whole of India responded 
and unanimously offered it, I should show that with out shedding a single drop 
of blood, Japanese arms—or any combination of arms— can be sterilized. That 
involves the determination of India not to give qua rter on any point whatsoever 
and to be ready to risk loss of several million liv es. But I would consider that 
cost very cheap and victory won at the cost gloriou s. That India may not be 
ready to pay that price may be true I hope it is no t true, but some such rice 
must be paid by any country that wants to retain it s independence. After all, 
the sacrifice made by the Russians and the Chinese is enormous, and they are 
ready to risk all. The same could be said of the ot her countries also, whether 
aggressors or defenders. The cost is enormous. Ther efore, in the non-violent 
technique I am asking India to risk no more than ot her countries are risking and 
which India would have to risk even if she offered armed resistance. 
Q. But unadulterated non-violent non-co-operation h as not been successful 
against Great Britain. How will it succeed against a new aggressor?  
A. I combat the statement altogether. Nobody has ye t told me that non-violent 
non-co-operation, unadulterated, has not succeeded.  It has not been offered, it 
is true. Therefore, you can say that what has not b een offered hitherto is not 
likely to be offered suddenly when India faces the Japanese arms. I can only Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 225  hope that, in the face of danger, India would be re adier to offer non-violent 
non-co-operation. Perhaps India is accustomed to Br itish rule for so many years 
that the Indian mind or India’s masses do not feel the pinch so much as the 
advent of a new power would be felt. But your quest ion is will put. It is possible 
that India may not be able to offer nonviolent non- co-operation. But a similar 
question may be put regarding armed resistance. Sev eral attempts have been 
made and they have not succeeded, therefore it will  not succeed against the 
Japanese. That leads us to the absurd conclusion th at India will never be ready 
for gaining independence, and seeing that I cannot subscribe to any such 
proposition, I must try again and again till India is ready to respond to the call 
of nonviolent non-co-operation. But if India does n ot respond to that call then 
India must respond to the call of some leader or so me organization, wedded to 
violence. For instance, the Hindu Mahasabha is tryi ng to rouse the Hindu mind 
for an armed conflict. It remains to be seen whethe r that attempt succeeds. I 
for one do not believe it will succeed. –H, 24-5-42, 167  
 
516. The fact is that non-violence does not work in  the same way as violence. It 
works in the opposite way. An armed man naturally r elies upon his arms. A man 
who is intentionally unarmed relies upon the unseen  force called God by poets, 
but called the unknown by scientists. But that whic h is unknown is not 
necessarily non-existent. God is the Force among al l forces known and 
unknown. Non-violence without reliance upon that Fo rce is poor stuff to be 
thrown in the dust.  
I hope now my critic realizes the error underlying his question and that he sees 
also that the doctrine that has guided my life is n ot one of inaction but of the 
highest action. His question should really have bee n put thus: 
‘How is it that, in spite of your work in India for  over twenty-two years, there 
are not sufficient satyagrahis who can cope with external and internal 
menaces?’ My answer then would be that twenty-two y ears are nothing in the 
training of a nation for the development of non-vio lent strength. That is not to 
say that a large number of persons will not show th at strength on due occasion. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 226  That occasion seems to have come now. This war puts  the civilian on his mettle 
no less than the military man, non-violent no  less than violent.  
– H, 28-6-42, 201.  
 
(F) WHAT WOULD FREE INDIA DO?  
517. Gandhiji had over and over again said that an orderly withdrawal would 
result in a sullen India becoming a friend and ally . These American friends now 
explored the implications of that possible friendsh ip: ‘Would a free India 
declare war against Japan?’ 
‘Free India need not do so. It simply becomes the a lly of the Allied powers, 
simply out of gratefulness for the payment of a deb t, however overdue. Human 
nature thanks the debtor when he discharges the deb t.’ 
‘How then would this alliance fitin with India’s no n-violence?’ 
‘It is a good question. The whole of India is not n on-violent. If the whole of 
India had been non-violent, there would have been n o need for my appeal to 
Britain, nor would there be any fear of a Japanese invasion. But my non-
violence is represented possibly by a hopeless mino rity, or perhaps by India’s 
dumb millions who are temperamentally non-violent. But there too the 
question; may be asked: "What have they done?" They  have done nothing, I 
agree; but they may act when the supreme test comes , or they may not. I have 
no non-violence of millions to present to Britain, and what we have had been 
discounted by the British as non-violence of the we ak. And so all I have done is 
to make this appeal on the strength of bare inheren t justice, so that it might 
find and echo in the British heart. It is made from  a moral plane, and even as 
they do not hesitate to act desperately in the phys ical field and take grave 
risks, let them for once act desperately on the mor al field and declare that 
India is independent today, irrespective of India’s  demand.’— H, 14-6-42, 187 . 
 
518. ‘You desire to have India’s freedom in order t o help the Allies?’, was Mr. 
Edgar Snow’s question, and the last question. ‘Will  Free India carry out total 
mobilization and adopt the methods of total war?’ Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 227  ‘That question is legitimate,’ said Gandhiji, ‘but it is beyond me. I can only say 
free India will make common cause with the Allies. I cannot say that Free India 
will take part in militarism or choose to go the no n-violent way. But I can say 
without hesitation that if I can turn India to non- violence I will certainly do so. 
If I succeed in converting forty crores of people t o non-violence, it will be a 
tremendous thing, a wonderful transformation.’ 
‘But you won’t oppose a militarist effort by civil disobedience?’ Mr. Snow 
pertinently asked. 
‘I have no such desire. I cannot oppose Free India’ s will with civil disobedience. 
It would be wrong.’ —H, I9-7-42, 234.  
 
(G) WHAT ABOUT NON-VIOLENCE?  
519. Q. But what about your non-violence? To what e xtent will you carry out 
your policy after freedom is gained? 
A. The question hardly arises. I am using the first  personal pronoun for brevity, 
but I am trying to represent the spirit of India as  I conceive it. It is and will be a 
mixture. What policy the National Government will a dopt I cannot say. I may 
not even survive it much as I would love to. If I d o, I would advise the adoption 
of non-violence to the peace of the world and the e stablishment of a new world 
order. I expect that with the existence of so many martial races in India, all of 
whom will have a voice in the government of the day , the national policy will 
incline towards militarism of a modified character.  I shall certainly hope that 
all the effort for the last twenty-two years to sho w the efficacy of non-violence 
as a political force will not have gone in vain and  a strong party representing 
true non-violence will exist in the country. In eve ry case a free India in alliance 
with the Allied powers must be of great help to the ir cause, whereas India held 
in bondage as she is today must be a drag upon the war-chariot and may prove 
a source of real danger at the most critical moment . 
—H, 21-6-42, I97.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 228  * What do you say to my recruiting campaign? It is fo r me a religious activity 
undertaken for the sacred doctrine of ahimsa. I hav e made the discovery that 
India has lost power to fight- not the inclination.  she must regain the power 
and then, if she will, deliver to a groaning world the doctrine of ahimsa. She 
must give abundantly out of her strength, not out o f her weakness. She may 
never do it. That to me would mean her effacement. She would lose her 
Individuality and would be like the other nations-a  worshipper of brute-force. 
This recruiting work id perhaps the hardest task ye t undertaken by me. I may 
fail to gain recruits. I shall still have given the  best political education to the 
people.- Letter to H. S. Polak quoted in Incidents of Gandhiji's Life, edited by 
Chandrashankar Shukla, Bombay, 1949, p. 245. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 229   
13. GANDHIJI'S LEADERSHIP IN THE NATIONAL STRUGGLE 
 
Gandhiji’s Leadership in the National Struggle  
520. It has been somewhat justly said that if I am a good general, I must not 
grumble about my men. For I must choose them from t he material at my 
disposal. I plead guilty. But I have qualified my a dmission by the adverb 
‘somewhat’, for I laid down the condition from the very inception of the 
programme of non-violence. My terms were accepted. If from experience it is 
found that the terms cannot be worked, I must eithe r be dismissed or I must 
retire. I retired but to no purpose. The bond betwe en Congressmen and me 
seems to be unbreakable. They may quarrel with my c onditions but they will 
not leave me or let me go. They know that however u nskilled a servant I may 
be, I will neither desert them nor fail them in the  hour of need. And so they 
try, though often grumblingly, to fulfill my condit ion. I must then on the one 
hand adhere to my conditions so long as I have a li ving faith in them, and on 
the other take what I can get from congressmen, exp ecting that if I am true, 
they will someday fulfill all my conditions and fin d themselves in the 
enjoyment of full independence such as has never be fore been seen on earth. 
—CB, 8-I-42, 48 
 
Letter to the President  
Barolo, 
30-12-41 
521. To, 
The President, Indian National Congress. 
Dear Maulana Saheb, 
In the course of discussion in the Working Committe e I discovered that I had 
committed a grave error in the interoperation of th e Bombay Resolution. I had 
interpreted it to mean that the Congress was refuse d participation in the Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 230  present or all war on the ground Principally of non -violence. I found to my 
astonishment that most members differed from my int erpretation and held that 
the opposition need not be on the ground of nonviol ence. On re-reading the 
Bombay Resolution I found that the differing member s were right and that I had 
read into it a meaning which its letter could not b ear. The discovery of the 
error makes it impossible for me to lead the Congre ss in the struggle for 
resistance to war effort on the grounds in which no n-violence was not 
indispensable. I could not, for instance, identify myself with opposition to war 
effort on the ground of ill-will against Great Brit ain. The Resolution 
contemplated material association with Britain in t he war effort as a price for 
guaranteed independence of India. If such was my vi ew and I believed in the 
use of violence for gaining independence and yet re fused participation in the 
effort as the price of that independence, I would c onsider myself guilty of 
unpatriotic conduct. It is certain belief that only  non-violence can save India 
and the world from self-extinction. Such being the case, I must continue my 
mission whether I am alone or assisted by an organi zation or individuals. You 
will, therefore, please relieve me of the responsib ility laid upon me by the 
Bombay Resolution. I must continue civil disobedien ce for free speech against 
all war with such Congressmen and others whom I sel ect and who believe in the 
non-violence I have contemplated and are willing to  conform to prescribed 
conditions. 
I will not, at this critical period, select for civ il disobedience those whose 
services are required to steady and help the people  in their respective 
localities. 
Yours sincerely, 
M.K. Gandhi 
(CB, 5-2-42, 2)  
 
522. (The following is a summary of Gandhiji’s spee ch in Hindustani introducing 
the Bardoli Resolution.) Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 231  I was not a little perturbed when the Maulana raise d me sky-high. I do not live 
up in the air. I am of the earth, earthy. I have ne ver seen an aeroplane. I am 
like you, an ordinary mortal made of common clay. 
The question of ahimsa would not have come up befor e you, had it not come up 
before the working Committee in Bardoli. And it was  well that it came up. The 
result has been good, not or two things clear. 
I am, as I have said, an ordinary mortal like you. Had that not been the case, 
we should not have been able to work together these  twenty years. Ahimsa 
with me is a creed, the breath of my life. But it i s never as a creed that I 
placed it before India, or for the matter of that b efore anyone except in casual 
informal talks. I placed it before the Congress as a political method, to be 
employed for the solution of political questions. I t may be it is a novel method, 
but it does not on that account lose its political character. I tried it for the first 
time in South Africa after I found that all so-call ed constitutional remedies, 
with which Congress work in India had made me famil iar, had failed. The 
question there was exclusively of the political exi stence of Indians who had 
settled in South Africa as merchants, petty hawkers , etc It was for them a 
question of life and death, and it was in dealing w ith it that this method of 
nonviolence came to me. The various measures that I  adopted there were not 
the work of a visionary or a dreamer. They were the  work of an essentially 
practical man dealing with practical political ques tions. As a political method, 
it can always be changed, modified, altered, even g iven up in preference to 
another. If, therefore, I say to you that our polic y should not be given up today, 
I am talking political wisdom. It is political insi ght. It has served in the past, it 
has enabled us to cover many stages towards Indepen dence, and it is as 
politician that I suggest to you that it is a grave  mistake to contemplate its 
abandonment. If I have carried the Congress with me  all these years, it is in my 
capacity as politician. It is hardly fair to descri be my method as religious 
because it is new. 
The Maulana has affectionately used high words of p raise for me, but I cannot 
accept them. The article in my possession is an inc alculable pearl. It has to e Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 232  weighed in the proper scales, and those who can pay  the price for it can have 
it. It cannot be bartered away even for Independenc e. 
Non-violence has brought us near to Swaraj as never  before. We dare not 
exchange it even for Swaraj. For Swaraj thus got wi ll be no true Swaraj. The 
question is not what we will do after Swaraj. It is  whether under given 
conditions we can give up non-violence to win Swara j. Again, do you expect to 
win real Independence by abandoning non-violence? I ndependence for me 
means the Independence of the humblest and poorest among us. It cannot be 
obtained by joining the war. For the Congress to jo in any war before the 
attainment of Complete Independence is to undo the work of the past twenty 
years. 
And yet why is it that I stand before you to plead with you to accept the 
Resolution, and even to divide the house? The reaso n is that the Resolution 
reflects the Congress mind. It undoubtedly is a ste p backward. We have not a 
clean slate to write on. Our elders have taken a st ep which has produced world-
wide reactions. To alter the Resolution out of shap e is to ignore these. It would 
be unwise to change the right to think that the Wor king Committee. The world 
had a right to think that the Working Committee’s p olicy would be endorsed by 
you. At one time, I had thought of dividing the A.I .C.C., but I saw that it would 
be a mistake. It would be almost violence. Non-viol ence does not act in the 
ordinary way. 
Sometimes a step back is a prelude to a step forwar d. It is highly likely that our 
step will be of that character. 
The Resolution is a mirror in which all groups can see themselves. The original 
was Jawaharlalji’s draft, but it was referred to su b-committee at whose hands 
it has undergone material changes. The original had  left no room for Rajaji to 
work. The sub-committee opened a tiny window for hi m to squeeze in. 
Jawaharlalji’s opposition to participation in the w ar effort is almost as strong 
as mine, though his reasons are different. Rajaji w ould participate, if certain 
conditions acceptable to the Congress are fulfilled . The non-violent non-co-Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 233  operators like Rajendra Babu have certainly a place , for until the remote event 
takes place, non-violence reigns supreme. 
It is no longer open to the Government and the Cong ress critics to say that the 
Congress has banged the door to negotiation on the impossible or unpolitical 
ground of non-violence. The Resolution throws the b urden on the Government 
of wooing the Congress on the basis of participatio n in the war effort. That 
nothing is to be expected from the Government is pr obably too true. Only the 
Resolution puts the Congress right with the expecta nt world. And since there is 
a party in the congress who will welcome an honoura ble offer that will satisfy 
the rigid test it is as well that the Resolution ha s accommodated this party. It is 
likely in the end to make all of one mind. Out and out believers in non-violence 
of the political type have the whole field open to them. 
When there was a talk of the A.I.C.C. being possibl y divided, several people 
contemplated the prospect with trepidation, lest th e Congress should again 
listen to mad Gandhi’s advice in order to retain hi s leadership, and become a 
religious organization instead of the political org anization that it has been all 
these years. Let me disabuse them of their fear, an d say the congress can do no 
such thing, that we have not wasted the past twenty  years. All that the 
Congress has decided to do is that it will allow th e world to deal with it in 
terms that the world can understand, and if the ter ms are good enough, it will 
accept them. But you may be also sure that the cong ress will not be easily 
satisfied. It will go on repeating ‘Not this’, unti l it wins the real commodity it 
wants. You will, therefore, say exactly what you wa nt, and I will also say all I 
want. That is why I have decided to issue the three  weeklies, and I will go on 
venting my views therein with the fullest freedom, as long as I am allowed to 
do so. In the meanwhile, if you can get what you wa nt, you will strike the 
bargain, and you may be sure that I will not shed a  single tear. I therefore do 
not want to cheat the world of its jubilation over the Resolution, I do not want 
the Congress to look ridiculous in the eyes of the world. I do not want it to be 
said that in order to retain my leadership you bade  good-bye to your 
convictions. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 234  Some friends have complained that the Resolution ha s no operative clause. The 
complaint is true so far as the Resolution is conce rned. The Resolution had to 
be merely explanatory. It is addressed to the world . It is not even addressed to 
the Government. 
But there are the instructions about the constructi ve programme for 
Congressmen. They form the operative part. It is a substitute for civil 
disobedience and the parliamentary programme. Civil  disobedience has been 
wisely reserved for me as an expert. It is good tha t, so long as I am alive and 
well in mind, it is so reserved. And as far as I am  concerned, there will be 
none, if the Government do not interfere with Harij an. For this weekly will 
constitute enough propaganda against al war. I have  no ill-will against 
Britishers,, and for that matter against Germans, I talians or Japanese. I can 
have none against the Russians who have done great things for the proletariate. 
The Chinese sail in the same boat with us. I would like all these nations to be at 
peace with one another. I would like to think that India will, through her non-
violence, be a messenger of peace to the whole worl d. Even political non-
violence has potency of which we have no conception . Harijan will deliver the 
message of peace from week to week. But if this is not permitted, then will be 
the tie for civil disobedience as a token. I want e very worker to be out for 
constructive work. And if I am rendered penless, I may become the sole 
resister. But I have no fixed plan. Events will sho w the way. 
 
So much for civil disobedience.  
Though the parliamentary mentality has come to stay , in my opinion, the 
parliamentary programme can have no place in Congre ss work so long as the 
war lasts. The Congress cannot handle it without id entifying itself with the war 
effort. I have always held that at all times it is the least part of a nation’s 
activity. The most important and permanent work is done outside. Legislators 
are not the masters, but servants of their electors  –the nation. The less, 
therefore, we look at and depend upon parliaments t he better. Power resides 
in the people either through their arms or through their civil disobedience, 
more comprehensively described as non-violent non-c o-operation, but the Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 235  power of non-co-operation comes only through solid,  incessant constructive 
work. Non-violent strength comes from construction,  not destruction, Hence 
today the constructive programme is the only thing before the Congress. And in 
this all parties are at one. 
Do not please go away with the idea that there is a  rift in the Congress lute. 
The Working Committee has worked like members of a happy family. Somebody 
suggested that Pandit Jawaharlal and I were estrang ed. It will require much 
more difference of opinion to estrange us. Wehave h ad differences from the 
moment we became co-workers, and yet I have said fo r some years and say now 
that not Rajaji but Jawaharlal will be my successor . He says the does not 
understand my language, and that he speaks a langua ge foreign to me. This 
may or may not be true. But language is no bar to a  union of hearts. And I know 
this that when I am gone he will speak my language.  
Let there be no lack of understanding or zeal among  Congressmen. Neither 
Jawaharlal nor Rajaji will let you be idle. I certa inly will not. Lastly let those 
who think the constructive programme is insipid kno w that there is nothing in 
the Working Committee’s Resolution to prevent a Con gressman at this own risk 
from leading civil disobedience –individual or mass . If he succeeds, he will win 
nothing but praise from all. But let me warn enthus iasts that they will not 
handle the weapon with any success. They will only damage themselves and the 
cause by any hasty or ignorant action. And let me s ay as your expert that those 
who regard the constructive programme as insipid do  not know what non-
violence is and how it works. 
Some Congressmen are sorry because I have relinquis hed the leadership of the 
Congress. You have not lost me. You would lose me o nly if I ceased to be loyal 
to the Congress, only if I became a visionary, only  if I ceased to be a practical 
man. It is not at Bardoli that I left the Congress;  I did so seven years ago at 
Bombay, and I did so in order to be able to render greater service to the 
country and the Congress. Colleagues like the Sarda r and Rajendra Babu are not 
happy over the Resolution, but I am asking them not  to leave the Working 
Committee. But even if they leave the Congress, the  Congress is not going to 
cease to function. Its work will go on, whether the y are there or not. No man, Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 236  however great, is indispensable to the Congress. Th ose who built up the 
Congress like Dadabhai, Pherozeshah and Tilak are n o more, but the Congress 
still functions. For they have left for us and edif ice do work upon and expand. 
And if the passing away of those leaders has not ma de any difference, why 
should the withdrawal of other leaders make any? – CB, 5-2-1942, 16.  
 
Appendix  
522. A. The relation between the Congress and Gandh iji is brought out very 
clearly in the following speech of the president in  1940. 
It is hardly four months and two weeks since we met  at Ramgarh but during this 
short period the world has changed almost out of re cognition. This change was 
not only in respect of outward form but it had almo st brought about a 
revolution in ideas and beliefs. It would not be po ssible for us not to be 
affected by all that has happened and, therefore, i t becomes our duty to 
review our own position and take stock of the situa tion with a view to seeking 
what changes we should make in our own attitude. 
Two important decisions of the Congress Working Com mittee are to be placed 
before you. One of these is known as the Wardha Sta tement. Although there is 
nothing new in it, as it relates to the basic polic y of the Indian National 
Congress, it becomes our duty to consider it as thi s House represents the 
Congress. 
It was not at the Wardha meeting in June last that Mahatma Gandhi raised the 
question of non-violence for the first time. He had  raised it two years ago. In 
September 1938 the All India Congress Committee met  at Delhi. At this meeting 
of the Congress Working Committee Mahatma Gandhi ra ised the issue or 
extending the principle of nonviolence which the Co ngress had followed in 
regard to its internal policy for the last twenty y ears to other spheres. 
Mahatma Gandhi wanted the Congress at this state to  declare that a Free India 
would eschew all violence and would have no army to  defend the country 
against aggression. The Congress should thus depend  entirely upon non-violence 
for the purpose of dealing with internal disorders and external aggression. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 237  Mahatma Gandhi felt that he had to give the message  of non-violence to the 
world and if he could not persuade he own countryme n to accept it, it would be 
difficult for him to preach it to others. The Congr ess Working committee felt it 
self unable to accept this position and explained t he difficulties to Mahatma 
Gandhi. The issue however did not assume any seriou s proportions then as the 
Munich Agreement postponed war. 
The question was again raised by Mahatma Gandhi whe n war broke out in 
September last. In November last when Gandhiji went  to interview the Viceroy 
he asked me and other members of the Working Commit tee to relieve him of 
the responsibility of guiding the Congress policy o f non-violence. The 
Committee, however, once again persuaded Mahatma Ga ndhi to postpone 
decision. At Ramgarh Mahatma Gandhi raised this que stion for the third time. 
On this occasion Mahatma Gandhi also referred to ot her weaknesses in the 
Congress organization and expressed a desire to be relieved of responsibility. 
This came as a shock to the Working Committee and i f I had not practically 
forced Mahatma Gandhi to postpone decision of the i ssue once again, a crisis 
would have arisen as early as at Ramgarh. 
You will thus see that this issue has been hanging fire for over two years and 
when we met in Wardha in June last Mahatma Gandhi w anted the Committee to 
make up its mind once for all, as the international  situation had become 
delicate and he felt that a decision on such a vita l issue could not be postponed 
any longer. Even then I tried to persuade Mahatma G andhi once again to 
postpone the matter as I knew the dangers and diffi culties of a decision. There 
is not a soul in the Congress who is not anxious to  go the whole length with 
Mahatma Gandhi, if he can help it (if he can do so? —N.K.B.); but we cannot 
close our eyes to hard facts. We know that arms and  ammunitions have not 
been able to save the freedom of France, Holland, B elgium and Norway but we 
also know that human nature even after realizing th e futility of armed 
resistance is not prepared to give up force. We had  not the courage to declare 
that we shall organize a State in this country with out an armed force. If we did 
it would be wrong on our art. Mahatma Gandhi has to  give the message of non-
violence to the world and, therefore, it is his dut y to propagate it but we have Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 238  to consider our position as the representatives of the Indian Nation meeting in 
the Indian National Congress. The Indian National C ongress is a political 
organization pledged to win the political independe nce of the country. It is not 
an institution for organizing world peace. 
CB, 7-9-1940, 2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 239   
14. WHEN FREEDOM CAME 
 
Views Regarding Partition: Before the Event  
523. Q. What is your objection to the establishment  of a separate Muslim stage 
after what has happened in Bihar? 
A. I have no objection to a Muslim state. The quest ion is what will be the 
character of the State? This point has not been mad e clear so far. If the Muslim 
state implied freedom to make unfriendly treaties w ith foreign powers to the 
detriment of the country, then obviously it cannot be a matter of agreement. 
No one can be asked to sign an agreement granting f reedom to another to 
launch hostilities against himself; that would be a  suicidal policy. 
Q. Would it not be better to concede Pakistan and g et freedom for the whole of 
India? 
A. When you think of establishing Pakistan first, y ou think in terms of getting it 
with the aid of a third power. When I think of the freedom of India, I think in 
terms of achieving it without any foreign aid, be i t Russian, Chinese or any 
other power, but on the basis of our own inner stre ngth. Then only that 
freedom will be real and lasting. Once freedom is s ecured for the country as a 
whole, then we can decide about Pakistan or Hindust an. 
Q. After the recent disturbances there is neither P akistan nor peace. What is 
your solution to the situation? 
A. That is exactly what I am in search for. As soon  as it is discovered, the world 
shall know it.  
-In answer to some Muslim youth’s question on 14-1- 47 in Noakhali. Unreported. 
 
524. Q. Is the communal division of India inevitabl e? Will such division solve the 
communal problem? Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 240  A. Personally, I have always said No, and I say No even now to both questions. –
H, 18-5-47, 156  
 
525. In view of the sourness between the Hindus and  Muslims that seemed to be 
growing daily, was it possible for the two to becom e friends? 
Gandhiji answered emphatically that the enmity coul d not last forever. They 
were brothers and must remain so in spite of tempor ary insanity. But perpetual 
feud was not impossibility between communities as i t was not between 
individuals. He hoped that that would not happen, f or he prophesied that in 
that case they would bury the two religions in Indi a and would sell their 
freedom for a mess of pottage.  
The second question was: Could partition of Bengal be avoided in view of the 
rising Hindu opinion in its favour? 
Gandhi recognized the force of that opinion. He him self was not in a position to 
pronounce an opinion. But he could say without fear  of contradiction that if 
there was partition, the Muslim majority would be r esponsible for it and, what 
was more, the Muslim Government that was in power. If he was the Prime 
Minister Of Bengal, he would plead with his Hindu b rethren to forget the past. 
He would say to them that he was as much a Bengali as they were. Differences 
in religion could not part the two. We and they spo ke the same language, had 
inherited the same culture. All that was Bengal’s w as common to both, of 
which both should be equally proud. Bengal was Beng al. It was neither the 
Punjab, nor Bombay, nor anything else. If the Prime  Minister could possibly 
take up that attitude he (the speaker) would undert ake to go with him from 
place to place and reason with Hindu audiences, and  he made bold to say that 
there would not be a Hindu opponent left for the un ity of Bengal, the unity for 
which the Hindus and the Muslims had fought so vali antly and undone ‘the 
settled fact’ of so powerful a Viceroy as Lord Cors on. If he were Janab 
Suhrawardy, he would invite the Hindus to partition  his body before they 
thought of partitioning Bengal. If he had that stur dy love for Bengal and the 
Bengalis, whether Hindus or Muslims, that love woul d melt the stoniest Hindu Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 241  heart, as it was their fear and suspicion that had seized the Hindu mind. He 
could not forget Noakhal8I or even Calcutta if all he heard was true, as it was 
equally true of the Muslim mind in Bihar, And he ha d not hesitated to tell the 
Hindus of Bihar that they should remove all suspici on and fear from the Muslim 
mind. He believed in the sovereign rule of the law of Love which made no 
distinctions. 
Q. You have advised us to work for an undivided Ben gal. But can there be an 
undivided Bengal with a divided India? 
A. The answer was that if what he had said was well  understood, it followed 
that nothing could happen without the joint wish of  both the Hindus and the 
Muslims. If a third party as not to decide their fa te, it could be only decided by 
their joint will. Then there was no question as yet  of a divided India. If the 
distant event unfortunately did come to pass, the j oint and free will of Hindu 
and Muslim Bengalis would decide which part to join . 
Q. When everything at the top goes wrong, can the g oodness of the people at 
the bottom assert itself against its mischievous in fluence? 
A. If the people at the top went wrong, it was cert ainly open to, and it was the 
duty of those at the bottom, to remove the wrong to p even as he would remove 
an umbrella which appeared to be at the top but whi ch was sustained by him.  
Thus Pandit Nehru was at the top. But in reality he  was sustained by them. If he 
went wrong, those at the bottom could remove him wi thout trouble. Coming 
nearer home, if he found Suhrawardy Saheb (the Beng al Premier) to be 
unworthy, they at the bottom could certainly remove  him, not by physical force 
but by the way he had the honour of putting before them. 
It all boiled down to the fact that if the people a t the bottom were ignorant, 
they would be exploited. Such was the case with the  English. When they 
realized their strength and the fact that the botto m sustained the top, it would 
be will with them. Therefore, he would say that if the top was wrong there was 
something radically wrong with the bottom. Let them , therefore, dispel their 
ignorant helplessness. 
- H, 25-5-47, 165 and 166.   Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 242   
Views Regarding the Partition of India: After the E vent  
526. On the evening of the 3rd (of June 1947) the V iceroy followed by Pandit 
Jawaharlal Nehru, Quaid-i-Azam Jinnah and Sardar Ba ldev Singh spoke to the 
people on the radio. The reactions to H. M. G.’s an nouncement were mixed. 
Most of the Hindus were sad. They all disliked the vivisection of India. But they 
could not let India bleed continuously. A surgical operation was to be preferred 
under the circumstances. Speaking on the plan embod ied in H. M. G.’s 
announcement Gandhiji said that he had already told  them over and over again 
that to yield even an inch to force was wholly wron g. The Working Committee 
holds that they had not yielded to the force of arm s but they had to yield to 
the force of circumstances. The vast majority of Co ngressmen did not want 
unwilling partners. Hence, after careful weighing o f the pros and cons of the 
vital issues at stake they had reluctantly agreed t o the secession from the 
Union that was being framed of those parts which ha d boycotted the 
Constituent Assembly. 
Gandhiji expressed sorrow at what he considered was  a mistaken policy of the 
Muslim League. They feared Hindu domination, they s aid, and desired to rule in 
what they were mistaken in calling their own homela nds. As a matter of fact, 
however, India was the homeland of all who were bor n and bred in India. Would 
the Muslim homeland live in isolation? Was not the Punjab as much the 
homeland of the Hindus, the Sikhs, the Christians, the Jews and the Parsis who 
were of the Punjab? 
Gandhiji could not blame the Viceroy for what had h appened. It was the act of 
the Congress and the League. 
Gandhiji had done his best to get the people to sta nd by the Cabinet Mission 
Statement of May 16th, but had failed. But what was  their duty and theirs in 
the face of the accepted fact? He was a servant of the Congress because he was 
a servant of the country, and he could never be dis loyal to them. Panditji and 
the Viceroy had said that nothing had been imposed upon anyone. The Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 243  agreement that was embodied in the announcement bei ng a voluntary act of 
the parties, could be varied by them at any stage b y mutual consent. 
Referring to the newspaper report that Gandhiji had  differed from the decision 
of the working Committee and that the A. I. C. C. w ould raise its voice against 
it, Gandhiji said that the A. I. C. C. had appointe d the Working Committee and 
they could not lightly discard its decisions. Suppo sing the Working Committee 
signed a promissory note on behalf of the A. I. C. C., the A. I. C. C. had to 
honour it. The Working committee might make a mista ke. They could punish it 
by removing it. But they could not go back upon the  decision already taken by 
it. He might differ from the Working Committee. But  having stated the fact, he 
would recommend their decision for acceptance. He w as of the opinion that 
they could still mend the situation to a large exte nt. 
Some people asked him whether he would undertake a fast unto death in view 
of the decision of the congress working committee a ccepting division of India. 
Had not he called Pakistan a sin in which he could never participate? Replying 
to this such fasts could not be lightly undertaken.  They could conceivably be 
wholly undesirable. They could not be undertaken ou t of anger. Anger was a 
short madness. He must, therefore, undertake the fa st only when the still small 
voice within him called for it. He was servant of t he country and, therefore, of 
the Congress. Was he to fast because the Congress d iffered form his views? He 
had to be patient. There were occasions enough for being impatient. The 
Congress seemed to stand for projects of industrial ism in which he saw no 
deliverance for the masses from their grinding pove rty. He did not believe in 
mill-made civilization as he did not in mill-made c loth. He did not believe in an 
army for the removal of the menace to the real free dom of the country. If he 
was to impatiently fast, in the symptoms he had des cribed and others he could 
add, there were reasons enough to justify a fast un to death. He felt that he 
must be steadfast in the midst of the fire raging r ound him and prove his faith 
in the ultimate triumph of truth. – H, I5-6-47, I93, I95, I94.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 244  527. Last evening, I showed why the coming freedom seemed to create no 
enthusiasm. This evening I propose to show how we c an, if we will, turn the 
calamity into a blessing. It will profit us nothing  to brood over the past or to 
blame this party or that. Technically freedom is ye t to come a few days hence. 
In fact, the parties having jointly accepted the si tuation, there is no turning 
back. Only the inscrutable Providence can undo what  men have agreed to do. 
One easy and ready way is for the congress and the League to come together 
and arrive at a mutual understanding without the in tervention of the Viceroy. 
The League has to make the first move. I do not at all suggest the undoing of 
Pakistan. Let that be treated as an established fac t beyond dispute or 
discussion. But they can sit together in a mud hut large enough to 
accommodate not more than ten representatives and u ndertake not to part till 
they have reached an agreement. I dare swear that i f such an event occurs, it 
will be infinitely better than the Bill recognizing  the Independence of India cut 
up into two states enjoying equal status. 
Neither the Hindus nor the Muslims are happy over w hat is happening before 
their helpless selves. This is first-hand evidence unless the Hindus and the 
Muslims who daily see me or correspond with me are deceiving me. But-it is a 
big but-I seem to be aiming at the impossible. Now that British intervention has 
done the trick, how can the League be expected to c ome down to their 
adversaries and produce an agreed settlement as bet ween brothers and friends? 
There is an alternative which is also, almost if no t quite, as difficult. This 
creation of two armies be created, not in order to "face and fight common 
danger but to destroy one another and demonstrate t o a gaping world that they 
were unfit for any other purpose but to fight one a nother unto death? 
I have put the prospect in its awful nakedness so t hat everyone may see and 
shun it. The alternative escape is undoubtedly attr active. Will the vast mass of 
the Hindus and those who had joined them in the str uggle for Independence 
realize the danger in its proper perspective and ri se to the occasion and swear 
even now that they do not wish to have an army at a ll or at least refuse ever to 
use it against their Muslim brethren whether in the  Union or outside it in Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 245  Pakistan? This proposal is tantamount to asking the  Hindus and their associates 
to turn thirty years’ weakness into strength of gre at beauty. Perhaps to state 
the Problem thus is to demonstrate its absurdity-ma y be God has been known 
making for the sake of all the parties who have sub scribed to the dangerous 
division of the army into two self-destroying warri ng camps.— H, 20-7-47, 24I.  
 
528. The Englishman was quitting because he had dis covered that it was wrong 
on economic and political grounds to hold India in bondage. Herein he was 
quite sincere. It would not be denied, however, tha t sincerity was quite 
consistent with self-deception. He was self-deceive d in that he believed that he 
could not leave India to possible anarchy if such w as to be India’s lot. He was 
quite content to leave India as a cockpit between t wo organized armies. Before 
quitting, he was setting the seal of approval on th e policy of playing off one 
community against another. And he lacked the courag e to do the right so far as 
the States were concerned. The speaker admitted fre ely that if the Englishman 
left India in an uncertain condition and left the p ossibility of several warring 
States, all independent of England and, therefore, of one another, he could not 
conceive a greater reflection on the British name t han this would be. 
–H, 20-7-47, 242.  
 
529. The Congress has always kept a broad vision. T oday it is needed more than 
ever before. It is permissible to say that India ha s accepted partition at the 
point of the bayonet. This settled fact cannot be u nsettled in the same way. 
The two can be one only when there is heart unity. 
The omens today seem to point to the contrary. Duri ng the crisis the Congress 
must stand firm as a rock.— H, I0-8-47, 272.  
 
530. The leaders had agreed to the partition as the  last resort. They did not 
feel that they had made a mistake. Rather than let the whole country go to 
dogs, they agreed to the partition, hoping to give the country a much needed Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 246  rest. He felt differently. He had said that he woul d rather let the whole 
country be reduced to ashes than yield an inch to v iolence. 
-H. 27-7-47, 253.  
 
531. A question has been and is being asked. If you  are sure that India is going 
the wrong way, why do you associate with the wrongd oers? Why do you not 
plough your own lonely furrow and have faith that i f you are right, your 
erstwhile friends and followers will seek you out? I regard this as a very fair 
question. I must not attempt to against it. All I c an say is that my faith is 
asstrong as ever. It is quite possible that my tech nique is faulty. There are old 
and tried precedents to guide one in such a complex ity. Only, no one should act 
mechanically. Hence I can say to all my counselors that they there should have 
patience with me and even share my belief that ther e is no hope for the aching 
world except through the narrow and straight path o f nonviolence. Millions like 
me may fail to prove the truth in their own lives; that would be their failure, 
never of the eternal law.— H, 29-6-47, 209.  
 
Non-violence in New-born India  
532. There was no doubt, Gandhiji said, that murder , arson. Loot etc. were 
never sop rampant. He had admitted his share of res ponsibility for the sorry 
state of things by saying that what was done during  the past thirty years under 
his leadership was no better than passive resistanc e. It was good enough to 
induce the British power to quit India. Passive res istance, unlike non-violence, 
had no power to change men’s hearts. The consequenc es they know but too 
well. They need not engage further attention. The S waraj of their dreams was 
far off. What was to be done to convert the poison into nectar? Was the process 
possible? He knew that it was and he thought he kne w the way too. But 
whereas the Indian mind was ready to respond to the  effort at passive 
resistance, it was not receptive enough to imbibe t he lesson of non-violence 
which, and perhaps which alone, was capable of turn ing the poison into the 
heart to adopt the golden path. He could proclaim f rom the house-top that Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 247  non-violence had not, had never, failed. The people  failed to rise to it. He did 
not mind being told that he did not know the techni que of propagating non-
violence. His critics even went so far as to sugges t that he had no non-violence 
in himself. God alone knew men’s hearts. He could s ay with confidence that if 
the world was to have peace, non-violence was the m eans to that end and no 
other.—H, 20-7-47, 242.  
 
533. Non-violence was his creed. It was not so with  the congress. The Congress 
had accepted non-violence as a policy. Badshah Khan  was the only leader who 
believed in non-violence as a creed. Even he had no t imbibed the doctrine 
through and through. 
"I have admitted my mistake, I thought our struggle  was based on nonviolence, 
whereas in reality it was no more than passive resi stance, which essentially is a 
weapon of the weak. It leads naturally to armed res istance whenever possible." 
The struggle in the Transvaal was not passive resis tance. It was based on non-
violence. The source of their strength was soul for ce, not physical force. 
Intoxicated with his success in South Africa he cam e to India. Here too the 
struggle bore fruit. But he now realized that it wa s not based on nonviolence. If 
he had known so then, he would not have launched th e struggle. But God 
wanted to take that work from him. So He blurred hi s vision. It was because 
their struggle was not non-violent that they today witnessed loot, arson and 
murder. –H, 27-7-47, 253.  
 
534. I would love to attempt an answer to a questio n which has been addressed 
to me from more than one quarter of the globe. It i s: 
How can you account for the growing violence among your people on the part 
of political parties for the furtherance of politic al ends? Is this the result of 
thirty years of non-violent practice for ending Bri tish rule? Does your message 
of non-violence still hold good for the world? I ha ve condensed the sentiments 
of my correspondents in my own language. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 248  In answer I must confess my bankruptcy, not that of  non-violence. I have 
already said that the non-violence that was offered  during the past thirty years 
was that of the weak. Whether it is a good enough a nswer or not is for others 
to judge. It must be further admitted that such non -violence can have no play 
in the altered circumstances. India has no experien ce of the non-violence of 
the strong. It serves no purpose for me to continue  to repeat that the non-
violence of the strong is the strongest force in th e world. The truth requires 
constant and extensive demonstration. This I am end eavouring to do to the best 
of my ability. What if the best of my ability is ve ry little? May I not be living in 
a fool’s paradise? These are pertinent questions. M y answer is quite simple. I 
ask nobody to follow me. Everyone should follow his  or her own inner voice. If 
he or she has no ears to listen to it, he or she sh ould do the best he or she can. 
In no case should he or she imitate others sheep-li ke. –H, 29-6-47, 209.  
 
535. Let me make one thing clear. I have rankly and  fully admitted that what 
we practiced during the past thirty years was not n on-violent resistance but 
passive resistance which only the weak offer becaus e they are unable, not 
unwilling, to offer armed resistance. If we knew th e use of non-violent 
resistance which only those with hearts of oak can offer, we would present to 
the world a totally different picture of tree India  instead of and India cut in 
twain, one part highly suspicious of the other and the two too much engaged in 
mutual strife to be able to think cogently of the f ood and clothing of the hungry 
and naked millions who know no religion but that of  the one and only God who 
appears to them in the guise of the necessaries of life.- 27-7-47, 251.  
 
Regarding Kashmir  
536. Gandhiji’s ahimsa forbade him from denying cre dit, where it was due, 
even though the creditor was a believer in violence . Thus, though he did not 
accept Subhash Bose’s belief in violence and his co nsequent action, he had not 
refrained from giving unstinted praise to his patri otism, resourcefulness and 
bravery. Similarly, though he did not approve of th e use of arms by the Union Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 249  Government for aiding the Kashmiris and though he c ould not approve of Sheikh 
Abdulla’s resort to arms, he could not possibly wit hhold admiration for either 
for their resourceful and praiseworthy conduct, esp ecially, if both the relieving 
troops and the Kashmiri defenders died heroically t o a man. He knew that if 
they could do so, they would perhaps change the fac e of India. But if the 
defense was purely non-violent in intention and act ion, he would not use the 
word ‘perhaps’, for, he would be sure of change in the face of India even to the 
extent of converting to the defender’s view the Uni on Cabinet, if not even the 
Pakistan Cabinet. 
The non-violent technique he would suggest, would b e no armed assistance to 
the defenders. Nonviolent assistance could be sent from the Union without 
stint. But the defenders, whether they got such ass istance or not, would defy 
the might of the raiders or even a disciplined army  in overwhelming numbers. 
And defenders dying at their post of duty without m alice and without anger in 
their hearts against the assailants, and without th e use of arms including even 
their fists would mean an exhibition of heroism as yet unknown in history. 
Kashmir would then become a holy land shedding the fragrance not only 
throughout India, but the world. 
Having described non-violent action, he had to conf ess his own impotence, in 
that his word lacked the strength, which perfect ma stery over self as described 
in the concluding lines of the second chapter of th e Gita, gave. He lacked the 
tapashcharya requisite for the purpose. He could on ly pray and invite the 
audience to pray with him to God, that if it please d Him, He might arm him 
with the qualifications he had just described.– H, 16-11-47, 413.  
 
In A Moment of Supreme Anguish  
537. New Delhi,12-1-48 
One fasts for health’s sake under laws governing he alth, fasts as a penance for 
a wrong done and felt as such. In these fasts, the fasting one need not believe 
in ahimsa. There is, however, a fast which a votary  of non-violence sometimes 
fees impelled to undertake by way of protest agains t some wrong done by Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 250  society and this he does when he as a votary of ahi msa has no other remedy 
left. Such an occasion has come my way. 
When on September 9th I returned to Delhi from Calc utta, it was to proceed to 
the West Punjab. But that was not to be. Gay Delhi looked like a city of the 
dead. As I alighted from the train I observed gloom  on every face I saw. Even 
the Sardar, whom humour and the joy that humour giv es never desert, was no 
exception this time. The cause of it I did not know . He was on the platform to 
receive me. He lost no time in giving me the sad ne ws of the disturbances that 
had taken place in the Metropolis of the Union. At once I saw that I had to be in 
Delhi and ‘do or die’. There is apparent calm broug ht about by prompt military 
and police action, but there is storm within the br east. It may burst forth any 
day. This I count as no fulfillment of the vow to ‘ do’ which alone can keep me 
from death, the incomparable friend, I yearn for he art friendship between the 
Hindus, the Sikhs and the Muslims. It subsisted bet ween them the other day. 
Today it is non-existent. It is a state that no Ind ian patriot worthy of the name 
can contemplate with equanimity. Though the Voice w ithin has been beckoning 
for a long time, I have been shutting my ears to It , lest it may be the voice of 
Satan otherwise called my weakness. I never like to  feel resource less, a 
satyagrahi never should. Fasting is his last resort  in the place of the sword – his 
or other’s. I have no answer to return to the Musli m friends who see me from 
day to day as to what they should do. My impotence has been gnawing at me of 
late. It will go immediately the fast is undertaken . I have been brooding over it 
for the last three days. The final conclusion has f lashed upon me and it makes 
me happy. No man, if he is pure, has anything more precious to give than his 
life. I hope and pray that I have that purity in me  to justify the step. 
I ask you to bless the effort and to pray for me an d with me. The fast begins 
from the first meal tomorrow. The period is indefin ite and I may drink water 
with or without salts and sour limes. It will end w hen and if I am satisfied that 
there is a reunion of hearts of all the communities  brought about without any 
outside pressure, but from an awakened sense of dut y. The reward will be the 
regaining if India’s dwindling prestige and her fas t fading sovereignty over the 
heart of Asia and there through the world. I flatte r myself with the belief that Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 251  the loss of her soul by India will mean the loss of  the hope of the aching, storm 
tossed and hungry world. Let no friend, or foe if t here be one, be angry with 
me. There are friends who do not believe in the met hod of the fast for the 
reclamation of the human mind. They will bear with me and extend to me the 
same liberty of action that they claim for themselv es. With God as my supreme 
and sole counselor, I felt that I must take the dec ision without any other 
adviser. If I have made a mistake and discover it, I shall have no hesitation in 
proclaiming it from the housetop and retracing my f aulty step. There is little 
chance of my making such a discovery. If there is c lear indication, as I claim 
there is, of the Inner Voice, it will not be gainsa id. I plead for all absence of 
argument and inevitable endorsement of the step. If  the whole of India 
responds or at least Delhi does, the fast might be soon ended. 
But whether it ends soon or late or never, let ther e be no softness in dealing 
with what may be termed as a crisis. Critics have r egarded some of my previous 
fasts as coercive and held that on merits the verdi ct would have gone against 
my sand but for the pressure exercised by the fasts . What value can an adverse 
verdict have when the purpose is demonstrably sound ? A pure fast like duty, is 
its own reward. I do not embark upon it for the sak e of the result it may bring. 
I do so because I must. Hence, I urge everybody dis passionately to examine the 
purpose and let me die, if I must, in peace, which I hope is ensured. Death for 
me would be a glorious deliverance rather than that  I should be a helpless 
witness of the destruction of India, Hinduism, Sikh ism and Islam. That 
destruction is certain if Pakistan ensures no equal ity of status and security of 
life and property for all professing the various fa iths of the world and if India 
copies her. Only then Islam dies in the two Indies,  not in the world. But 
Hinduism and Sikhism have no world outside India. T hose who differ from me 
will be honored by me for their resistance however implacable. Let my fast 
quicken conscience, not deaden it. Just contemplate  the rot that has set in 
beloved India and you will rejoice to think that th ere is a humble son of hers 
who is strong enough and possibly pure enough to ta ke the happy step. If he is 
neither, he is a burden on earth. The sooner he dis appears and clears the 
Indian atmosphere of the burden the better for him and all concerned. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 252  I would beg of all friends not to rush to Burlap Ho use nor try to dissuade me or 
be anxious for me. I am in God’s hands. Rather, the y should turn the 
searchlight inwards, for this is essentially a test ing time for all of us. Those who 
remain at their post of duty and perform it diligen tly and well, now more than 
hitherto, will help me and the cause in every way. The fast is a process of self-
purification. –H, 18-1-48, 523.  
 
His Politics and Economics for Free India  
538. A correspondent asks whether I would leave pol itics after the 15 th  when 
India will be free.  
In the first instance there is no freedom approachi ng the Kingdom of God. We 
seem to be as far from it as ever. And in any case the life of the millions is my 
politics from which I dare not free myself without denying my life work and 
God. That my politics may take a different turn is quite possible. But that will 
be determined by circumstances. – H, 17-8-47, 281  
 
539. In Gandhiji’s opinion, the departure from the straight path of non-violence 
they had made at times in 1942, was very probably r esponsible for the 
aberration to which he had referred. He instanced a lso the spirit of general 
lawlessness which had seized them in as much as the y dared to travel without 
tickets, pull chains unlawfully or in senseless vin dictiveness, burn zamindars 
crops or belongings. He was no lover of the zaminda rs system. He had often 
spoken against it; but he frankly confessed that he  was not the enemy of the 
zamindars. He owned no enemies. The best way to bri ng about reform in the 
economic and social systems, whose evils were admit tedly many, was through 
the royal road of self-suffering. Any departure fro m it only resulted in merely 
changing the form of the evil that was sought to be  liquidated violently. 
Violence was incapable of destroying the evil root and branch. –H, 30-3-47, 87.  
 
540. Gandhiji had also a visit from the zamindars w ho, among other things had 
complained of growing lawlessness among the peasant ry and labour. He Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 253  deplored the fact. It was a blot on the fair name o f Bihar. Such lawlessness was 
criminal and was bound to involve the very peasantr y and labour in ruin, let 
alone the zamindars who were after all a handful. H e was quite prepared t say 
for the sake of argument that the zamindars were gu ilty of many crimes and of 
omissions and commissions. But that was no reason f or the peasant and the 
labourer who were the salt of the earth to copy cri me. If salt lost its savour 
wherewith could it be salted? 
The Kisans had a rich experience of non-violent sat yagraha when their amazing 
restraint brought about the end of a century-old wr ong in the shape of the 
indigo grievance and planters raj in Champaran. He hoped they would not 
forget the lesson of that rich experience. 
To the landlords he said that if what was said agai nst them was true he would 
warn them that their days were numbered. They could  no longer continue as 
lords and masters. They had a bright future if they  became the trustees of the 
poor Kisans. He had in mind not trustees in name bu t in reality. Such trustees 
would take; nothing for themselves that their labou r and care did not entitle 
them to. Then they would find that no law would be able to touch them. The 
Kisans would be their friends. 
–H, 4-5-47, 134.  
 
541. The speaker then came to the topic he wanted t o discuss that evening. He 
reminded them that the previous evening he had said  that in a free India they 
would neither have Birla Raj nor Nawab of Bhopal Ra j. They would have 
Panchayat Raj. –H, 8-6-47, 183.  
 
542. Q. The majority of Socialists claim that if th ere was a socialist revolution 
the economic question will come to the forefront th rowing the communal 
conflict to the background. Do you agree? If such a  revolution takes place, will 
it promote the establishment of the Kingdom of God which you cal Ramarajya? 
A. The economic conflict you envisage is likely to make the Hindu-Muslim 
tension less acute. Even the end of the Hindu-Musli m conflict will not end all Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 254  our troubles. What is happening is this. With the e nd of slavery and the dawn of 
independence, all the weaknesses of society are bou nd to come to the surface. 
I do not see any reason to be unnecessarily upset a bout it. If we keep the 
balance at such a time, every tangle will be solved . As far as the economic 
question is concerned it has to be solved in any ca se. Today there is gross 
economic inequality. The basis of socialism is econ omic equality. There can be 
no Ramarajya in the present state of iniquitous ine qualities in which a few roll 
in riches and the theory socialism even while I was  in South Africa. My 
opposition to the Socialists and others consists it  attacking violence as a means 
of effecting any lasting reform. 
Q. You say that a Raja, a zamindar or a capitalist should be a trustee for the 
poor. Do you think that any such exists today? Or d o you expect them to be so 
transformed? 
A. I think that some very few exist even today, tho ugh not in the full sense of 
the term. They are certainly moving in that directi on. It can, however, be 
asked whether the present Rajas and others can be e xpected to become 
trustees of the poor. If they do not become trustee s of their own accord, force 
of circumstances will compel the reform unless they  court utter destruction. 
When Panchayat Raj is established, public opinion w ill do what violence can 
never do. The present power of the zamindars, the c apitalists and the Rajas 
can hold sway only so long as the common people do not realize their own 
strength. If the people non-co-operate with the evi l of zamindari or capitalism, 
it must die of inanition. In Panchayat Raj only the  Panchayat will be obeyed 
and the Panchayat can only work through the law of their making.— H, I-6-47, 
172.  
 
Provincialism  
543. (Gandhiji) then referred to the provincial spi rit that seemed to be 
infecting the provinces. Thus, he saw in the papers  that some Assamese thought 
that Assam belonged exclusively to the Assamese. If  that spirit fired every 
province, to whom could India belong? He held that the people of all the 
provinces belonged to India and India belonged to a ll. The only condition was Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 255  that no one could go and settle in another province  to exploit it or rule it or to 
injure its interest in any way. All were servants o f India and they lived only in 
the spirit of service. –H, 7-9-47, 311.  
 
544. Bihar is undoubtedly for Biharis but it is als o for India. What is true of 
Bihar is equally true of all the provinces in the U nion. No Indian can be treated 
as a foreigner in Bihar as he may be treated in Pak istan of today and vice versa. 
It is necessary to bear th8is difference in mind if  we are to avoid difficulties 
and heart-burn. 
Though then every Indian of the Union has a right t o settle in Bihar, he must 
not do so to oust the Biharis. If the qualification  was not actively operated, it is 
possible to conceive such an inrush of non-Bihari I ndians as to flood out the 
Biharis. We are thus forced to the conclusion that a non-Bihari who settles in 
Bihar must do so to serve Bihar, not to exploit it after the manner of our old 
masters. 
This way of examining the proposition rings us to t he question of the zamindars 
and the ryots. When a non-Bihari enters Bihar for t he sake of making money, he 
will in all probability do so to exploit the ryots in league with the zamindars. If 
the zamindars really become the trustees of their z amindari for the sake of the 
ryots, there never could be any unholy league as ha s been here conceived. 
There is the difficult zamindari question awaiting solution in Bihar. What one 
would love to see is proper, impartial and satisfac tory understanding between 
the zamindars, big and small, the ryots and the Gov ernment so that when the 
law is passed, it may not be a dead letter nor need  force be used against the 
zamindars or the ryots. Would that all changes, som e of which must be radical, 
take place throughout India without bloodshed and w ithout force! So much for 
the new-comer from the other provinces of India. 
What about the services? It seems that if the provi nces are all to make equal 
progress in all directions, the services should be largely confined to the 
inhabitants of the province concerned for the sake of India as a whole. No 
province and no tribe or clan can kept backward if India is to stand up erect Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 256  before the world. It will never do so through its a rms of which the world is sick. 
It must shine through its innate culture expressed in every citizen’s life and in 
the socialism I have recently described in these co lumns. That means 
elimination of all force for the sake of popularizi ng one’s doctrines and 
schemes. A thing which is truly popular rarely, if ever, requires force save that 
of public opinion to make itself acceptable to all.  Therefore, the ugly scenes of 
violence by individuals witnessed in Bihar and Oris sa and Assam should never 
have been. Popular governments are functioning to r edress any irregularity or 
encroachment by persons from other provinces. The p rovincial governments are 
bound to give full protection to all the comers fro m outside their provinces. 
‘Use what you consider yours so as not to injure ot hers,’ is a famous maxim of 
equity. It is also a and moral code of conduct. How  apposite today! 
Hitherto I have dealt with the question of new arri vals. What of those who were 
on the 15th of August in Bihar—some in Government e mployment and some 
otherwise employed? So far as I can see, they shoul d be on the same footing as 
the Biharis unless they make another choice. Natura lly, they should not form a 
separate colony as it they were foreigners. ‘Live i n Rome as the Romans do’, is 
a sound commonsense maxim so long as it does not ap ply to Roman vices. The 
process of progressive blending must be one of reje cting the bad and absorbing 
the good. As a Gujarati in Bengal, I must quickly a bsorb all that is good in 
Bengal and never touch that which is bad. I must ev er serve Bengal, never 
selfishly exploit it. The bane of our life is our e xclusive provincialism, whereas 
my province must be co-extensive with the Indian bo undary so that ultimately 
it extends to the boundary of the earth. Else it pe rishes. –H, 21-9-47, 332.  
 
Regarding the Congress Organization  
545. Gandhiji next took up the thread of his talk a t Hilsa where he had dropped 
it the day before. He had heard from various quarte rs that ever since the 
acceptance of office by the Congress it was abandon ing its tradition of 
penance, sacrifice and service, so painfully built up during its glorious history of 
over 60 years, from its humble beginnings in 1885 t o the present day when it 
had become a mighty organization having millions of  followers. They said it was Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 257  fast becoming an organization of selfish power-seek ers and job-hunters. Instead 
of remaining the servants of the public, Congressme n had become its lords and 
masters. The Congress was, moreover, torn by petty intrigues and group 
rivalries. What he said was moreover, torn by petty  intrigues and group 
rivalries. What he said was true of all the provinc es. If that continued, he was 
afraid Indians would not be able to retain the prec ious thing that was 
approaching. For that they required knowledge, unde rstanding and purity of 
mind. If the Congress and the League did not retain  the requisite purity and 
strength, they would find all power slipping from t heir hands. They could not 
hope to maintain it with the help of the bayonet li ke the British. All their 
power came from the people, who were the real maste rs, though they might 
not realize it at the moment. The Congress won thei r confidence through years 
of service. If it betrayed them, he was afraid, the y would fall a prey to the 
white-robed goondas of society in whose hands all p ower would pass. – H, 1-6-
47, 175.  
 
546. Indian National Congress which is the oldest n ational political organization 
and which has after many battles fought her non-vio lent way to freedom cannot 
be allowed to die. It can only die with the nation.  A loving organism ever grows 
or it dies. The Congress has won political freedom,  but it has yet to win 
economic freedom, social and moral freedom. These f reedoms are harder than 
the political, if only because they are constructiv e, less exciting and not 
spectacular. All-embracing constructive work evokes  the energy of all the units 
of the millions. 
The Congress has got the preliminary and necessary part of her freedom. The 
hardest has yet to come. In its difficult ascent to  democracy, it has inevitably 
created rotten boroughs, leading to corruption and creation of institutions, 
popular and democratic only in name. How to get out  of the weedy and 
unwieldy growth? 
The Congress must do away with its special register  of members, at no time 
exceeding one crore, not even then easily identifia ble. It had an unknown Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 258  register of millions who could never be wanted. Its  register should now be co-
extensive with all the men and women on the voters’  rolls in the country. The 
Congress business should be to see that no faked na me gets in and no 
legitimate name is left out. On its own register it  will have a body of servants 
of the nation who would be workers doing the work a llotted to them from time 
to time. 
Unfortunately for the country they will be drawn ch iefly for the time being 
from the city dwellers, most of whom would be requi red to work for and in the 
villages of India. The ranks must be filled in incr easing numbers from villagers. 
These servants will be expected to operate upon and  serve the voters 
registered according to law, in their own surroundi ngs. Many persons and 
parties will woo them. The very best will win. Thus  and in no other way can the 
Congress regain its fast ebbing unique position in the country. But yesterday 
the Congress was unwittingly the servant of the Nat ion, it was Khudai 
khidmatgar –God’s servant. Let it now proclaim to i tself and the world that it is 
only God’s servant—nothing more, nothing less. If i t engages in the ungainly 
skirmish for power, it will find one fine morning t hat it is no more. Thank God, 
it is now no longer in sole possession of the field . 
I have only opened to view the distant scene. If I have the time and health, I 
hope to discuss in these columns what the servants of the Nation can do to 
raise themselves in the estimation of their masters , the whole of the adult 
population, male and female. 
New Delh i, 27-1-48 --H, 1-2-48, 4.  
 
547. (The last public document handed over to the S ecretary of the Indian 
National Congress on the forenoon of the 30th of Ja nuary, 1948.) 
Though split into two, India having attained politi cal independence through 
means devised by the Indian National Congress, the congress in its present 
shape and form i.e. as a propaganda vehicle and par liamentary machine, has 
outlived its use. India has still to attain social,  moral and economic Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 259  independence in terms of its 700,000 villages as di stinguished from its cities 
and towns. 
The struggle for the ascendancy of civil over milit ary power is bound to take 
place in India’s progress towards its democratic go al. It must be kept out of 
unhealthy competition with political parties and co mmunal bodies. For these 
and other similar reasons, the A.I.C.C. resolves to  disband the existing Congress 
organization and flower into a Lok sevak Sangh unde r the following rules with 
power to alter them as occasion may demand. 
Every Panchayat of five adult men and women being v illagers or village-minded 
shall forma unit. Two such contiguous Panchayats sh all form a working party 
under all leader elected from among themselves. 
When there are 100 such panchayats, the 50 first gr ade leaders shall elect from 
among themselves a second grade leader and so on; t he first grade leaders 
meanwhile working under the second grade leader. Pa rallel groups of 200 
panchayats shall continue to be formed till they co ver the whole of India, each 
succeeding group of panchayats electing second grad e leaders after the manner 
of the first. All second grade leaders shall serve jointly for the whole of India 
and severally for their respective areas. The secon d grade leaders may elect 
whenever they deem necessary from among themselves chief who will, during 
pleasure, regulate and command all the groups. 
As the final formation of provinces of districts is  still in a state of flux, no 
attempt has been made to divide this group of serva nts into provincial or 
district councils and jurisdiction over the whole o f India has been established in 
the group or groups that may have been formed at an y given time. It should be 
noted that this body of servants derive their autho rity or power from service 
ungrudgingly and wisely done to their master, the w hole of India. 
1. Ever worker shall be a habitual wearer of khadi made from self-spun yarn of 
certified by the A.I.S.A. and must be a teetotaller . If a Hindu, he must have 
abjured untouchability in any shape or form in his own person or in his family. 
He must be a believer in the ideal of inter-communa l unity with equal respect Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 260  and regard for all religions and equality of opport unity and status for all, 
irrespective of race, creed or sex.  
2. He shall come in personal contact with every vil lager within his jurisdiction.  
3. He shall enroll and train workers from amongst t he villagers and keep a 
register of all these.  
4. He shall keep a record of his work from day to d ay.  
5. He shall organize the villages so as to make the m self-contained and self-
supporting through their agriculture and handicraft s.  
6. He shall educate the village-folk in sanitation and hygiene and take all 
measures for prevention of ill-health and disease a mong them.  
7. He shall organize the education of village-folk from birth to death along the 
lines of Nayee Talim, in accordance with the policy  laid down by the Hindustani 
Talimi Sangh.  
8. He shall see that those whose names are missing o the statutory voters’ rolls 
are duly entered therein.  
9. He shall encourage those who have not yet acquir ed the legal qualification 
to acquire it, for getting the right of franchise.  
10. For the above purposes and others to be added f rom time to time, he shall 
train and fit himself in accordance with the rules laid down by the Sangh for 
the due performance of duty. 
The Sangh shall affiliate the following autonomous bodies: 1. A.I.S.A., 2. 
A.I.V.I.A., 3. Hindustani Talimi Sangh, 4. Harijan Sevak Sangh, 5. Goseva 
Sangh.  
Finance: The Sangh shall raise finances for the ful fillment of its mission from 
among the villagers and others, special stress bein g laid on collection of poor 
man’s pice.— HS, 4-2-48.  
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 261   
15. SATYAGRAHA 
 
548. I am essentially a non-violent man, and I beli eve in war bereft of every 
trace of violence.  –H, 14-5-38, 115.  
 
549. I have no set theory to go by. I have not work ed out the science of 
satyagraha in its entirety. I am still groping. You  can join me in my quest if it 
appeals to you and you feel the call. —H, 27-5-39, 136.  
 
A Call for Adventure  
550. If we are to make progress, we must not repeat  history but make new 
history. We must add to the inheritance left by our  ancestors. If we may make 
new discoveries and inventions in the phenomenal wo rld, must we declare our 
bankruptcy in the spiritual domain? Is it impossibl e to multiply the exception so 
as to make them the rule? Must man always be brute first and man after, if at 
all? —YI, 6-5-26, I64.  
 
Satyagraha: Its Theory and Practice  
551. The term Passive Resistance does not fit the a ctivity of the Indian 
community during the past eight years. Its equivale nt in the vernacular 
rendered into English means Truth-Force. I think To lstoy called it also soul-
Force or Love-Force, and so it is. Carried out to i ts utmost limit, this force is 
independent of pecuniary or other material assistan ce: certainly, even in its 
elementary form, of physical force or violence. Ind eed, violence is the negation 
of this great spiritual force which can only be cul tivated or wielded by those 
who will entirely eschew violence. It is a force th at may be used by individuals 
as well as by communities. It may be used as well i n political as in domestic 
affairs. Its universal applicability is a demonstra tion of its permanence and 
invincibility. It can be used alike by men, women a nd children. It is totally Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 262  untrue to say that it is a force to be used only by  the weak so long as they are 
not capable of meeting violence by violence. This s uperstition arises from the 
incompleteness of the English expression. It is imp ossible for those who 
consider themselves to be weal to apply this force.  Only those who realize that 
is something in man which is superior to the brute nature in him, and that the 
latter always yields to it, can effectively be pass ive. This force is to violence 
and, therefore, to all tyranny, all injustice, what  light is to darkness. In 
politics, its use is based upon the immutable maxim  that government of the 
people is possible only so long as they consent eit her consciously or 
unconsciously to be governed. We did not want to be  governed by Asiatic Act of 
1907 of the Transvaal and it had to go before this mighty force. Two courses 
were open to us-to use violence when we were called  upon to submit to the 
Act, or to suffer the penalties prescribed under th e Act, and thus to draw out 
and exhibit the force of the soul within us for a p eriod long enough to appeal to 
the sympathetic chord in the governors or the law-m akers. We have taken long 
to achieve what we set about striving for. That was  because out passive 
resistance was not of the most complete type. All p assive resisters do not 
understand the full value of the force, nor have we  men who always from 
conviction refrain from violence. The use of this f orce requires the adoption of 
poverty, in the sense that we must be indifferent w hether we have the 
wherewithal to feed or clothe ourselves. During the  past struggle, all passive 
resisters, if any at all, were not prepared to go t hat length. Some again were 
only passive resisters so-called. They came without  any conviction, often with 
mixed motives, less often with impure motives. Some  even, whilst engaged in 
the struggle, would gladly have resorted to violenc e but for most vigilant 
supervision. Thus it was that the struggle became p rolonged; for the exercise of 
the purest soul-force, in its perfect form, brings about instantaneous relief. For 
this exercise, prolonged training of the individual  soul is an absolute necessity 
so that a perfect passive resister has to be almost  if not entirely, a perfect 
man. We cannot all suddenly become such men, but if  my proposition is 
correct-as I know it to be correct-the greater the spirit of passive resistance in 
us, the better men we will become. Its use, therefo re, is, I think, indisputable, 
and it is a force which, if it became universal, wo uld revolutionize social ideals Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 263  and do away with despotism’s and the ever-growing m ilitarism under which the 
nations of the West are groaning and are being almo st crushed to death-that 
militarism which promises to overwhelm even the nat ions of the East. If the 
past struggle has produced even a few Indians who w ould dedicate themselves 
to the task of becoming passive resisters as nearly  perfect as possible, they 
would not only have served them-selves in the trues t sense of the term, they 
would also have served humanity at large. Thus view ed, passive resistance is 
the noblest and the best education. It should come,  not after the ordinary 
education in letters of children, but it should pre cede it. It will not be denied 
that a child, before it begins to write it’s alphab et and to gain worldly 
knowledge, should know what the soul is, what truth  is, what love is, what 
powers are latent in the soul. It should be an esse ntial of real education that a 
child should learn that, in the struggle of life, i t can easily conquer hate by 
love, untruth by truth, violence by self-suffering.  It was because I felt the force 
of this truth that, during the latter part of the s truggle, I endeavored as much 
as I could to train the children at Tolstoy Farm an d then at Phoenix along these 
lines, and one of the reasons for my departure to I ndia is still further to realize 
as I already do in part, my own imperfection as a p assive resister and then to 
try to perfect myself; for I believe that it is in India that the nearest approach 
to perfection is most possible. –Nat,189.  
 
552. Let no one understand that a nonviolent army i s open only to those who 
strictly enforce in their lives al the implications  of nonviolence. It is open to all 
those who accept the implications and make an ever- increasing endeavor to 
observe them. There never will be an army of perfec tly nonviolent people. It 
will be formed of those who will honestly endeavor to observe nonviolence. –H, 
21-7-40, 214.  
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 264  Satyagraha, Distinguished from passive Resistance  
(A) ITS ACTIVE CHARACTER  
553. Non-co-operation is not a passive state, it is  an intensely active state, 
more active than physical resistance or violence. P assive resistance is a 
misnomer. –YI, 25-8-20, Tagore, 322.  
 
(B) SATYAGRAHIS, SUBJECT TO A HIGHER LAW  
554. A satyagrahi sometimes appears momentarily to disobey laws and the 
constituted authority only to prove in the end his regard for both. 
–Nat, 302.  
 
555. Disobedience to the law of the State becomes a  peremptory duty when it 
comes in conflict with the law of God. –ER, 45.  
 
(C) NO ROOM FOR VIOLENCE  
556. While in passive resistance there is scope for  the use of arms when a 
suitable occasion arrives, in satyagraha physical f orce is forbidden even in the 
most favourable circumstances. 
In passive resistance there is always present idea of harassing the other party 
and there is a simultaneous readiness to undergo an y hardships entailed upon 
us by such activity; while is satyagraha there is n ot the remotest idea of 
injuring the opponent. Satyagraha postulates the co nquest of the adversary by 
suffering in one’s own person. –SA, 179.  
 
557. Non-violence is never a method of coercion, it  is one of conversion. We 
have failed to convert the Princes, we have failed to convert the English 
administrators. It is no use saying that it is impo ssible to persuade persons 
willingly to part with their power. I have claimed that satyagraha is a new 
experiment. It will be time to pronounce it a failu re when Congressmen have Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 265  given it a genuine trial. Even a policy, if it is h onestly pursued, has to be 
pursued with all one’s heart. We have not done so. Hence Congressmen have to 
convert themselves before the Paramount Power and t he Princes can be 
expected to act justly. – H, 8-7-39, 193.  
 
(D) LOVE, NOT HATRED, THE MOTIVE  
558. While there is no scope for love in passive re sistance, hatred has no place 
in satyagraha but is a positive breach of its rulin g principle. –SA, 178.  
 
559. Passive resistance is a negative thing, and ha s nothing to do with the 
active principle of love. Satyagraha proceeds on th e active principle of love 
which says, ‘Love those that despitefully use you. It is easy for you to love your 
friends. But I say unto you, love your enemies. ‘—H, 14-5-38, 111.  
 
560. Passive resistance, unlike nonviolence, had no  power to change men’s 
hearts.  –H, 20-7-47, 243.  
 
561. It is never the intention of a satyagrahi to e mbarrass the wrongdoer. The 
appeal is never to his fear; it is, must be, always  to his heart. The satyagrahis 
object is to convert, not to coerce, the wrongdoer,  He should avoid artificiality 
in all his doings. He acts naturally and from inwar d conviction.  –H, 25-3-39, 64.  
 
(E) RESPECTING THE ADVERSARY  
562. Whilst we may attack measures and systems. We may not, must not, 
attack men. Imperfect ourselves, we must be tender towards others and be 
slow to impute motives. –YI, 25-5-21, 164.  
 
563. Immediately we begin to think of things as our  opponents think of them we 
shall be able to do them full justice. I know that this requires a detached state Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 266  of mind, and it is a state very difficult to reach.  Nevertheless for a satyagrahi it 
is absolutely essential. Three-fourths of the miser ies and misunderstandings of 
the world will disappear, if we step into the shoes  of our adversaries and 
understand their standpoint. We will then agree wit h our adversaries quickly or 
think of them charitably. In our case there is no q uestion of our agreeing with 
them quickly as our ideals are radically different.  But we may be charitable to 
them and believe that they actually mean what they say. They do not want to 
open the roads to the unapproachable.* Now whether it is their self-interest or 
ignorance that tells them to say so, we really beli eve that it is wrong of them 
to say so. Our business therefore is toshow them th at they are in the wrong and 
we should do so by our suffering. I have found that  mere appeal to reason does 
not answer where prejudices are age long and based on supposed religious 
authority. Reason has to be strengthened by sufferi ng and suffering opens the 
eyes of understanding. Therefore there must be no t race of compulsion in our 
acts. We must not be impatient, and we must have an  undying faith in the 
means we are adopting. —YI, 19-3-25, 95.  
 
564. Our motto must ever be conversion by gently pe rsuasion and a constant 
appeal to the head and the heart. We must therefore  be ever courteous and 
patient with those who do not see eye to eye with u s. We must resolutely 
refuse to consider our opponents as enemies of the country. –YI ,29-9-21, 306.  
 
565. The end of non-violent  ‘war’ is always an agreement, never dictation, 
much less humiliation of the opponent. –H, 23-3-40, 53.  
 
566. A satyagrahi bids goodbye to fear. He is there fore never afraid to trusting 
the opponent. Even if the opponent plays him false twenty times, the 
satyagrahi is ready to trust him t6he twenty-first time, for an  implicit trust in 
human nature is the very essence of his creed. –SA, 246.  
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 267  (F) NON-CO-OPERATING, NOT WITH A PART, BUT WITH THE  WHOLE SYSTEM  
567. I was faced with the very question as the auth or of the Non-co-operation 
Movement. I said to myself, there is no State run b y Nero or Mussolini which has 
not good points about it, but we have to reject the  whole, once we decide to 
non-co-operate with the system. ‘There are in our c ountry grand public roads, 
and palatial educational institutions,’ said I to m yself, ‘but they are part of a 
system which crushes the nation. I should not have anything to do with them. 
They are like the fabled snake with a brilliant jew el on its head, but which has 
fangs full of poison.’ So I came to the conclusion that the British rule in India 
had crushed the spirit of the nation and stunted it s growth, and so I decided to 
deny myself all the privileges, services, courts, t itles. The policy would vary 
with different countries but sacrifice and self-den ial are the essential points. 
What Einstein has said would occur only once a year  and only with a very few 
people.* But I suggest as your first duty to non-co -operate with the State. 
Non-co-operation in military services and service i n non-military matters are 
not compatible. ‘Definitely’ military service is an  ill-chosen word. You are all 
the while giving military service by deputy because  you are supporting a State 
which is based on military service. You will have t o extend the scope of non-co-
operation (from mere refusal to serve in war) to (t he non-payment of) your 
taxes.  
–YI, 312-12-31, 426, 427.  
 
568. Why should not British pacifists stand aside a nd remodel their life in its 
entirety? They might be unable to bring about peace  outright, but they would 
lay a solid foundation for it and give the surest t est of their faith. When, in the 
face of an upheaval such as we are witnessing, ther e are only a few individuals 
of immovable faith, they have to live up to their f aith even though they may 
produce no visible effect on the course of events. They should believe that 
their action will produce tangible results in due c ourse. Their staunchness is 
bound to attract scepties. I would also suggest tha t individuals like Dr. Maude 
Royden are not mere camp followers. They are leader s. Therefore, they have to Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 268  live their lives in strict accord with the Sermon o n the Mount and they will find 
immediately that there is much to give up and much remodel. The greatest 
thing that they have to deny them-selves is the fru it of imperialism.  
–H, 15-3-42, 73.  
 
Non-co-operation, Progressive in Character  
569. The power of suggestion is such, that a man af t last becomes what he 
believes himself to be. If we are satyagraha his an d offer satyagraha believing 
ourselves to be strong, two clear consequences resu lt from it. Fostering the 
idea of strength, we grow stronger and stronger eve ry day. With the increase in 
our strength our satyagraha to becomes more effecti ve and we would never be 
casting about for an opportunity to give it up. –SA, 178.  
 
570. The clearest possible definition of the goal a nd its Appreciation would fail 
to take us there, if we do not know and utilize the  means of achieving it. I 
have, therefore, concerned myself principally with the conservation of the 
means and their progressive use. –ABP, 17-9-33.  
 
571. My experience has taught me that a law of prog ression applies to every 
righteous struggle. But in the case of satyagraha t he law amounts to an axiom. 
As a satyagraha struggle progresses onward, many an other element helps to 
swell its current and there is a constant growth in  the results to which it leads. 
This is really inevitable, and is bound up with the  first principles of satyagraha. 
For in satyagraha the minimum is also the maximum, and as it is the irreducible 
minimum, there is no question of retreat, and the o nly movement possible is an 
advance. In other struggles, even when they are rig hteous, the demand is first 
pitched a little higher so as to admit of future re duction, and hence the law of 
progression does not apply to all of them without e xception. –SA, 319.  
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 269  Basic Assumptions for Successful Satyagraha  
572. 1. There must be common honesty among satyagra his.  
2. They must render heart discipline to their comma nder. There should be no 
mental reservation.  
3. They must be prepared to lose all, not merely th eir personal liberty, not 
merely their possessions, land, cash, etc. but also  the liberty and possessions of 
their families, and they must be ready cheerfully t o face bullets, bayonets, or 
even slow death by torture. 
4. They must not be violent in thought, word or dee d towards the ‘enemy’ or 
among themselves.  
–H, 22-10-38, 298.  
 
573. Those only can take up civil disobedience, who  believes in willing 
obedience even to irksome laws imposed by the State  so long as they do not 
hurt their conscience or religion, and are prepared  equally willingly to suffer 
the penalty of civil disobedience. Disobedience to be civil has to be absolutely 
non-  violent, the underlying principle being the winning  over of the opponent 
by suffering, i.e. love. –YI, 3-  11-21, 346.  
 
Cultivation of the Democratic spirit  
Essential for the Satyagrahi  
574. A born democrat is a born disciplinarian. Demo cracy comes naturally to 
him who is habituated normally to yield willing obe dience to all laws, human or 
divine. I claim to be a democrat both by instinct a nd training. Let those who 
are ambitious to serve democracy qualify themselves  by satisfying first this acid 
test of democracy. Moreover, a democrat must be utt erly selfless. He must 
think and dream not in terms of self or party but o nly of democracy. Only then 
does he acquire the right of civil disobedience. I do not want anybody to give 
up his convictions or to suppress himself. I do not  believe that a healthy and 
honest difference of opinion will injure our cause.  But opportunism, 
camouflage or patched up compromises certainly will . If you must dissent, you Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 270  should take care that your opinions voice your inne rmost convictions and are 
not intended merely as a convenient party cry. 
I value individual freedom but you must not forget that man is essentially a 
social being. He has risen to his present status by  learning to adjust his 
individualism to the requirements of social progres s. Unrestricted individualism 
is the law of the beast of the jungle. We have lear nt to strike the mean 
between individual freedom and social restraint. Wi lling submission to social 
restraint for the sake of the wellbeing of the whol e society, enriches both the 
individual and the society of which one is a member . –H, 27-5-39, 136, 144.  
 
The Right of Civil Disobedience  
575. Most people do not understand the complicated machinery of the 
government. They do not realize that every citizen silently but none the less 
certainly sustains the government of the day in way s of which he has no 
knowledge. Every citizen therefore renders himself responsible for every act of 
his government. And it is quite proper to support i t so long as the actions of the 
government are bearable. But when they hurt him and  his nation, it becomes 
his duty to withdraw his support. 
–YI, 28-7-20, Tagore, 242.  
 
576. It is no part of a citizen’s duty to pay blind  obedience to the laws imposed 
on him. And if my countrymen believe in God and the  existence of the soul, 
then, while they may admit that their bodies belong  to the State to be 
imprisoned and deported, their minds, their wills, and their souls must ever 
remain free like the birds of the air, and are bey9 nd the reach of the swiftest 
arrow. –Nat, 306.  
 
577. It is true that in the vast majority of cases,  it is the duty of a subject to 
submit to wrongs on failure of the usual procedure,  so long as they do not 
affect his vital being. But every nation and every individual have the right, and Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 271  it is their duty, to rise against an intolerable wr ong. I do not believe in armed 
rising. They are a remedy worse than the disease so ught to be cured. They are 
a token of the spirit of revenge and impatience and  anger. The method of 
violence cannot do good in the long run. Witness th e effect of the armed rising 
of the Allied powers against Germany. Have they not  become even like the 
Germans, as the latter have been depicted to us by them? 
We have a better method. Unlike that of violence it  certainly involves the 
exercise of restraint and patience; but it requires  also resoluteness of will. This 
method is to refuse to be party to the wrong. No ty rant has ever yet succeeded 
in his purpose without carrying the victim with him , it may be, as it often is, by 
force. Most people choose rather to yield to the wi ll of the tyrant than to suffer 
for the consequence of resistance. Hence does terro rism form part of the stock-
in-trade of the tyrant. But we have instances in hi story where terrorism has 
failed to impose the terrorist’s will upon his vict im. India has choice before her 
now. If then the acts of the Punjab Government be a n insufferable wrong, if 
the report of Lord Hunter’s Committee and the two d ispatches be a greater 
wrong reason of their grievous condonation of these  acts, it is clear that we 
must refuse to submit to this official violence. Ap peal to the Parliament by all 
means, if necessary, but if the Parliament fails us  and if we are worthy to call 
ourselves a nation, we must refuse to uphold the Go vernment by withdrawing 
co-operation from it. –YI,9-6-20, Tagore, 80.  
 
578. Complete civil disobedience is rebellion witho ut the element of violence in 
it. An out-and-out civil resister simply ignores th e authority of the State. He 
becomes an outlaw claiming to disregard every unmor al State law. Thus, for 
instance, he may refuse to pay taxes, he may refuse  to recognize the authority 
of the State in his daily intercourse. He may refus e to obey the law of trespass 
and claim to enter military barracks in order to sp eak to the soldiers, he may 
refuse to submit to limitations upon the manner of picketing and may picket 
within the proscribed area. In doing al this he nev er uses force and never resists 
force when it is used against him. In fact, he invi tes imprisonment and other 
uses of force against himself. This he does because  and when he finds the Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 272  bodily freedom he seemingly enjoys to be an intoler able burden. He argues to 
himself, that a State allows persona freedom only i n so far as the citizen 
submits to its regulations. Submission to the state  law is the price a citizen 
pays for his personal liberty. Submission, therefor e, to a State law wholly or 
largely unjust is an immoral barter for liberty. A citizen who thus realizes the 
evil nature of a State is not satisfied to live on its sufferance, and therefore 
appears to the others who do not share his belief t o be a nuisance to society 
whilst he is endeavouring to compel the State, with out committing a moral 
breach, to arrest him. Thus considered, civil resis tance is a most powerful 
expression of a soul’s anguish and an eloquent prot est against the continuance 
of an evil State. Is not this the story of all refo rm? Have not reformers, much to 
the disgust of their fellows, discarded even innoce nt symbols associated with an 
evil practice? 
When a body of men disowns the State under which th ey have hitherto lived, 
they nearly establish their own government. I say n early, for they do not go to 
the point of using force when they are resisted by the State. Their ‘business’, 
as of the individual, is to be locked up or shot by  the State, unless it recognizes 
their separate existence, in other words bows to th eir will. Thus three thousand 
Indians in South Africa after due notice to the Gov ernment of the Transvaal 
crossed the Transvaal border in 1914 in defiance of  the Transvaal Immigration 
Law and compelled Government to arrest them. When i t failed to provoke them 
to violence or to coerce them into submission, it y ielded to their demand. A 
body of civil resisters is, therefore, like an army  subject to all the discipline of 
a soldier, only harder because of want of excitemen t of an ordinary soldier’s 
life. And as a civil resistance army is or ought to  be free from passion because 
free from the spirit of retaliation, it requires th e fewest number of soldiers. 
Indeed one PERFECT civil resister is enough to win the battle of Right against 
Wrong. - YI,10-11-21, 362.  
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 273  Respecting Differences of Opinion among Co-workers  
579. It is a bad habit to say that another man’s th oughts are bad and ours only 
are good and that those holding different views fro m ours are the enemies of 
the country. –IHR, 4  
 
580. Let us honour our opponents for the same hones ty of purpose and patriotic 
motives that we claim for ourselves. –YI, 4-6-25, 193.  
 
581. It is true that I have often been let down. Ma ny have deceived me and 
many have been found wanting. But I do not repent o f my association with 
them. For I know how to non-co-operate, as I know h ow to co-operate. The 
most practical, the most dignified way of going on in the world is to take 
people at their word, when you have no positive rea son to the contrary –YI, 26-
12-24, 430.  
 
No Compulsion in Satyagraha  
582. Our tyranny, if we impose our will on others, will be infinitely worse than 
that of the handful of Englishmen who form the bure aucracy. Theirs is a 
terrorism imposed by a minority struggling to exist  in the midst of opposition. 
Ours will be a terrorism imposed by a majority and therefore worse and really 
more godless than the first. We must therefore elim inate compulsion in any 
shape from our struggle. If we are only a handful h olding freely the doctrine of 
non-co-operation, we may have to die in the attempt  to convert others to our 
view, but we shall have truly defended and represen ted our cause. If however 
we enlist under our banner men by force, we shall b e denying our cause and 
God, and if we seem to succeed for the moment, we s hall have succeeded in 
establishing a worse terror. 
We shall also retard our cause if we suppress opini on by intolerance. For then 
we shall never know who is with us and who is again st us. The indispensable 
condition therefore of success is that we encourage  the greatest freedom of Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 274  opinion. It is the least we can learn from the pres ent ‘masters’. Their Penal 
Code contains drastic punishments for holding opini ons they do not like. And 
they have arrested some of the noblest of our count rymen for expression of 
their opinion. Our non-co-operation is a defiantly open protest against that 
system. We may not in the very act of fighting the restraint on opinion be guilty 
ourselves of  imposing it on others.  –YI, 27-10-21, 342.  
 
Satyagraha and the Masses  
583. I do not rely merely upon the lawyer class or highly educated men to 
enable the Non-co-operation Committee to carry out all the stages of non-co-
operation. My hope lies with the masses son far as the later stages of non-co-
operation are concerned. –YI, 18-8-20, Tagore, 370.  
 
584. His Excellency has been misled by his advisers  in believing that non-co-
operationists have only now turned their attention to the masses. Indeed, they 
are our sheet anchor. But we are not going to tampe r with them. We shall 
continue patiently to educate them politically till  they are ready for safe 
action. There need be no mistake about our goal. As  soon as we feel reasonably 
confident of nonviolence continuing among them in s pite of provoking 
executions, we shall certainly call upon the sepoy to lay down his arms and the 
peasantry to suspend payment of taxes. We are hopin g that that time may 
never be reached. We shall leave no stone unturned to avoid such a serious 
step. But we will not flinch when the moment has co me and the need has 
arisen.  –YI, 9-3-21, 76.  
 
Can the Masses Remain Non-violent?  
585. Q. How do you think that the masses can practi ce non-violence, when we 
know that they are all prone to anger, hate, ill-wi ll? They are known to fight for 
the most trivial things. 
A. They are, and yet I think they can practice non- violence for the common 
good. Do you think that the thousands of women that  collected contraband salt Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 275  had ill-will against anyone? They knew that the Con gress or Gandhi had asked 
them to do certain things, and they did those thing s in faith and hope. To my 
mind the most perfect demonstration of nonviolence was in Champaran. Did 
the thousands of ryots who rose up in revolt agains t the agrarian evils harbour 
the least ill-will against the Government or the pl anters? Their belief in 
nonviolence was unintelligent, even as the belief i n the earth being round with 
many is unintelligent. But their belief in their le aders was genuine, and that 
was enough. With those who lead it is another matte r. Their belief has got to 
be intelligent, and they have to live up to all the  implications of the belief. 
Q. But then are not the masses the world over like that? 
A. They are not, for others have not that backgroun d of non-violence. 
Q. But if there was non-violence ingrained in our m asses, how should they have 
come to this state of slavery? 
A. There indeed is what I flatter myself is going t o be my contribution. I want 
that non-violence of the weak to become non-violenc e of the brave. It may be 
a dream, but I have to strive for its realization. 
–H, 4-11-39, 332.  
 
586.Q. Believing that mass revolution is the only m eans to achieve freedom, do 
you believe it a practical proposition that the mas s will and can remain 
absolutely non-violent in thought and action in spi te of all possible provocations 
in the course of such revolution? It may be possibl e for an individual to attain 
that standard butt do you think that it is possible  for the masses to attain that 
standard of non-violence in action? 
A. This is a strange question coming from you at th is time of the day, for the 
entire course of our non-violent fight bears testim ony to the fact that wherever 
violence has broken out it has broken out not on th e part of the masses but, if I 
may put it by the intellectuals. Even in violence f ighting though the individual 
sometimes lets himself go and forgets everything, t he mass of the fighting force 
dares not and does not. It resorts to arms only und er orders and has to suspend Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 276  fire in response to orders, no matter how great the  individual impulse to 
revenge or retaliation might be. There is no prima facie reason why under 
nonviolence the mass, if disciplined, should be inc apable of showing the 
discipline which in organized warfare a fighting fo rce normally does. Besides, a 
nonviolent general has this special advantage: he d oes not require thousands of 
leaders to successfully carry on his fight. The non -violent message does not 
require so many for transmission. The example of a few true men or women if 
they have fully imbibed the spirit of non-violence is bound to infect the whole 
mass in the end. This was just what I experienced i n the beginning of the 
movement. I found that people actually believed tha t in my heart of hearts I 
favoured violence even when I preached non-violence . That was the way they 
had been trained to read and interpret the utteranc es of the leaders. But when 
they realized that I meant what I said, they did ob serve non-violence indeed 
under the most trying circumstances. There has been  no repetition of Chauri 
Chaura. As for non-violence in thought God alone is  judge. But this much is 
certain that non-violence in action cannot be susta ined unless it goes hand in 
hand with non-violence in thought. –ABP, 3-8-34.  
 
Caution in Mass-movements  
587. The greatest care is necessary at the present moment when violence, not 
non-violence, seems to pervade the air. Indeed it m ay be reasonably argued 
that in an atmosphere surcharged with violence ther e is no scope for non-
violence. This argument may be carried too far, so far that nonviolence may be 
made wholly ineffective; whereas it is claimed to b e the only effective force 
for counteracting violence no matter how terrible. But when violence pervades 
the air the expression of non-violence may not be t hrough civil disobedience. 
And if it is to be civil disobedience, it must be h edged in by adequate 
restrictions. In satyagraha, it is never the number s that count; it is always the 
quality, more so when the forces of violence are up permost. –H, 25-3-39, 64.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 277  588. Since satyagraha is one of the most powerful m ethods of direct action, a 
satyagrahi exhausts all other means before he resor ts to satyagraha. He will 
therefore constantly and continually approach the c onstituted authority, he 
will appeal to public opinion, educate public opini on, state his case calmly and 
coolly before everybody, who wants to listen to him , and only after he has 
exhausted all these avenues will he resort to satya graha. But when he has 
found the impelling call of the inner voice within him and launches out upon 
satyagraha he has burnt his boats and there is no r eceding. –YI, 20-10-27, 353.  
 
589. I am not going to take a single step in non-co -operation unless I am 
satisfied that the country is ready for that step. 
–YI, 18-8-20, Tagore, 369.  
 
590. A full grasp of the conditions of successful c ivil resistance is necessary at 
least on the part of the representatives of the peo ple before we can launch out 
upon an enterprise of such magnitude. The quickest remedies are always 
fraught with the greatest danger and require the ut most skill in handling 
them. –YI, 4-8-21, 244.  
 
591. So far as response is concerned, I agree with the editor that the quickest 
and the largest response is to be expected in the m atter of suspension of 
payment of taxes, but as I have said, so long as th e masses are not educated to 
appreciate the value of non-violence even whilst th eir holdings are being sold, 
so long must it be difficult to take up the last st age in any appreciable extent.  
–YI, 18-8-20, Tagore, 328.  
 
592. We must not resort to non-payment because of t he possibility f a ready 
response. The readiness is a fatal temptation, Such  non-payment will not be 
civil or non-violent, but it will be criminal and f raught with the greatest 
possibility of violence. Not until peasantry is tra ined to understand the reason Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 278  and the reason and the virtue of civil non-payment and is prepared to look with 
calm resignation upon the confiscation of their hol dings and the forced sale of 
their cattle and other belongings, may they be advi sed to withhold payment of 
taxes. –YI, 26-1-22, 57.  
 
593. In the midst of an enervating atmosphere such as ours, the duty before 
non-co-operators is clear. They must keep exemplary  patience. They must not 
be goaded into precipitate action. They must refuse  battle where they are not 
ready. –YI, 26-1-22, 56.  
 
594. Suffering has its well-defined limits. Sufferi ng can be both wise and 
unwise, and when the limit is reached, to prolong i t would be not unwise but 
the height of folly. –YI, 12-3-31, 30.  
 
595. (But) There is no time limit for a satyagrahi,  nor is there a limit to his 
capacity for suffering. Hence there is no such thin g as defeat in satyagraha. YI, 
19-2-25, 61.  
 
596. Repression does good only to those who are pre pared for it. 
–YI, 9-4-25, 124  
 
597. A satyagrahi goes to prison, not to embarrass the authorities but to 
convert them by demonstrating to them his innocence , You should realize that 
unless you have developed the moral fitness to go t o prison, which the law of 
satyagraha demands, your jail-going will be useless  and will bring you nothing 
but disappointment in the end. –H, 5-11-38, 315.  
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 279  Instruction to Satyagrahis  
598. It is the essence of satyagraha that those who  are suffering should alone 
offer it. Cases can be conceived when what may be t ermed sympathetic 
satyagraha may be legitimately applied. The idea un derlying satyagraha is to 
convert the wrongdoer, to awaken the sense of justi ce in him, to show him also 
that without the co-operation, direct or indirect, of the wronged the 
wrongdoer cannot do the wrong intended by him. If t he people in either case 
are not ready to suffer for their causes, no outsid e help in the shape of 
satyagraha can possibly bring true deliverance. 
– H, 10-12-38, 369.  
 
599. No organization can be run with success if its  members, especially its 
officers, refuse to carry out its policy and hold o n to it in spite of opposition to 
it. For winning Swaraj one requires iron discipline . Let this friend and those 
who think with him realize that we are engaged in t he very difficult and 
delicate task of wresting authority from an organiz ation whose members are 
able, industrious, intelligent, brave and above all  trained in the habits of exact 
discipline. –YI, 28-8-24, 285.  
 
600. I regard you as soldiers in this campaign. It is not possible to reason out 
things for ourselves. You have come to the Ashram b ecause you have faith in 
the management. That does not mean faith in me. For  I am not the manager. I 
am directing the movement so far as the ideals and general direction are 
concerned. Your faith therefore must be in those wh o are managers for the 
time being. The choice before coming to the Ashram was yours. But having 
made your choice and come to the Ashram it is not f or you to reason why. If we 
are to become a powerful nation you must obey all d irections that may be given 
from time to time. This is the only way in which ei ther political or religious life 
can be built up. You must have determined for yours elves certain principles and 
you must have joined the struggle in obedience to t hese principles. Those who 
remain in the Ashram are taking as much part in the  struggle as those who go Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 280  and offer satyagraha at the barricades. Every piece  of work in connection with 
the struggle is just as important any other piece, and therefore the work of 
sanitation in the Ashram is just as important as sp inning away at the 
barricades. And if in this place the work of cleani ng the closets and compound 
is more distasteful than spinning, it should be con sidered far more important 
and profitable. Not a single minute should be waste d in idle conversation, but 
we must be absorbed in the work before us and if ev ery one of us work in that 
spirit you will see that there is pleasure I work i tself. Every bit of property, 
anything in the Ashram should be regarded by you as  your own property and not 
property that can be wasted and similarly a minute of your time. It is not ours. 
It belongs to the nation and we are trustees for th e use of it.* - YI, I9-3-25, 95.  
 
601. I admit that there is ‘a doubtful proportion o f full believers’ in my ‘theory 
of non-violence’. But it should not be forgotten th at I have also said that for my 
movement I do not at all need believers in the theo ry of non-violence, full or 
imperfect. It is enough if people carry out the rul es of non-violent action. 
—GC, 169.  
 
602. Freedom of four hundred million people through  purely non-violent effort 
is not to be gained without learning the virtue of iron discipline-not imposed 
from without, but sprung naturally from within. Wit hout the requisite discipline 
non-violence can only be a veneer. – HS, 6-8-44.  
 
Publicity in Satyagraha  
603. I believe that a struggle which chiefly relies  upon internal strength cannot 
be wholly carried on without a newspaper, and it is  also my experience that we 
could not perhaps have educated the local Indian co mmunity, nor kept Indians 
all over the world in touch with the course of even ts in south Africa in any 
other way, with the same ease and success as throug h Indian Opinion, which 
therefore was certainly a most useful and potent we apon in our struggle. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 281  As the community was transformed in course of and a s a result of the struggle, 
so was Indian Opinion. 
– SA, 221.  
 
604. Any day the Government may prohibit the use of  the telegraph, the post, 
the rail, and the press by non-co-operationists. Wi ll it stop the struggle for a 
single minute? I hope not. It has been conceived so  as to be independent of 
Government sufferance. For it depends for success u pon its universality. Non-
co-operation by stray individuals is, no doubt, pos sible and conceivable. It has 
then to take a somewhat different shape. But when t he spirit of it pervades the 
whole of India, we need not feel dependent upon the  telegraph, the post, the 
rail or the press. Our work can be done quit effect ively without the aid of these 
agencies. We can send messages from mouth to with e lectric speed. The 
railway train quickly transfers leaders from place to place, but it quickly 
transfers thousands of curiosity-mongers who serve no purpose and cause 
national waste. I can contemplate with perfect calm ness the prohibition of the 
use of the rail by all except those who sign the cr eed of co-operation with the 
Govern long as we should have an automatic census o f co-operators. So long as 
we have pen and paper, or even slate and pencil, we  need not despair of 
transmitting our thoughts in writhing, if we have e nough volunteers. I have 
often been told that the independence of our printi ng press is a great 
desideratum. I admit that it is a convenience but I  was able to show during the 
satyagraha week in the April of 1919 that it was po ssible to issue a written 
news-paper. Given a sufficient number of volunteer writers, we can multiply 
copies indefinitely. I can foresee many advantages in non-co-operationists 
being confined to their pens only. —YI, 9-3-2I, 73  . 
 
The Task of Leadership  
605. A satyagraha struggle is impossible without ca pital in the shape of 
character. –SA, 2I8.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 282  606. The leaders of every clean movement are bound to see that they admit 
only clean fighters to it. –SA, 218.  
 
607. Those who claim to lead the masses must resolu tely refuse to be led by 
them, if we want to avoid mob law and desire ordere d progress for the country. 
I believe that mere protestation of one’s opinion a nd surrender to the mass 
opinion is not only not enough, but in matters of v ital importance, leaders must 
act contrary to the mass of opinion if it does not commend itself to their 
reason. —YI, 14-7-20.  
 
608. A leader is useless when he acts against the p rompting of his own 
conscience, surrounded as he must be by people hold ing all kinds of views. He 
will drift like an anchorless ship, if he has not t he inner voice to hold him firm 
and guide him. —YI, 23-2-22  
 
609. An able general always gives battle in his own  time on the ground of his 
choice. He always retains the initiative in these r espects and never allows it to 
pass into the hands of the enemy. 
In a satyagraha campaign the mode of fight and the choice of tactics, e.g. 
whether to advance or retreat, offer civil resistan ce or organize nonviolent 
strength through constructive work and purely selfl ess humanitarian service are 
determined according to the exigencies of the situa tion. A satyagrahi must 
carry out what-ever plan is laid out for him with a  cool determination giving 
way to neither excitement nor depression. –H, 27-5-9, I43  
 
610. A wise general does not wait till he is actual ly routed; he withdraws in 
time in an orderly manner from a position which he knows he would not be able 
to hold. —H, 22-I0-38, 304.  
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 283  Fighting without a Captain  
611. The questioners betray their unbelief in, if n ot their unfitness for, Swaraj 
by putting the question. What will happen when all the leaders die? Our fitness 
for Swaraj can only be demonstrated by our capacity  to continue our work in 
spite of the withdrawal of leaders by death or impr isonment. Surely the 
memory of imprisonment should act as a spur to grea ter and more disciplined 
action. We must be able to stand on our own legs wi thout support even as we 
breathe naturally and without artificial aid. –YI, 20-I0-2I, 330.  
 
612. There should be no demoralization when the lea ders are gone, and there 
should be no surrender in the face of fire. –YI , 3-II-2I,349.  
 
613. Strength of number is the delight of the timid . The valiant of spirit glory in 
fighting alone. And you are all here to cultivate t hat valour of the spirit. Be you 
one or many, this valour is the only valour, all el se is false. And the valour of 
the spirit cannot be achieved without sacrifice, de termination, faith and 
humility. — YI, I7-6-26, 2I7.  
 
614. Discipline has a place in non-violent strategy , but much more is required. 
In a satyagraha army everybody is a soldier and a s ervant. But at a pinch every 
satyagrahi soldier has also to be his own general a nd leader. Mere discipline 
cannot make for leadership. The latter calls for fa ith and vision. 
—H, 28-7-40, 227.  
 
615. Where self-reliance is the order of the day, w here no one has to look 
expectantly at another, where all are leaders and a ll are followers, the death 
of a fighter, however eminent, makes not for slackn ess but on the other hand 
intensifies the struggle.—  SA, 288.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 284  616. My confidences unshaken. If a single satyagrah i holds out to the end, 
victory is absolutely certain.—  SA, 5.  
 
The Campaign of Satyagraha  
617. Having fixed one’s minimum from which one may not recede, one may 
stoop to conquer the whole world.— YI, 2-4-25, II5  
 
618. In a pure fight, the fighters would never go b eyond the objective when the 
fight began even if they received an accession to t heir strength in course of the 
fighting and, on the other hand, they could not giv e up their objective if they 
found their strength dwindling away.— SA, 4I2.  
 
619. It is my conviction that we are in sight of th e promised land, but the 
danger is the greatest when victory seems the neare st. No victory worth the 
name has ever been won without a final effort, more  serious than all the 
preceding ones. God’s last test is ever the most di fficult. Satan’s last 
temptation is ever the most seductive. We must stan d God’s last test and resist 
Satan’s last temptation, if we would be free. 
Non-violence is the most vital and integral part of  non-co-operation. We may 
fail in everything else and still continue our batt le if were main non-violent. 
But we capitulate miserably if we fail in adhering to non-violence. But we 
capitulate miserably if we fail in adhering to non- violence. Let it be 
remembered that violence is the keystone of the Gov ernment edifice. Since 
violence is its sheet-anchor and its final refuge, it has rendered itself almost 
immune from violence on our side by having prepared  itself to frustrate all 
violent effort by the people. We therefore cooperat e with the Government in 
the most active manner when we resort to violence. Any violence on our part 
must be a token of our stupidity, ignorance and imp otent rage. To exercise 
restraint under the gravest provocation is the true st mark of soldier ship. The 
veriest tyro in the art of war knows, that he must avoid the ambushes of his 
adversary. And every provocation is a dangerous amb ush into which we must Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 285  resolutely refuse to walk. –YI, 28-7-21,237.  
 
Five Stages of a Movement  
620.Every good movement passes through five stages,  indifference, ridicule, 
abuse, repression, and respect. We had in differenc e for a few months. Then 
the Viceroy graciously laughed at it. Abuse, includ ing misrepresentation, has 
been the order of the day. The Provincial Governors  and the anti-non-co-
operation Press have heaped as much abuse upon the Movement as they have 
been able to. Now comes repression, at present yet in its fairly mild form. 
Every movement that survives repression, mild or se vere, invariably commands 
respect which is another name for success. This rep ression, if we are true, may 
be treated as a sure sign of the approaching victor y. But, if we are true, we 
shall neither be cowed down nor angrily retaliate a nd be violent. Violence is 
suicide. Let us recognize that power dies hard, and  that it is but natural for the 
Government to make a final effort for life even tho ugh it is through repression. 
Complete self-restraint at the present critical mom ent is the speediest way to 
success. – YI, 9-3-2I, 74.  
 
A Warning to Satyagrahi  
621. Indiscriminate resistance to authority must le ad to lawlessness, unbridled 
license and consequent self-destruction.— YI,  2-4-3I, 58.  
 
622. Non-co-operation, when its limitations are not  recognized becomes a 
license instead of being a duty and therefore becom es a crime. 
—YI,  29-I2-2I, 434.  
 
623. Some students have revived the ancient form of  barbarity in the form of 
‘sitting dharma’. I call it ‘barbarity for it is a crude way of using coercion. It is 
also cowardly because one who’ sits dhurna’ knows t hat he is not going to be 
trampled over. It is difficult to call the practice  violence, but it is certainly Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 286  worse. If we fight our opponent, we at least him to  return the blow. But when 
we challenge him to walk over us, we, knowing that he will not, place him in a 
most awkward and humiliating position. I know that the overzealous students 
who ‘sat dhurna’ never thought of the barbarity of the deed. But one, who 
expected to follow the voice of conscience and stan d even single-handed in the 
face of odds, cannot afford to be thoughtless. Non- co-operation, if it fails, will 
fail only through internal weakness. There is no su ch thing as defeat in non-co-
operation. It never fails. Its so-called representa tives may so badly represent 
their cause that it may appear to the spectators to  have failed. Let non-co-
operationists therefore beware of everything they d o. There must be no 
impatience, no barbarity, no insolence, no undue pr essure. If we want to 
cultivate a true spirit of democracy, we cannot aff ord to be 
intolerant. Intolerance betrays want of faith in on e’s cause.— YI, 2-2-2I, 33.  
 
In the midst of violence  
624. A call may come which one dare not neglect, co st what it may. I can 
clearly see the time coming to me when I must refus e obedience to every single 
State-made law, even though there may be a certaint y of bloodshed. When 
neglect of the call means a denial of God, civil di sobedience becomes a 
peremptory duty.— YI, 4-8-2I, 244. Cf. 555.  
 
625. Is it not intelligible why, notwithstanding it s undoubted risks, I am 
planning some sort of civil disobedience so as to g et together all the nonviolent 
forces and see if it stems the tide of onrushing vi olence? Hatred and ill-will 
there undoubtedly are in the air. They are bound so oner or later to burst into 
acts of fury if they are not anticipate in time. Th e conviction had deepened in 
me that civil disobedience alone can stop the burst ing of that fury. The nation 
wants to feel its power more even than to have inde pendence. Possession of 
such is independence. 
That civil disobedience may resolve itself into vio lent disobedience is, I am 
sorry to have to confess, not an unlikely event. Bu t know that it will not be the Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 287  cause of it. Violence is there already corroding th e whole body politic. Civil 
disobedience will be but a purifying process and ma y bring to the surface what 
is burrowing under and into the whole body. And Bri tish officials, if they 
choose, may regulate civil disobedience so as to st erilize the forces of violence. 
But whether they do so, or whether, as many of us f ear, they will, directly or 
indirectly, consciously or unconsciously, provoke v iolence, my course is clear. 
With the evidence I have of the condition of the co untry and with the 
unquenchable faith I have in the method of civil re sistance, I must not be 
deterred from the course the Inward Voice seems to be leading me to.— YI, 23-I-
30, 29.  
 
626. We must cease to dread violence, if we have th e country free. Can we not 
see that we are tightly pressed in the coil of viol ence? The peace we seem to 
prize is a mere makeshift, and it is bought with th e blood of the starving 
millions. If the critics could only realize the tor ture of their slow and lingering 
death brought about by forced starvation, they woul d risk anarchy and worse in 
order to end that agony. The agony will not end til l the existing rule of 
spoliation has ended.— YI, 23-I-30, 28.  
 
627. There is certainly danger of the Movement beco ming violent. But we may 
no more drop nonviolent non-co-operation because of  its dangers than we may 
stop freedom because of the dangers of its abuse. 
—YI, I5-I2-20, Tagore, 334.  
 
628. But nonviolence has to be patient. The Governm ent will spread out its red 
paws in what it will call self-defense; the party o f violence may commit the 
mistake of seeing its chance of coming out in the o pen. The non-violent party 
must then prove its creed by being ground to powder  between the two 
millstones.— YI, 6-2-30, 44.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 288  629. If I can have nothing to do with the organized  violence of the government, 
I can have less to do with the unorganized violence  of the people. I would 
prefer to be crushed between the two. — YI,  24-II-2I, 382.  
 
Why there Was Suspension after Chauri Chaura  
630. So long as the organizers strictly keep within  the limits which they have 
prescribed for themselves there is no cause for cal ling off satyagraha. The 
friend cites Chauri Chaura as an illustration. In d oing so, he has betrayed 
confusion of thought or ignorance of facts. The Bar doli Satyagraha was 
suspended because congress and Khilafat men were im plicated in the Chauri 
Chaura outrage.— YI , I9-6-24, 201.  
 
631. Whenever I have suspended civil disobedience, I have done so, not by 
reason of any outbreak of violence, but upon the di scovery of such violence as 
had been initiated or encouraged by Congressmen who  should have known 
better. Any outbreak of violence would not have bro ught about suspension, for 
instance, the Moplah outbreak. But Chauri Chaura di d, for the simple reason 
that persons connected with the Congress were invol ved in it.— YI, 29-I0-25, 
368.  
 
The Spirit of Self-surrender in Satyagraha  
632. That is the beauty of satyagraha. It comes up to oneself, one has not to go 
out in search for it. That is a virtue inherent in the principle itself. A dharma-
yuddha, in which there are no secrets to be guarded , no scope for cunning and 
no place for untruth, comes unsought; and a man of religion is every ready for 
it. A struggle which has to be previously planned i s not a righteous struggle. In 
a righteous struggle God Himself plans campaigns an d conducts battles. A 
dharma-yuddha can be waged only in the name of God,  and it is only in the 
name of God, and it is only when the satyagrahi fee ls quite helpless, is 
apparently on his last legs and finds utter darknes s all around him, that god 
comes to the rescue. God helps when one feels onese lf humbler than the very 
dust under one’s feet, Only to the weak and helples s is divine succour 
vouchsafed.— SA, 5.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 289   
16. THE LIFE OF THE SATYAGRAHI 
 
633. You will have to take up sackcloth and ashes. You cannot serve God and 
Mammon both.—Ceylon, 65.  
 
A Life of Truth  
634. A man is but the product of his thoughts; what  he thinks, he becomes.—
ER, 60.  
 
635. Every one of you should, from this very moment , consider yourself a free 
man or woman and even act as if you are free and no  longer under the heel of 
this Imperialism. This is no make-believe. You have  to cultivate the spirit of 
freedom before it comes physically. The chains of a  slave are broken the 
moment be considers himself a free man. He will the n tell his master: ‘I have 
been your slave all these days but I am no longer t hat now. You may kill me, 
but if you do not and if you release me from the bo ndage, I will ask for nothing 
more from you. For hence-forth instead of depending  upon you I shall depend 
upon God for food and clothing. God has given me th e urge for freedom and 
therefore. I deem myself to be a free man’s.—GC, 83 .  
 
On Faith and Activity  
636. You should be pioneers in presenting a living faith to the world, and not 
the dry bones of a traditional faith which the worl d will not grasp. –Ceylon, 
112. 
 
637.Every moment of our life should be filled with mental or physical activity, 
but that activity should be sattvika, tending to Tr uth. One, who has 
consecrated his life to service, cannot lie idle fo r a single moment. But one has Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 290  to learn to distinguish between good activity and e vil activity. This 
discrimination goes naturally with a single-minded devotion to service. 
–YM,39. 
 
638. I have not the shadow of a doubt that any man or woman can achieve what 
I have, if he or she would make the same effort and  cultivate the same hope 
and faith. Work without faith is like an attempt to  reach the bottom of a 
bottomless pit. –H, 3-10-36, 269. 
 
639. Faith can only grow from within; it cannot be acquired vicariously. Nothing 
great in this world was ever accomplished without a  living faith. 
–H, 9-10-36, 292. 
 
640. Faith can be developed. Only, the way it can b e developed and in which it 
works differs from that in the case of violence. Yo u cannot develop violence 
through prayer. Faith, on the other hand, cannot be  developed except through 
prayer. Non-violence succeeds only when we have a l iving faith is God. –H, 28-
1-39, 443. cf. 31 ff. 
 
641. If we do not build the movement on the solid r ock of non-violence, it may 
any day tumble, like a pack of cards, with a whiff.  We cannot serve God and 
Mammon. –YI, 16-3-21, 82. 
 
642. It is poor faith that needs fair weather for s tanding firm. That alone is true 
faith that stands the foulest weather. –YI, 20-11-2 4, 383. 
 
643. In every great cause it is not the number of f ighters that counts but it is 
the quality of which they are made that becomes the  deciding factor. The 
greatest men of the world have always stood alone. Take the great prophets, Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 291  Zoroaster, Buddha, Jesus, Mohammed—they all stood a lone like many others 
whom I can name. But they had living faith in thems elves and their God, and 
believing as they did that God was on their side, t hey never felt lonely. –YI, 10-
10-29, 330. 
 
644. Meetings and group organizations are all right . They are of some help, but 
very little. They are like the scaffolding that an architect erects—a temporary 
and makeshift expedient. The thing that really matt ers is an invincible faith 
that cannot be quenched. –H, 28-1-39, 443.  
 
Thoroughness  
645. No matter how insignificant the thing you have  to do, do it as well as you 
can, give it as much of your care and attention as you would give to the thing 
you regard as most important, For it will be by tho se small things that you shall 
be judged. –H, 27-7-35, 191. 
 
646. In every branch of reform constant study givin g one a mastery over one’s 
subject is necessary. Ignorance is at the root of f ailures, partial or complete, of 
all reform movements whose merits are admitted. For  every project 
masquerading under the name of reform is not necess arily worthy of being 
so designated.–Y, 24-4-37,84.  
 
Punctuality and Order  
647. I have often expressed the opinion among frien ds that in the matter of 
capacity for detachment, Englishmen are far in adva nce of us. No matter how 
important national affairs may be, they will keep t heir meal hours and hours of 
recreation. They are not unnerved in the face of da ngers or impending 
calamity, This may be called working in the spirit of the Gita. Among the 
political workers in India there are very few who c ome up to the Englishman’s 
standard. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 292  This English detachment is worthy of emulation. Tha t it is used for the 
exploitation of the so-called uncivilized or semi-c ivilized races of the earth is 
another matter. It would be a distinct gain to the national cause if the leaders 
and workers strictly keep their hours. No man is ex pected to do more than he 
really can. If at the end of the day there is surpl us work left or he cannot get 
through it without missing a meal or encroaching up on the hours of sleep or 
recreation, there is mismanagement somewhere. I hav e no doubt that if we 
cultivate the habit of punctuality and acting accor ding to programme, the 
index of national efficiency will go up, our advanc e towards our goal will be 
rapid, and the workers will be healthier and longer  lived. –H, 24-9-38, 266.  
 
Fearlessness  
648. We often confuse spiritual knowledge with spir itual attainment. 
Spirituality is not a matter of knowing scriptures and engaging in philosophical 
discussions. It is a matter of heart culture, of im measurable strength. 
Fearlessness is the first requisite of spirituality . Cowards can never be moral. 
–YI, 13-10-21, 323. 
 
649. Fearlessness is indispensable for the growth o f the other noble qualities. 
How can one seek Truth, or cherish Love, without fe arlessness? As Preterm 
says, ‘The path of Hari (the Lord) is the path of t he brave, not of cowards.’ 
Hari here means Truth, and the brave are those arme d with fearlessness. –YM, 
40. 
 
650. The remedy against cowardice is not physical c ulture but the braving of 
dangers. So long as parents of the middle-class Hin dus, themselves timid, 
continue to transmit their timidity by keeping thei r grown-up children in 
cotton-wool, so long will there be the desire to sh un dangers and run no risks. 
They will have to dare to leave their children alon e, let them run risks and 
even at times get killed in so doing. The puniest i ndividual may have a stout 
heart. –YI, 29-5-24,177. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 293   
651. Swaraj won without sacrifice cannot last long.  I would therefore like our 
people to get ready to make the highest sacrifice t hat they are capable of. In 
true sacrifice al the suffering is on one side—one is required to master the art 
of getting killed without killing, of gaining life by losing it. May India live up to 
this mantra!—YI, 8-5-30, 161. 
 
652. They must be ready to face bullets without fli nching but also without 
lifting their little finger in so-called self-defen se. A satyagrahi abjures the right 
of self-defense. –H, 9-7-38, 173. 
 
653. Nothing better can happen to a satyagrahi than  meeting death all 
unsought in the very act of satyagraha, i.e. pursui ng Truth. –SA, 288. 
 
654. Let us all be brave enough to die the death of  a martyr, but let no one just 
for martyrdom.—YI, 13-1-27, 10. 
 
655. We are not to seek imprisonment out of bravado . The goal is the gateway 
to liberty and honour, when innocence finds itself in it. –YI, 1-6-21, 171.  
 
Humility  
656. A non-co-operator is nothing if he is not humb le. When self-satisfaction 
creeps over a man, he has ceased to grow and theref ore has become unfit for 
freedom. He who offers a little sacrifice from a lo wly and religious spirit 
quickly realizes the littleness of it. Once on the path of sacrifice, we find out 
the measure of our selfishness and must continually  wish to give more and not 
be satisfied till there is a complete self-surrende r. –YI, 29-9-21, 306. 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 294  657. The satyagrahis course is plain. He must stand  unmoved in the midst of al 
cross currents. He may not be impatient with blind orthodoxy, nor be irritated 
over the unbelief of the suppressed people. He must  know that his suffering 
will melt the stoniest heart of the stoniest fanati c and that it will also be a wall 
of protection for the wavering Panchama brother who  has been held under 
suppression for ages. He must know that relief will  come when there is least 
hope for it. For such is the way of the cruelly kin d Deity who insists upon 
testing His devotee through a fiery furnace and del ights in humbling him to the 
dust. –YI, 4-6-25, 189. 
 
658. If patience is worth anything, it must endure to the end of time. And a 
living faith will last in the midst of the blackest  storm. –YI, 17-6-26, 215. 
 
659. It is the duty of him who claims to serve huma nity not to be angry with 
those whom he is serving.–YI, 2-4-31, 54. 
 
660. It is of little moment when the goal is reache d so long as effort is not 
relaxed. –GC, 74.  
 
The Practice of an Ideal  
661. We need not be afraid of ideals or of reducing  them to practice even to 
the uttermost. –Nat, 355. 
 
662. We shall never achieve (our object) unless new  facts are made to suit the 
principle, instead of performing the impossible fea t of changing the principle to 
suit existing facts. –YI, 26-1-22, 62. 
 
663. No one need take fright at my observations, or  give up the effort in 
despair. The taking of a vow does not mean that we are be to observe it Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 295  completely from the very beginning; it does mean co nstant and honest effort in 
thought, word and deed with a view to its fulfillme nt. We must not practiced 
self-deception by resorting to some make-believe. – ym 25. 
 
664. Having ascertained the law of our being, we mu st set about reducing it to 
practice to the extent of our capacity and no furth er. That is the middle way. –
YI, 5-2-25, 48. 
 
665. Striving does not require any quality unattain able by the lowliest among 
us. For Satyagraha is an attribute of the spirit wi thin. It is latent in every one of 
us. –YI, 26-12-24, 429.  
 
Quality and Not Quantity  
666. The best and the most solid work were done in the wilderness of minority. 
–YI, 2-3-22, 135. 
 
667. Strength of numbers is the delight of the timi d. The valiant in spirit glory 
in fighting alone. And you are all here to cultivat e that valour of the spirit. Be 
you one or many, this valour is the only valour, al  else is false. 
–YI, 17-6-26, 217.  
 
What is True Victory?  
668. For a fighter, the fight itself is victory for  he takes delight in it alone. –SA, 
394. 
 
669. A satyagrahi, whether free or incarcerated is ever victorious. He is 
vanquished only when he forsakes truth and non-viol ence and thus turns a deaf 
ear to the Inner voice. If, therefore, there is suc h a thing as defeat for even a 
satyagrahi, he alone is the cause of it. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 296  670. Joy lies in the fight, in the attempt, in the suffering involved, not in the 
victory itself. For, victory is implied in such an attempt. 
–H, 23-12-39, 386.  
 
True Strength is Inward  
671.I believe that I have an unflinching faith in G od. For many years I have 
accorded intellectual assent to the proposition tha t death is only a big change 
in lie and nothing more, and should be welcome when ever it arrives. I have 
deliberately made a supreme attempt to cast out fro m my heart all fear 
whatsoever including the fear of death. Still I rem ember occasions inn my if 
when I have not rejoiced at the thought of approach ing death as one might 
rejoice at the prospect of meeting a long lost frie nd. Thus man often remains 
weak notwithstanding all his efforts to be strong, and knowledge which stops at 
the head and does not penetrate into the heart is o f but little use in the critical 
times of living experience. Then again the strength  of the spirit within mostly 
evaporates when a man gets and accepts support from  outside A satyagrahi 
must be always on his guard against such temptation s. –SA, 286.  
 
Recognize Your own Limitations  
672.I am conscious of my own limitations. That cons ciousness is my lonely 
strength. Whatever I mighty have been able to do in  my life has proceeded 
more than anything else out of the realization of m y own imitations. –YI, 13-11-
24, 378. 
 
673.There are many things to do. Let each one of us  choose our task and stick 
to it through thick and thin. Let us not think of t he vastness. But let us pick up 
that portion which we can handle best. 
–YI, 11-9-24, 298. cf. 400, 647, 664. 
 
674.No man is expected to do more than he really ca n. –H, 24-9-38, 266. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 297   
675.Everyone should learn how to measure his own we akness. He who, knowing 
his own weakness, imitates the strong, is bound to fail. Hence have I contended 
that everyone should construct his own restraints. –H, 27-7-47, 252.  
 
Know Thyself  
676.Our difficulties are of two kinds: those that a re imposed from without and 
those that are of our own creation. The later are f ar more dangerous, 
becausewe often hug them and are there-fore relucta nt to remove them. –YI, 
10-11-20, Tagore, 752. 
 
677.A knowledge of one as he is can always do good to the people, never any 
harm. –YI, 25-2-26, 78. 
 
678.Confession of error is like a broom that sweeps  away dirt and leaves the 
surface cleaner than before. It is millions times B etter to appear untrue before 
the world than to be untrue to ourselves. 
–YI,16-2-22, 102,103.  
 
Taking the Blame  
679. There is no discredit greater than the refusal  to acknowledge errors. 
–H, 8-10-38, 279. 
 
680.It is well to take the blame sometimes. –Nat, 3 26. 
 
681.I am used to misrepresentation all my life. It is the lot of every public 
worker. He has to have a tough hide. Life would be burdensome if every 
misrepresentation has to be answered and cleared. I t is a rule of life with me Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 298  never to explain misrepresentations except when the  cause required 
correction. This rule has saved much time and worry . –YI, 27-5-26, 193.  
 
Self-restraint  
682. Self-restraint never accrues to the faint-hear ted. It is the beautiful fruit of 
watchfulness and ceaseless effort is the form of pr ayer and fasting. –H, 10-4-37, 
68. 
 
683.Everyone must remember that his most secret tho ughts have an influence 
on himself as well as on others. He should, therefo re, practise self-control, so 
as to put all evil thoughts out of his mind, and gi ve room only for thoughts that 
are noble and great. He should keep his body as cle an and spotless as his mind.  
–ER, 59. 
 
684.Inhibitions imposed from without rarely succeed , but when they are self-
imposed they have a decidedly salutary effect. –Aut o, 398. Cf. 157.  
 
Rules of Self-restraint  
(A) WITH REGARD TO FOOD  
685.For the seeker who would live in fear of God, a nd who would see Him face 
to face, restraint in diet both as to quantity and quality is as essential as 
restraint in thought and speech. –Auto, 334. 
 
686.One should eat not in order to please the palat e but just to keep the body 
going. When each organ or sense sub serves the body  and through the body the 
soul, its specific relish disappears, and then alon e does it begin to function in 
the way nature intended it to do. 
Any number of experiments is too small and no sacri fice is too great for 
attaining this symphony with nature. –Auto, 392. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 299  (B) FASTING  
687. It is my firm, belief that the strength of the  soul grows in proportion as 
you subdue the flesh, --YI, 23-10-24, 354. 
 
688. My religion teaches me that whenever there is distress which one cannot 
remove, one must fast and pray. –YI, 25-9-24, 319.  
 
(C) CONTINENCE  
689.It is wrong to call me an ascetic. The ideals t hat regulate my life are 
presented for acceptance by mankind in general. I h ave arrived at them by 
gradual evolution. Every step was thought out, well -considered, and taken with 
the greatest deliberation. Both my continence and n on-violence were derived 
from personal experience and became necessary in re sponse to the calls of 
public duty, The isolated life I had to lead in Sou th Africa whether as a 
householder, legal practitioner, social reformer or  politician, required, for the 
due fulfillment of these duties, the strictest regu lation of sexual life and a rigid 
practice of non-violence and truth in human relatio ns, whether with my own 
countrymen or with the Europeans. I claim to be no more than an average man 
with less than average ability. Nor can I claim any  special merit for such non-
violence or continence as I have been able to reach  with laborious research. I 
have not the shadow of a doubt that any man or woma n can achieve what I 
have, if he or she would make the same effort and c ultivate the same hope and 
faith. –H, 3-10-36, 268. 
 
690.He who has realized the misery of mankind in al l its magnitude will never 
be stirred by passion. –YI, 29-4-26, 157. 
 
691.Realization of God is impossible without comple te renunciation of the 
sexual desire. –YI, 24-6-26, 230. 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 300  692. The conquest of lust is the highest endeavour of a man or woman’s 
existence. Without overcoming lust man cannot hope to rule over self. And 
without rule over self there can be no Swaraj or Ra ma Raj. Rule of al without 
rule of oneself would prove to be as deceptive and disappointing as a painted 
toy-mango, charming to look at outwardly but hollow  and empty within. No 
worker who has not overcome lust can hope to render  any genuine service to 
the cause of Harijans, communal unity, Khadi, cow-p rotection or village 
reconstruction. Great causes like these cannot be s erved by intellectual 
equipment alone, they call for spiritual effort or soul-force. Soul-force comes 
only through God’s grace, and God’s grace never des cends upon an man who is 
a slave to lust. –H, 21-11-36, 321. 
 
693. Now for the definition—the meaning—of Brahmach arya. Its root meaning 
may be given thus: that conduct which puts one in t ouch with God. 
The conduct consists in the fullest control over al l the senses. This is the true 
and relevant meaning of the word. 
Popularly it has come to mean mere physical control  over the organ of 
generation. This narrow meaning has debased Brahmac harya and made its 
practice all but impossible. Control over the organ  of generation is impossible 
without proper control over all the senses. They ar e all interdependent. Mind 
on the lower plane is included in the senses. Witho ut control over the mind 
mere physical control, even if it can be  attained for a time, is of little or no 
use. –H, 13-6-36, 137. 
 
694. Brahmacharya must be observed in thought, word  and deed, It may be 
harmful to suppress the body, if the mind is at the  same time allowed to go 
astray. Where the mind wanders, the body must follo w sooner or later. 
It is necessary here to appreciate a distinction. I t is one thing to allow the mind 
to harbour impure thoughts; it is a different thing  altogether if it strays among 
them in spite of ourselves. Victory will be ours in  the end, if we non-c-operate 
with the mind in its evil wanderings. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 301  We experience every moment of our lives, that often  while the body is subject 
to our control, the mind is not. This physical cont rol should never be relaxed, 
and in Addition we must put forth a constant endeav our to bring the mind 
under control. We can do nothing more, nothing less . –YM, 18. 
 
695. The mind is even more difficult to curb than t he wind. Nevertheless the 
existence of God within makes even the control of t he mind possible. Let no 
one think that it is impossible because it is diffi cult. It is the highest goal and it 
is no wonder that the highest effort should he nece ssary to attain it. –Auto, 
259. 
 
696.It is better to enjoy through the body than to be enjoying the thought of it. 
It is good to disapprove of sensual desires as soon  as they arise in the mind and 
try to deep them down; but if,. For want of physica l enjoyment, the mind 
wallows in thoughts of enjoyment, then it is legiti mate to satisfy the hunger of 
the body. About this I have no doubt. –(Translated from the Hindi Navajivan of 
9-5-29).  
 
(D) NON-POSSESSION  
697. It was because this process of multiplication of wants out of proportion to 
our surroundings was discovered to be going on with  increasing velocity that 
Non-co-operation was conceived. And thus conceived it was not non-co-
operation with persons but with an attitude that wa s responsible for the system 
which had seized us in its serpentine coil and whic h was reducing us to dust. 
The system had raised the standard of living among us, its creatures, wholly 
unwarranted by the general condition of the country . And since India did not 
live upon exploitation of other peoples, the expans ion of the middle class who 
were also the middlemen meant extinction of the low est strata. Hence the 
smallest villages were dying out through sheer exha ustion. This was all plain to 
many of us in 1920. The arresting movement is yet i n its infancy. Let us not 
hinder it by any hasty action. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 302  This artificial increase in our wants has been felt  more severely than it 
otherwise would have been, because of the persisten ce of the family system 
which the Western method is ill designed to support . The joint system having 
become wooden, its evils have become accentuated; i ts sweet graces have 
disappeared. Thus evil has been added to evil. 
Our self-sacrifice must therefore be in terms of th e requirements of the 
country. The reforms required are more from within than from without. A 
perfect constitution super-imposed upon a rotten in ternal condition will be like 
a whited sepulchre. 
The process of self-purification must therefore be completed. The spirit of self-
sacrifice must be extended. Great as the sacrifice has been, it is nothing 
compared to the demands made upon us by the country . We dare not support 
able-bodied members of the family—men or women—who will not work. We 
may not contribute a single piece towards the expen ses of conforming to 
meaningless or superstitious customs, such as caste -dinners, or towards forming 
expensive marriage connections. Every marriage and every death brings an 
unnecessary cruel burden upon the head or the famil y. We must refuse to 
regard such acts of self-denial as self-sacrifice. They are evils to be 
counteracted with courage and resolution. 
There is too, for us, the inordinately expensive ed ucation. When it is difficult 
for millions even to make the two ends meet, when m illions are dying of 
starvation, it is monstrous to think if giving our relatives a costly education. 
Expansion of the mind will come from hard experienc e, not necessarily in the 
college or the school-room. When some of us deny ou rselves and ours the so-
called higher education, we shall find the true mea ns of giving and receiving a 
really high education. Is there not, may there not be a way of each boy paying 
for his own education? There may be no such way. Wh ether there is or there is 
not such a way is irrelevant. But there is no doubt  that when we deny ourselves 
the way of expensive education, seeing that aspirat ion after higher education is 
a laudable end, we shall find out a way of fulfilli ng it more in accord with our 
surroundings. The golden rule to apply in all such cases is resolutely to refuse 
to have what the millions cannot. The ability to re fuse will not descend upon us Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 303  all of a sudden. The first thing is to cultivate th e mental attitude that we will 
not have possessions or facilities denied to millio ns, and the next immediate 
thing is to rearrange our lives as fast as possible  in accordance with that 
mentality. 
Without a large, very large, army of such self-sacr ificing and determined 
workers, real progress of the masses, I hold to be an impossibility. And without 
that progress there is no such thing as Swaraj. Pro gress towards Swaraj will be 
in exact proportion to the increase in the number o f workers who will dare to 
sacrifice their al for the cause of the poor. 
–YI, 24-6-26, 226. 
 
698.Whilst Gandhiji insists, as we have seen, on a village worker living on a 
villager’s diet not costing say three annas a day, he is far from insisting on 
starvation or mortification of the flesh. To a work er who has imposed on 
himself a strict regimen involving only one meal a day, consisting generally of 
15 tolas of rice boiled, amti (made of vegetables a nd dal ) and buttermilk, all 
costing only one anna per day, Gandhiji wrote: 
‘Your meal is very meagre, it is starvation diet. I n my opinion, you are not 
making full use of the instrument that God has put at your disposal. Do you 
know the story of the talents that were taken away from him who did not know 
how to use them, or having known would not use them ? 
‘Mortification of the flesh is a necessity when the  flesh rebels against one; it is 
a sin when the flesh has come under subjection and can be used as an 
instrument of service. In other works, there is no inherent  merit in 
mortification of the flesh.’ –H, 2-11-35, 299.  
 
(E) PUT A CURB ON THE MIND  
699.We should remember that Non-possession is a pri nciple applicable to 
thoughts, as to things. One, who fills his brain wi th useless knowledge, violates Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 304  that inestimable principle. Thoughts, which turn us  away from God, or do not 
turn us towards Him, constitute impediments in our way. –YM, 38. 
 
700. Silence is part of the spiritual discipline of  the votary of truth. Proneness 
to exaggerate, to suppress or modify the truth, wil lingly or unwillingly, is a 
natural weakness of man, and silence is necessary i n order to surmount it. A 
man of few words will rarely be thoughtless in his speech; he will measure 
every word. – Auto, 84.  
 
Renunciation and Joy  
701. No sacrifice is worth the name unless it is a joy. Sacrifice and a long face 
go ill together. Sacrifice is ‘making sacrifice’. H e must be a poor specimen of 
humanity who is in need of sympathy for his sacrifi ce. 
–YI, 25-6-25, 217 
 
702. Forced sacrifice is no sacrifice. It will not last. 
–YI, 11-8-20, Tagore, 410. 
 
703.There should be no sorrow felt over one’s sacri fice. That sacrifice which 
causes pain, loses its sacred character and will br eak down under stress. One 
gives up things that one considers to be injurious and therefore there should be 
pleasure attendant upon giving up. 
–YI,15-7-26, 252,  
 
Nature of True Restraint  
704. Gandhiji’s Favourite quotation from the sage N ishkulananda: ‘Renunciation 
of objects, without the renunciation of desires, is  short lived, however hard you 
may try.’ –Auto, 20. 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 305  705. I know that the mental attitude is everything.  Just as prayer may be 
merely a mechanical intonation as of a bird, so may  a fast be a mere 
mechanical torture of the flesh. Neither will touch  the soul within. 
 –YI, 16-2-22, 103. 
 
706.Abstemiousness from intoxicating drinks and dru gs, and from all kinds of 
foods, especially meat, is undoubtedly a great aid to the evolution of the spirit, 
but it is by no means an end in itself. Many a man eating meat and with 
everybody but living in the fear of God is nearer h is freedom than a man 
religiously abstaining from meat and many other thi ngs, but blaspheming God in 
every one of his acts. –YI, 6-10-21, 318. 
 
707.I do feel that spiritual progress does demand a t some stage that we should 
cease to kill our fellow creatures for the satisfac tion of out bodily wants The 
beautiful lines of Goldsmith occur to me as I tell you of my vegetarian fad: 
No flocks that range the valley free 
To slaughter I condemn, 
Taught by the Power that pities me 
I learn to pity them. –IC, 402. 
 
708.Experince teaches that animal food is unsuited to those who would curb 
their passions. But it is wrong to overestimate the  importance of food in the 
formation of character or in subjugating the flesh.  Diet is a powerful factor not 
to be neglected. But to sum up al religion in terms  of diet, as is often done in 
India, is as wrong as it is to disregard all restra int in regard to diet and to give 
full reins to one’s appetite. –YI, 7-10-26, 347. 
 
709. By unnecessarily exercising ourselves over con undrums about the 
justifiability of man’s killing creatures and anima ls of a lower order we often Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 306  seem to forget our primary duties. Every one of us is not faced every day with 
the question of killing obnoxious animals. Most of us have not developed 
courage and love enough to practice ahimsa with reg ard to dangerous reptiles. 
We do not destroy the vipers of ill-will and anger in our bosom, but we dare to 
raise futile discussions about the propriety of kil ling obnoxious creatures and 
we thus move in a vicious circle. We fail in the pr imary duty and lay the 
unction to our souls that we are refraining from ki lling obnoxious life. One who 
desires to practice ahimsa must for the time being forget all about snakes etc 
Let him not worry if he cannot avoid killing them, but try for all he is worth to 
overcome the anger and ill-will of men by his patie nt endeavour as a first step 
towards cultivating universal love. 
Abjure brinjals or potatoes by all means, if you wi ll, but do not for heaven’s 
sake begin to feel yourself self-righteous and flat ter yourself that you are 
practicing ahimsa on that account. The very idea is  enough to make one blush. 
Ahimsa in not a mere matter of dietetics, it transc ends it. What a man eats or 
drinks matters little; it is the self-denial, the s elf-restraint behind it that 
matters. By all means practice as much restraint in  the choice of the articles of 
your diet as you like. The restraint is commendable , even necessary, but it 
touches only the fringe of ahimsa. A man may allow himself wide latitude in the 
mater of diet and yet may be a personification of a himsa and compel our 
homage, if his heart overflows with love and melts at another’s woe, and has 
been purged of al Passions. On the other hand, a ma n always over-scrupulous in 
diet is an utter stranger to ahimsa and a pitiful w retch if he is slave to 
selfishness and passions and is hard of heart. –YI,  6-9-28, 300. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 307   
17. RELIGION AND MORALS 
 
710. You must watch my life, how I live, eat, sit, talk, be-have in general. The 
sum total of all those in me is my religion. –H, 22 -9-46, 321.  
 
True Religion  
711. There is no religion higher than Truth and Rig hteousness. –ER, 49. 
 
712. Let me explain what I mean by religion. It is not the Hindu religion which I 
certainly prize above all other religions, but the religion which transcends 
Hinduism, which changes one’s very nature, which bi nds one, indissoluble to 
the truth within and whichever purifies. It is the permanent element in human 
nature which counts no cost to treat in order to fi nd full expression and which 
leaves the soul utterly restless until it has found  itself, known its Maker and 
appreciated the true correspondence between the Mak er and itself. –YI, 12-5-
20, Tagore, 1070.  
 
True Morality  
713. True morality consists, not in following the b eaten track, but in finding 
out the true path for ourselves and in fearlessly f ollowing it. –ER, 38. 
 
714. No action which is not voluntary can be called  moral. So long as we act 
like machines, there can be no question of morality . If we want to call an 
action moral, it should have been done consciously and as a matter of duty. Any 
action that is dictated by fear or by coercion of a ny kind ceases to be moral. It 
also follows that all good deeds that are prompted by hope of happiness in the 
next world cease to be moral. –ER, 43. 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 308  715. How can I, the champion of ahimsa, compel anyo ne to perform even a 
good act? Has not a well-known Englishman said that  to make mistakes as a free 
man is better than being in bondage in order to avo id them? I believe in the 
truth of this. The reason is obvious. The mind of a  man who remains good under 
compulsion cannot improve, in fact it worsens. And when compulsion is 
removed all the defects will up to the surface with  even greater force. –H, 29-
9-46, 333.  
 
Religion and Morality  
716. True religion and true morality are inseparabl y bound up with each other. 
Religion is to morality what water is to the seed t hat is sown in the soil. –ER, 
49. 
 
717. I reject any religious doctrine that does not appeal to reason and is in 
conflict with morality. I tolerate unreasonable rel igious sentiment when it is 
not immoral.–YI, 21-7-20, Tagore, 173. 
 
718. As soon as we lose the moral basis, we cease t o be religious. There is no 
such thing as religion overriding morality. Man for  instance cannot be 
untruthful, cruel and incontinent and claim to have  God on his side. 
–YI, 24-11-21, 385. 
 
719. Our desires and motives may be divide into two  classes—selfish and 
unselfish. All selfish desires are immoral, while t he desire to improve ourselves 
for the sake of doing good to others is truly moral . The  highest moral law is that 
we should unremittingly work for the good of mankin d. –ER, 36.  
 
Religion and Practical Affairs  
720. Swaraj is synonymous with Rama Raj—the establi shment of the Kingdom of 
Righteousness on earth. –YI, 4-5-21, 143. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 309   
721. Hanuman tore open his heart and showed that th ere was nothing there but 
Ramanama. I have none of the power of Hanuman to te ar open my heart, but if 
any of you feel inclined to do it I assure you will  find nothing there but love for 
Rama whom I see face to face in the starving millio ns of India. –YI, 24-3-27, 93. 
 
722. Religion which takes no account of practical a ffairs and does not help to 
solve them, is no religion. And that is why I am pu tting a religious matter 
before you in a practical form. –YI, 7-5-25, 164. 
 
723. If any action of mine claimed to the spiritual  is proved to be unpractical it 
must be pronounced to be a failure. I do believe th at the most spiritual act is 
the most practical in the true sense of the term. 
–H, 1-7-39, 181. 
 
724. Q. In your autobiography you have said that yo u cannot think of politics 
apart from religion. Bo you still hold that view? I f so, how is it that in a country 
of many diverse religions like India you expect a c ommon political policy to be 
adopted? 
Yes, I still hold the view that I cannot conceive p olitics as divorces from 
religion. Indeed religion should evade every one of  our actions. Here religion 
does not mean sectarianism. It means a belief in or dered moral government of 
the universe. It is not less real because it is uns een. This religion transcends 
Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, etc. It does not sup ersede them. It harmonizes 
them and gives them reality. 
–H, 10-2-40, 445. 
 
725. To practice nonviolence in mundane matters is to know its true value. It is 
to bring heaven upon earth. There is no such thing as the other world. All Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 310  worlds are one. There is no ‘here’ and no ‘there’. As Jeans has demonstrated, 
the whole universe including the most distant stars , invisible even through the 
most powerful telescope in the world, is compressed  in an atom. I hold it 
therefore to be wrong to limit the use of nonviolen ce to cave-dwellers and for 
acquiring merit for a favored position in the other  world. All virtue ceases to 
have used if it serves no purpose in every walk of life. –H, 26-7-42, 248. 
 
The various Religious creeds  
726. Religions are different roads converging to th e same pint. What does it 
matter that we take different roads, so long as we reach the same goal? In 
reality, there are as many religions as there are i ndividuals. 
–IHR, 24, 23. 
 
727. If a man reaches the heart of his own religion , he has reached the heart of 
the others too. –Polak, 41. 
 
728. So long as there are different religions, ever y one of them may need some 
distinctive symbol. But when the symbol is made int o a fetish and an 
instrument of proving the superiority of one’s reli gion over other’s it is fit only 
to be discarded. –Auto, 480.  
 
Missionary effort and the State  
729. The State should undoubtedly be secular. Every one living in it should be 
entitled to profess his religion without let or hin drance, so long as the citizen 
obeyed the common law of the land. There should be no interference with 
missionary effort, but no mission could enjoy the p atronage of the State as it 
did during the foreign regime. 
–H, 24-8-47, 292. 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 311  730. ‘If I were a dictator, religion and State woul d be separate. I swear by my 
religion. I will die for it. But it is my personal affair. The State has nothing to 
do with it,’ remarked Gandhiji sometime back in ans wer to a question by a 
missionary friend who asked whether in Free India t here would be complete 
religious freed and whether religion will be separa te from the State. ‘The State 
would look after your secular welfare, health, comm unications, foreign 
relations, currency and so on, but not your or my r eligion. That is everybody’s 
personal concern.’ He then went on to describe his conception of religion. ‘You 
must watch my life, how I live, eat, sit, talk, beh ave in general. The sum total 
of all those in me is my religion,’ he said. –H, 22 -9-46, 321.  
 
Tolerance  
731. I do not like the word tolerance, but could no t think of a better one. 
Tolerance may imply a gratuitous assumption of the inferiority of other faiths 
to one’s own, whereas ahimsa teaches us to entertai n the same respect for the 
religious faiths of others as we accord to your own , thus admitting the 
imperfection of the latter. This admission will be readily made by a seeker of 
Truth, who follows the law of Love. If we had attai ned the full vision of Truth, 
we would no longer be mere seekers, but have become  one with God, for truth 
is God. But being only seekers, we prosecute our qu est, and are conscious of 
our imperfection. And if we are imperfect ourselves , religion as conceived by us 
must also be imperfect. We have not realized religi on in its perfection, even as 
we have not rallied God. Religion of our conception , being thus imperfect, is 
always subject to a process of evolution and reinte rpretation. Progress towards 
Truth, towards God, is possible only because of suc h evolution. And if all faiths 
outlined by men are imperfect, the question of comp arative merit does not 
arise. All faiths constitute a revelation of Truth,  but all are imperfect, and 
liable to error. Reverence for other faiths need no t blind us to their faults. We 
must be keenly alive to the defects of our own fait h also, yet not leave it on 
that account, but try to overcome those defects. Lo oking at all religions with 
an equal eye, we would not only not hesitate, but w ould think it our duty, to 
blend into our faith every acceptable feature of ot her faiths.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 312  Even as a tree has a single trunk, but many branche s and leaves, so there is one 
true and perfect Religion, but it becomes many, as it passes through the human 
medium. The one Religion is beyond al speech. Imper fect men put it into such 
language as they can command, and their words are i nterpreted by other men 
equally imperfect. Imperfect. Whose interpretation is to be held to be the right 
one? Everybody is right from his own standpoint, bu t it is not possible that 
everybody is wrong. Hence the necessity of toleranc e, which does not mean 
indifference to one’s own faith, but a more intelli gent and purer love for it. 
Tolerance gives us spiritual insight, which is as f ar from fanaticism as the north 
pole from the south. True knowledge of religion bre aks down the barriers 
between faith and faith. –YM, 55. 
 
732. There is one rule, however, which should alway s be kept in mind while 
studying all great religions and that is that one s hould study them only through 
the writings of known votaries of the respective re ligions. For instance, if one 
wants to study the Bhagavata, one should do so not through a translation of it 
made by a hostile critic but one prepared by a love r of the Bhagavata. Similarly 
to study the Bible one should study it through the commentaries of devoted 
Christians. This study of other religions besides o ne’s own will give one a grasp 
of the rock-bottom unity of all religions and affor d a glimpse also of the 
universal and absolute truth which lies beyond the ‘dust of creeds and faiths’. 
Let no one even for a moment entertain the fear tha t a reverent study of other 
religions is likely to weaken or shake one’s faith in one’s own. The Hindu 
system of philosophy regards all religions as conta ining the elements of truth in 
them and enjoins an attitude of respect and reveren ce towards them all. This 
of course presupposes regard for one’s own religion . Study and appreciation of 
other religions need not cause a weakening of that regard; it should mean 
extension of that regard to other religions. 
–YI, 6-13-28, 406. 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 313  733. Religion does not teach us to bear ill-will to wards one another. It is easy 
enough to be friendly to one’s friends. But to befr iend the one, who regards 
himself as your enemy, is the quintessence of true religion. The other is mere 
business. –H, 11-5-47, 146. 
 
Gandhi’s Personal Attitude  
734. After long study and experience, I have come t o the conclusion that (1) all 
religions are true; (2) all religions have some err or in them (3) all religions are 
almost as dear to me as my own Hinduism, in as much  as all human beings 
should be as dear to one as one’s own close relativ es. My own veneration for 
other faiths is the same as that for my own faith; therefore no thought of 
conversion is possible. The aim of the Fellowship s hould be to help a Hindu to 
become a better Hindu, a Muscleman to become a bett er Mussalman, and a 
Christian a better Christian, The attitude of patro nizing toleration is false to 
the spirit of International Fellowship. If I have a  suspicion in my mind that my 
religion is more or less true, and that others’ are  more or less false, instead of 
being more or less true, then, though I may have so me sort of fellowship with 
them, it is of an entirely different kind from the one we need in the 
International Fellowship. Our prayer for other must  be NOT ‘God, give him the 
light that Thou has given me, ‘ BUT’ Give him all t he light and truth he needs 
for his highest development.’ Pray merely that your  friends may become better 
men, whatever their form of religion. Nevertheless,  your experience may 
become a part of their experience, without your kno wing it. – Sabarmati, 1928, 
17-19.  
 
To Christian Friends  
735. Your work will be all the richer if you accept  as settled fact the faiths of 
the people you come to serve, faiths which, however  crude, are valuable to 
them. I want you to complement the faith of the peo ple instead of undermining 
it. Make us better Hindus, i.e. better men and wome n. Why should a man, even 
if he becomes a Christian, be torn from his surroun dings? Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 314  Superstitions and undesirable things go as soon as we begin to live the correct 
life. I concern myself not with belief but with ask ing to do the right thing. As 
soon as they do it, their belief rights itself. 
–YI, 11-8-27, 250, 251.  
 
True  Preaching  
736. It is better to allow our lives to speak for u s than our words. God did not 
bear the Cross only 1900 years ago, but He bears it  today, and He dies and is 
resurrected from day to day. It would be poor comfo rt to the world if it had to 
depend upon a historical God who died 2000 years ag o. Do not then preach the 
God of history, but show Him as He lives today thro ugh you. –YI, 11-8-27, 251. 
 
737. God has created different faiths just as He ha s the votaries thereof. How 
can I even secretly harbor the thought that my neig hbor’s faith is inferior to 
mine and wish that he should give up his faith and embrace mine? As a true and 
loyal friend, I can only wish and pray that he may live and grow perfect in his 
own faith. In God’s houses there are many mansions and they are equally holy. 
- H, 20-4-34, 73. 
 
738. I do not believe in people telling others of t heir faith, especially with a 
view to conversion. Faith does not admit of telling . It has to be lived and then 
it becomes self-propagating. –YI, 20-10-27, 352. 
 
739. Even a lofty utterance, that has not the backi ng of sincerity and 
experience, will be inert and lifeless, and will ut terly fail to penetrate and 
quicken the hearts of men,. While the speech that s prings from self-realization 
and genuine experience is always fruitful. –H, 21-1 1-36, 322. 
 
740. Learning takes us through many stages in life but it fails us utterly in the 
hour of danger and temptation. Then faith alone sav es. –YI, 22-1-25, 27. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 315   
741. Divine knowledge is not borrowed from books. I t has to be realized in 
oneself. Books are at best an aid, often ever a hin drance. –YI, 17-7-24, 238. 
 
742. Religion is a very personal matter. We should by living the life according to 
our lights share the best with one another, thus ad ding to the sum total of 
human effort to reach God. –H, 28-11-36, 330.  
 
The Acid Test  
743. I would reject all authority if it is in confl ict with sober reason or the 
dictates of the heart. Authority sustains and ennob les the weak when it is the 
handiwork of reason, but it degrades them when it s upplants reason sanctified 
by the still small voice within.—YI, 8-12-20, Tagor e, 616. 
 
744. Scriptures cannot transcend reason and truth. They are intended to purify 
reason and illuminate truth. –YI, 19-1-21, 22. 
 
745. Error can claim no exemption even if it can be  supported by the scriptures 
of the world. –YI, 26-2-25, 74. 
 
746. An error does not become truth by reason of mu ltiplied propagation, nor 
does truth become error because nobody sees it. –YI , 26-2-25, 75. 
 
747. I do not hold that everything ancient is good because it is ancient. I do not 
advocate surrender of God-given reasoning faculty i n the face of dancing 
tradition. Any tradition, however ancient, if incon sistent with morality, is fit to 
be banished from the land. Untouchability may be co nsidered to be an ancient 
traction, the institution of child widowhood and ch ild marriage may be 
considered to be an ancient tradition, and even so many an ancient horrible Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 316  belief and superstitious practice. I would sweep th em out of existence if I had 
the power. When, therefore, I talk of respecting th e ancient tradition, you now 
understand what I mean. –YI, 22-9-27, 319. 
 
748. We should cease to grow the moment we cease to  discriminate between 
virtue and vice, and slavishly copy the past which we do not fully know. We are 
proud heirs to all that was noblest and best in the  bygone age. We must not 
dishonor our heritage by multiplying past errors. – YI, 15-9-21, 292. 
 
749. Intolerance of criticism even of what one may prize as life itself is not 
conducive to the growth of public corporate life. – YI, 5-3-25, 82.  
 
On Hinduism  
750. I can no more describe my feeling for Hinduism  than for my wife. She 
moves me as no other woman in the world can. Not th at she has no faults. I 
dare say she has many more than I see myself. But t he feeling of an indissoluble 
bond is there. Even so I feel about Hinduism with a ll its faults and limitations. 
Nothing elates me so much as the music of the Gita or he Ramayana of 
Tulsidas, the only two books in Hinduism I may be s aid to know. I know the vice 
that is going on today in all the great Hindu shrin es, but I love them in spite of 
their unspeakable failings. I am a reformer through  and through. But my zeal 
never takes me to the rejection of any of the essen tial things in Hinduism. –YI, 
6-10-21, 318. 
 
751. Hinduism is a living organism liable to growth  and decay, and subject to 
the laws of nature. One and indivisible at the root , it has grown into a vast tree 
with innumerable branches. The changes in the seaso ns affect it. It has its 
autumn and summer, its winter and spring. The rains  nourish and fructify it too. 
Hinduism is like the Ganges, pure and unsullied at its source, but taking in its 
course the impurities in the way. Even like the Gan ges it is beneficent in its Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 317  total effect. –YI, 8-4-26, 131.  
 
(A) GURUVADA  
752. I believe in the Hindu theory of guru and its importance in spiritual 
realization. I think there is a great deal of truth  in the doctrine that true 
knowledge is impossible without a guru. An imperfec t teacher in mundane 
affairs may be tolerable, but not so in spiritual m atters. Only a perfect gnani (a 
knowing one, a seer) deserves to be enthroned as gu ru. 
–Auto, 113. 
 
753. I must therefore warn all against accepting im perfect ones as gurus. It is 
better to grope in the dark and wade through a mill ion errors to Truth than to 
entrust oneself to one who ‘knows not that he knows  not’. 
–YI, 3-12-25, 422.  
 
(B) IDOL WORSHIP  
754. I do not disbelieve in idol worship. An idol d oes not excite any feeling of 
veneration in me. But I think that idol worship is part of human nature. We 
hanker after symbolism. –YI, 6-10-21, 318. 
 
755. Should we forget our humanity and return a blo w for a blow? If some 
misdirected individual took it into his head to des ecrate a temple or break 
idols, should a Hindu in return desecrate a mosque on that account? Did it in 
any way help to protect the temple or to save the c ause of Hinduism? 
Personally, he was as much an idol-worshipper as an  idol-breaker, and he 
suggested that the whole of the audience, whether H indu, Musli9m or any 
other, were also so, whether they admitted it or no t. He knew that mankind 
thirsted for symbolism. Were not masjids or churche s in reality the same as 
mandirs? God resided everywhere, no less in stock o r stone than in a single hair 
on the body of man. But men associated sacredness w ith particular places and Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 318  things more than with others. Such sentiment was wo rthy of respect when it 
did not mean restrictions on similar freedom for ot hers. To every Hindu and 
Mussulman, Gandhiji’s advice was if there was compu lsion anywhere, they 
should gently but firmly refuse to submit to it. Pe rsonally, he himself would hug 
an idol and lay down his life to protect it rather than brook any restriction upon 
his freedom of worship. –H, 30-3-47, 86.  
 
(C) INCARNATION  
756. In Hinduism, incarnation is ascribed to one wh o has performed some 
extraordinary service of mankind. All embodied life  is in reality an incarnation 
of God, but it is not usual to consider every livin g being as an incarnation. 
Future generations pay this homage to one who, in h is own generation, has 
been extraordinarily religious in his conduct. I ca n see nothing wrong in this 
procedure; it takes nothing from God’s greatness an d there is no violence done 
to truth. There is an Urdu saying which means ‘Adam  is not God but he is a 
spark of the Divine.’ And therefore he who is the m ost religiously behaved has 
most of the divine spark in him. It is in accordanc e with this train of thought 
that Krishna enjoys, in Hinduism, the status of the  most perfect incarnation. –
YI, 6-8-31, 205.  
 
(D) BELIEF IN THE HEREDITARY TRANSMISSIBILITY OF CH ARACTER  
757. Children inherit the qualities of the parents,  no less than their physical 
features. Environment does play an important part, but the original capital on 
which a child starts in life is inherited from its ancestors. –Auto, 381. 
758. I believe that just as everyone inherits a par ticular form so dies he inherit 
the particular characteristics and qualities of his  progenitors, and to make this 
admission is to conserve one’s energy. That frank a dmission, if he will act up to 
it, would put a legitimate curb upon our ambitions,  and thereby our energy is 
set free for extending the field of spiritual resea rch and spiritual evolution. It is 
this doctrine of Varnashrama Dharma which I have al ways adopted. –YI, 29-9-Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 319  27, 329.  
 
(E) VARNA  
759. I regard Varnashrama as a healthy division of work based on birth. The 
present ideas of caste are a perversion of the orig inal. There is no question 
with me of superiority or inferiority. It is purely  a question of duty. I have 
indeed stated that varna is based on birth. But I h ave also said that it is 
possible for a shudra, for instance, to become a va ishya. But in order to 
perform the duty of a vaishya he does not need the label of a vaishya. He who 
performs the duty of a Brahman will easily become o ne in the next incarnation.  
– YI, 23-4-25, 145. 
 
760. So far as I know anything at all of Hinduism, the meaning of varna is 
incredibly simple. It simply means the following on  the part of us all the 
hereditary calling of our forefathers, in so far as  that traditional calling is not 
inconsistent with fundamental ethics, and this only  for the purpose of earning 
one’s livelihood. You will realize that if all of u s follow this law of varna we 
would limit our material ambition, and our energy w ould be set free for 
exploring those vast fields whereby and where throu gh we can know God. 
– YI, 20-10-27, 355. 
 
761. Varnashrama Dharma defines man’s mission on th is earth. He is not born 
day after day to explore avenues for amassing riche s and to explore different 
means of livelihood; on the contrary man is born in  order that he may utilize 
every atom of his energy for the purpose of knowing  his Maker. It restricts him 
therefore, for the purpose of holding body and soul  together, to the occupation 
of his forefathers. That and nothing more or nothin g less is Varnashrama 
Dharma. –YI, 27-10-27, 357. 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 320  762. Numerous verses from the shastras unmistakably  show that mere birth 
counts for nothing. A person must show correspondin g works and character to 
establish his claim by birth. Such verses also enfo rce the argument that  
(i) A person loses varna by failing to exhibit its peculiar characteristics;  
(ii) Inter-varna marriage or interdining, whatever virtue the restrictions on 
them may have, does not affect a person’s varna, at  least not so much as the 
failing to live up to one’s varna;  
(iii) Birth, while it gives a start and enables the  parents to determine the 
training and occupation of their children, does not  perpetuate the varna of 
one’s birth, if it is not fulfilled by works. –H, 1 5-4-33, 2.  
 
(F) CASTE AS VARNA  
763. Our existing caste organizations are really tr ade guilds. 
–YI, 13-4-231, 114. 
 
764. From the economic point of view, its value was  once very great. It ensured 
hereditary skill; it limited competition. It was th e best remedy against 
pauperism. And it had all the advantages of trade g uilds. Although it did not 
foster adventure or invention there, it is not know n to have come in the way 
either.  
Historically speaking, caste may be regarded as man ’s experiment or social 
adjustment in the laboratory of Indian society. If we can prove it to be a 
success, it can be offered to the world as a leaven  and as the best remedy 
against heartless competition and social disintegra tion born of avarice and 
greed. –YI, 5-1-21, 2. 
 
765. The vast organization of caste answered not on ly the religious wants of the 
community but it answered its political needs. The villagers managed their 
internal affairs through the caste system, and thro ugh it they dealt with any 
oppression from the ruling power or powers. It is n ot possible to deny of a Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 321  nation that was capable of producing the caste syst em its wonderful power of 
organization. –Nat, 339. 
 
766. I believe that every man is born in the world with certain natural 
tendencies. Every person is born with certain defin ite limitations which he 
cannot overcome. From a careful; observation of tho se limitations the law of 
varna was deduced. It establishes certain spheres o f action for certain people 
with certain tendencies. This avoided all unworthy competition. Whilst 
recognizing limitations the law of varna admitted o f no distinctions of high and 
low; on the one hand it guaranteed to each the frui ts of his labours and on the 
other it prevented him from pressing upon his neigh bour. This great law has 
been degraded and fallen into disrepute. But my con viction is that an ideal 
social order will only be evolved when the implicat ions of this law are fully 
understood and given effect to. 
Q. Do you not think that in ancient India there was  much difference in 
economic status and social privileges between the f our varnas? 
A. That may be historically true. But misapplicatio n or an imperfect 
und3erstanding of the law must not lead to the igno ring of the law itself. By 
constant striving we have to enrich the inheritance  left to us.  This law 
determines the duties of man. Rights follow from a due performance of duties.  
– MR., 414.  
 
(G) CASTE IN SO FAR AS IT IS DIFFERENT FROM VARNA  
767. I consider the four divisions alone to be fund amental, natural, and 
essential. The innumerable sub-castes are sometimes  a convenience, often a 
hindrance. The sooner there is fusion the better. 
–YI, 8-12-20, Tagore, 613. 
 
768. The existing innumerable divisions with the at tendant artificial restrictions 
and elaborate ceremonial are harmful to the growth of a religious spirit, as also Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 322  to the social wellbeing of the Hindus and therefore  also their neighbours. –YI, 
25-2-26, 77. 
 
769. Varnashrama of the shastras is today non-exist ent in practice. The present 
caste system is the very antithesis of varna-shrama . The sooner public opinion 
abolishes it the better. - H, I6-11-35,3i6. 
 
770.Caste has nothing to do with religion. It is ha rmful both to spiritual and 
national growth.—H. 
 
771. Today Brahmans and kshatriyas, vaishyas and sh udras are mere labels. 
There is utter confusion of varna as I understand i t and I wish that all the 
Hindus will voluntarily call themselves shudras. Th at is the only way to 
demonstrate the truth of Brahmanism and to revive V arna Dharma in its true 
state. –H, 25-3-33, 3.  
 
(H) INTERDINING AND INTERMARRIAGE  
772. I do not believe that inter-dining and even in termarriage necessarily 
deprives man of his status that his birth has given  him. The four divisions define 
a man’s calling, they do not restrict or regulate s ocial intercourse. The divisions 
define duties, they confer no privileges. All are b orn to serve God’s creation, a 
Brahmans with his knowledge, a kshatriya with his p ower of protection, a 
vaishya with his commercial ability and a shudra wi th bodily labour. This 
however does not mean, that a Brahman for instance is absolved from bodily 
labour, or the duty of protecting himself and other s. His birth makes a Brahman 
predominantly a man of knowledge, the fittest by he redity and training to 
impart it to others. There is nothing, again, to pr event the shudra from 
acquiring all the knowledge he wishes. Only, he wil l best serve with his body 
and need not envy others their special qualities fo r service. Varnashrama is 
self-restraint and conservation and economy of ener gy. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 323  Though therefore Varnashrama is not affected by int erdining and intermarriage, 
Hinduism does most emphatically discourage interdin ing and intermarriage 
between divisions. Hinduism is undoubtedly a religi on of the renunciation of the 
flesh so that the spirit may be set free. It is no part of a Hindu’s duty to dine 
with his son. And by restricting his choice of a br ide to a particular group, he 
exercises rare self-restraint. Prohibition against intermarriage and inter-dining 
is essential for the rapid evolution of the soul. B ut this self-denial is no test of 
varna. A Brahmans may remain a Brahman, though he m ay dine with his shudra 
brother, if he has not left off his duty of service  by knowledge. It follows from 
what I have said above, that restraint in matters o f marriage and dining is not 
based upon notions of superiority. –YI, 6-10-21, 31 7. 
 
773. Correspondents have asked whether inter-dining  and intermarriage are a 
part of the movement of untouchability. In my o0pin ion they are not. They 
touch the caste men equally with the outcastes. It is, therefore, not obligatory 
on an anti-untouchability worker to devote himself or herself to inter-dining 
and intermarriage reform. Personally I am of opinio n that the reform is coming 
sooner than we expect. Restriction on inter-caste d ining and inter-caste 
marriage is no part of Hindu religion. It is a soci al custom which crept into 
Hinduism when perhaps it was in its decline, and wa s then probably meant to 
be a temporary protection against disintegration of  Hindu society. Today those 
two prohibitions are weakening Hindu society, and t he emphasis on them has 
turned the attention of the mass mind from the fund amentals which alone are 
vita to life’s growth. Wherever, therefore, people voluntarily take part in 
functions where ‘touchables’ and ‘untouchables’, Hi ndus and non-Hindus are 
invited to join dinner parties, I welcome them as a  healthy sing,. But I should 
never dream of making this reform, however desirabl e in itself it may be, part 
of an all-India reform which is long overdue. Untou chability, in the form we all 
know it, is a canker eating into the very vitals of  Hinduism. Dining and marriage 
restrictions stunt Hindu society. I think the disti nction is fundamental. It would 
be unwise in a hurricane campaign to overweight and  thus endanger the main 
issue. It may even amount to a breach of faith with  the masses to call upon Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 324  them suddenly to view the removal f untouchability in a light different from 
what they have been taught to believe it to be. On the one hand, therefore, 
whilst inter-dining may go on where the public itse lf is ready for it, it should 
not be a part of an India-wide campaign. (Press sta tement of 4-11-32)—My 
Soul’s Agony, 5* 
 
774. The question of food and drink has or ought to  have no social value.  
–YI, 29-12-20, Tagore, 619. 
 
775. In Varnashrama there was and there should be n o prohibition of 
intermarriage or inter-dining.  
Though there is in Varnashrama no prohibition again st intermarriage and 
interdining, there can be no compulsion. It must be  left to the unfettered 
choice of the individual as to where he or she will  marry or dine. If the law of 
Varnashrama was observed there would naturally be a  tendency, so far as 
marriage is  concerned, for people to restrict the marital relat ions to there own 
varna. –H, 16-11-35, 316. 
 
*Regarding the above two passages and their apparen t inconsistency, Gandhiji 
wrote in answer to a correspondent's question: 
As I read them with a detached mind, I find no cont radiction between the two 
statements especially if they are read in their ful l context. I still believe that 
restriction imposed by oneself upon inter-dining an d intermarriage is an act of 
renunciation of the flesh. There is one word that p erhaps I would change if I 
was writing the article of 1921 today. Instead of ‘ prohibition’, I should repeat 
the expression used in the same article just a few lines before and say ‘self-
imposed restriction against intermarriage and inter -dining is essential for a 
rapid evolution of the soul’. 
–H, 29-4-33, 2. 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 325  776. When I said that removal of untouchability did  not include the removal of 
restrictions on inter-dining and intermarriage, I h ad the general Hindu public in 
mind, not the congress workers or Congressmen. Thes e have to abolish 
untouchability from every part of their life. –H, 1 -2-42, 23. 
 
777. There should be a breach in the double wall of  caste and province. If India 
is one and indivisible, surely there should be no a rtificial divisions creating 
innumerable little groups which would neither inter dine nor intermarry. There 
is no religion in this cruel custom. It would not d o to plead that individuals 
cannot make the commencement and that they must wai t till the whole society 
is ripe for change. No reform has ever been brought  about except through 
intrepid individuals breaking down inhuman customs or usages. And after all 
what hardships can the schoolmaster suffer if he an d his daughters refused to 
treat marriage as a marketable transaction instead of a status or sacrament, 
which it undoubtedly is I would, therefore, advise my correspondent 
courageously to give up the idea of borrowing or be gging and to save the four 
hundred rupees he can get on his life policy by cho osing in consultation with his 
daughter a suitable husband no matter to what caste  or province he belongs.  
–H, 25-7-36, 192. 
 
778. Q. Does the congress programme for the aboliti on of untouchability 
include interdining and intermarriage with Harijans ? 
A. So far as I know the Congress mind today there i s no opposition to dining 
with Harijans. But speaking for myself, I have said  that we have all to become 
Harijans today or we will not be able to purge ours elves completely of the taint 
of untouchability. I, therefore, tell all boys and girls who want to marry that 
they cannot be married sat Sevagram Ashram unless o ne of the parties is a 
Harijan. I am convinced that there is no real diffi culty in this. All that is needed 
is a change of outlook. –HS, 5-1-46.  
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 326  (I) UNTOUCHABILITY  
779. Hinduism has sinned in giving sanction to unto uchability. It has degraded 
us, made us pariahs. Even the Mussalman have caught  the sinful contagion from 
us. –YI, 27-4-21, 136. 
 
780.The ‘touch-me-not’-ism that disfigures the pres ent-day Hinduism is morbid 
growth. It only betrays a woodenness of mind, a bli nd self-conceit. It is 
abhorrent alike to the spirit of religion and moral ity. –H, 20-4-34, 73. 
 
781. Untouchability is not only not a part and parc el of Hinduism, but a plague, 
which it is the bounden duty of every Hindu to comb at. It has received religious 
sanction in India, and reduced lakhs and crores of human beings to a state 
bordering on slavery.  
The observance (of the vow of the removal of untouc hability) is not fulfilled, 
merely by making friends with ‘untouchables’, but b y loving all life as one’s 
own self. Removal of untouchability means love for,  and service of, the whole 
world, and it thus merges into ahimsa. –YM, 47, 49.  
 
782. I do not want to be reborn. But if I have to b e reborn, I should be born an 
untouchable, so that I may share their sorrows, suf ferings, and affronts leveled 
at them, in order that I may endeavour to free myse lf and them from that 
miserable condition. I, therefore, pray that if I s hould be born again, I should 
do so not as a Brahmans, kshatriya, vaishya or shud ra, but as an atishudra. –YI, 
4-5-21, 144. 
 
783. Q. How can the cast-Hindus look after the inte rests of the Untouchables? 
How can they realize the feelings of the classes wh o have suffered so long at 
their hands? Is it not then better to entrust the i nterests of the Untouchables to 
men of their own caste? Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 327  A. Gandhiji was of opinion that the caste-Hindu owe d a sacred duty to the so-
called Untouchables. He must become a bhangi (sweep er) in name and action. 
When that happened the Untouchables would rise at a  bound and Hinduism 
would leave a rich legacy to the world. If that hap pened, the system of 
cleaning closets would undergo transformation. In E ngland real bhangis were 
famous engineers; and sanitarians. That could not h appen in India so long as 
society was sluggish and slothful. –H, 23-3-47, 78.  
 
(J) ANIMAL SACRIFICE  
784. It does not matter, that animal sacrifice is a lleged to find a place in the 
Vedas. It is enough for us, that such sacrifice can not stand the fundamental 
tests of truth and nonviolence. I readily admit my incompetence in Vedic 
scholarship. But the incompetence, so far as this s ubject is concerned does not 
worry me, because even if the practice of animal sa crifice be proved to have 
been a feature of Vedic society, it can form no pre cedent for a votary of 
ahimsa. –YM, 77.  
 
(K) RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS  
785. The hoards rotting in the name of religion in the various parts of India 
have made many of these religious institutions a sh ame, where they have not 
become hot-beds of corruption. –YI, 6-7-25, 209.  
 
(L) REINTERPRETATION OF TERMS  
786. As the world progresses the same terms acquire  new values. 
–YI, 7-5-25, 161.  
 
787. I have come to feel that like human beings wor ds have their evolution 
from stage to stage in the contents they hold. For instance, the contents of the 
richest word—God—are not the same to every lone of us. They will vary with Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 328  the experience of each. –YI, 11-8-27, 250.  
 
788. Yajna is a word full of beauty and power. Henc e with the growth of 
knowledge and experience and with the change of tim e, its meaning is likely to 
grow and change. Yajna literally means worship; hen ce sacrifice; hence any 
sacrificial act or any act of service. And in this sense every age may and should 
have its own particular Yajna. The principles of re ligion are one thing, and 
practices based on them are another. The principles  are absolute and 
irrespective of space and time. Practices change wi th place and time. –YI, 13-5-
26, 179.  
 
789. ‘Satyam bruyat priyam bruyat ma bruyat satyam apriyam’: -In my opinion 
the Sanskrit text means that one should speak the t ruth in gentle language. One 
had better not speak it, if one cannot do so in a g entle way; meaning thereby 
that there is not truth in a man who cannot control  his tongue. –YI, 17-9-25, 
318. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 329   
18. WOMEN’S PROBLEMS 
 
Women and India’s Future  
790. I am firmly of opinion that India’s salvation depends on the sacrifice and 
enlightenment of her women.-H,27-6-36,i53. 
 
791.I had flattered myself that my contribution to the women’s cause definitely 
began with the discovery of satyagraha. But the wri ter of the letter is of 
opinion that the fair sex requires treatment differ ent from men. It is so, I do 
not think any man will find the correct solution. N o matter how much he tries, 
he must fail because nature has made him different from woman. Only the toad 
under the harrow knows where it pinches him. Theref ore ultimately woman will 
have to determine with authority what she needs. My  own opinion is that, just 
as fundamentally man and woman are one, their probl em must be one in 
essence. The soul in both is the same. The two live  the same life, have the 
same feelings. Each is a complement of the other. T he one cannot live without 
the other’s active help. 
But somehow or other man has dominated woman from a ges past., and so 
woman has developed an inferiority complex. She has  believed in the truth of 
man’s interested teaching that she is inferior to h im. But the seers among men 
have recognized her equal status.  
Nevertheless there is no doubt that at some point t here is bifurcation. Whilst 
both are fundamentally one, it is also equally true  that in the form there is a 
vital difference between the two. Hence the vocatio ns of the two must also be 
different. The duty of motherhood, which the vast m ajority of women will 
always undertake, requires qualities which man need  not possess. She is 
passive, he is active. She is essentially mistress of the house. He is the bread-
winner. She is the keeper and distributor of the br ead. She is the care-taker in 
every sense of the term. The art of bringing up the  infants of the race is her Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 330  special and sole prerogative. Without her care the race must become extinct.  
In my opinion it is degrading both for man and woma n that woman should be 
called upon or induced to forsake the hearth and sh oulder the rifle for the 
protection of that hearth. It is a reversion to bar barity and the beginning of the 
end. In trying to ride the horse that man rides, sh e brings herself and him 
down. The sin will be on man’s head for tempting or  compelling his companion 
to desert her special calling. There is as much bra very in keeping one’s home in 
good order and condition as there is in defending i t against attack from 
without.  
As I have watched millions of peasants in their nat ural surroundings and as I 
watch them daily in little Segaon, the natural divi sion of spheres of work has 
forced itself on my attention. There are no women b lack-smiths and 
carpenters. But men and women work on the fields, t he heaviest work being 
done by the males. The women deep and manage the ho mes. They supplement 
the meagre resources of the family, but man remains  the main breadwinner.  
The divisions of the spheres of work being recogniz ed, the general qualities and 
culture required are practically the same for both the sexes.  
My contribution to the great problem lies in my pre senting for acceptance truth 
and ahimsa in every walk of life, whether for indiv iduals or nations. I have 
hugged the hope that in this woman will be the unqu estioned leader and, 
having thus found her place in human evolution, she  will shed her inferiority 
complex. If she is able to do this successfully, sh e must resolutely refuse to 
believe in the modern teaching that everything is d etermined and regulated by 
the sex impulse. I fear I have put the proposition rather clumsily. But I hope my 
meaning is clear. I do not know that the millions o f men who are taking an 
active part6 in the war are obsessed by the sex spe cter. Nor are the peasants 
working together in their fields worried or dominat ed by it. This is not to say or 
suggest that they are free from the instinct implan ted in man and woman. But 
it most certainly does not dominate their lives as it seems to dominate the lives 
of those who are saturated with the modern sex lite rature. Neither man nor 
woman has time for such things when he or she is fa ced with the hard fact of 
living life in its grim reality.  Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 331  I have suggested in these columns that woman is the  incarnation of ahimsa. 
Ahimsa means infinite love, which again means infin ite capacity for suffering. 
Who but woman, the mother of man, shows this capaci ty in the largest 
measure? She shows it as she carries the infant and  feeds it during nine months 
and derives joy in the suffering involved. What can  beat the suffering caused by 
the pangs of labour? But she forgets them in the jo y of creation. Who again 
suffers daily so that her babe may wax from day to day? Let her transfer that 
love to the whole of humanity, let her forget that she ever was or can be the 
object of man’s lust. And she will occupy her proud  position by the side on man 
as his mother, maker and silent leader. It is given  to her to teach the art of 
peace to the warring would thirsting for that necta r. She can become the 
leader in satyagraha which does not require the lea rning that books give but 
does require the stout heart that comes from suffer ing and faith.  
My good nurse in the Sassoon Hospital, Poona, as I was lying on a sick bed years 
ago, told me the story of a woman who refused to ta ke chloroform because she 
would not risk the life of the babe she was carryin g. She had to undergo a 
painful operation. The only anesthetic she had was her love for the babe, to 
save whom no suffering was too great. Let not women , who can count many 
such heroines among them, ever despise their sex or  deplore that they were 
not born men. The contemplation of that heroine oft en makes me envy woman 
the status that is hers, if she only knew. There is  as much reason for man to 
with that he was born a woman as for woman to do ot herwise. But the wish is 
fruitless. Let us be happy in the state to which we  are born and do the duty for 
which nature has destined us. –H, 24-2-40, 13.  
 
The Problem  
792. I passionately desire the utmost freedom for o ur women. I detest child 
marriages. I shudder to see a child widow, and shiv er with rage when a husband 
just widowed contracts with brutal indifference ano ther marriage. I deplore the 
criminal indifference of parents who deep their dau ghters utterly ignorant and 
illiterate and bring them up only f9r the purpose o f marrying them off to some 
young man of means. Notwithstanding all this grief and rage, I realize the Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 332  difficulty of the problem. Women must have votes an d an equal legal status. 
But the problem does not end there. It only commenc es at the point where 
women begin to affect the political deliberations o f the nation. –YI, 21-7-21, 
229.  
 
The Ideal of Marriage  
793. The ideal that marriage aims at is that of spi ritual union through the 
physical. The human love that it incarnates is inte nded to serve as a stepping 
stone to divine or universal love. S.F.G-18 
 
794. The wife is not the husband’s bond slave, but his companion and his 
helpmate, and an equal partner in all his joys and sorrows—as free as the 
husband to choose her own path—Auto, 38.  
 
Child Marriage  
795. What is kanaka in the case of little children?  Has a father any rights of 
property over his children? He is their protector n ot owner. And he forfeits the 
privilege of protection when he abuses it by seekin g to garter away the liberty 
of the ward. 
The least that a parent, who has so abused his trus t as to give in marriage an 
infant to an old man in his dotage or to a boy hard ly in his teens, can do, is to 
purge himself of his sin by remarrying his daughter  when she becomes 
widowed. As I have said in a previous note, such ma rriages should be declared 
null and void from the beginning. 
–YI, 11-11-26, 388. 
 
796. You must be able surely to control your lust t o this extent, that you are 
not going to marry a girl that is under 16 years ag e. If I could do so I would lay 
down 20 as the minimum. Twenty years is early enoug h even in India. It is we 
who are responsible for the precocity of the girls,  not even the Indian climate, Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 333  because I know girls of the age of twenty who are p ure and undefiled and able 
to stand the storm that may rage round. Let us not hug that precocity to 
ourselves. Some Brahman students tell me that they cannot follow this 
principle, that they cannot get Brahman girls sixte en years old, very few 
Brahmans keep their daughters unmarried till that a ge, the Brahman girls are 
married mostly before 10, 12 and 13 years. Then I s ay to the Brahman youth, 
"Cease to be a Brahman, if you cannot possibly cont rol yourself. Choose a grown 
up girl of 16 who became a widow when she was a chi ld. If you cannot get a 
Brahman widow who has reached that age, then go and  take any girl you like. 
And I tell you that the God of the Hindus will pard on that boy who has 
preferred to marry out of his caste rather than rav ish a girl of twelve. When 
your heart is not pure and you cannot master your p assions, you cease to an 
educated man. You have called your institution a pr emier institution. I want 
you to leave up to the name of the premier institut ion which must produce boys 
who will occupy the front rank in character. And wh at is education without 
character and what is character without elementary personal purity? 
Brahmanism I adore. I have defended Varnashrama Dha rma. But Brahmanism 
that can tolerate untouchability, virgin widowhood,  spoliation of virgins, stinks 
in my nostrils. It is a parody of Brahmanism. There  is no knowledge of Brahman 
therein. There is no true interpretation of the scr iptures. It is undiluted 
animalism, Brahmanism is made of sterner stuff. 
–YI, 15-9-27, 314.  
 
The Dowry System  
797.The system has to go. Marriage must cease to be  a matter of arrangement 
made by parents for money. The system is intimately  connected with caste. So 
long as the choice is restricted to a few hundred-y oung men or young women of 
a particular caste, the system, will persist no mat ter what is said against it. 
The girls or boys or their parents will have to bre ak the bonds of caste if the 
evil is to be eradicated. All this means education of a character that will 
revolutionize the mentality of the youth of the nat ion. –H, 23-5-36, 117. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 334   
798.There should be work done in the schools and co lleges and amongst the 
parents of girls. The parents should so educate the ir daughters that they would 
refuse to marry a young man who wanted a price for marrying and would rather 
remain spinsters than be party to the degrading ter ms. The only honourable 
terms in marriage are mutual love and mutual consen t. –YI, 27-12-28, 431. 
 
799. Q. Namashudra girls are generally married at t he age of 12 or 13; formerly 
the usual age was 8 or 9. The bridegroom has to pay  a dowry of Rs. 150 for the 
bride. The average difference of age between the tw o is about 12 to 15 years. 
As a result of this the number of widows in namashu dra society is rather large. 
Among one section of the caste, widow remarriage wa s prevalent. But in 
imitation of another section which was looked upon as superior, the former are 
giving up that practice. What is your advice regard ing child marriage and widow 
remarriage? 
A. Dealing with the question Gandhiji said that his  opinion was definite. In the 
first instance there should be no possibility of ch ild widows. He was averse to 
child marriages. It was an evil custom which unfort unately the namashudras 
had perhaps taken from the so-called higher castes.  
Gandhiji was also against the system of dowry. It w as nothing but the sale of 
girls. That there should be castes even amongst nam ashudras was deplorable 
and he would strongly advise them to abolish all ca ste-distinctions amongst 
themselves. And in this they should bear in mind th e opinion the speaker had 
often expressed that all caste-distinctions should be abolished, and there 
should be only one caste, namely, bhangis and all H indus should take pride in 
being called bhangis and nothing else. This applied  to the namashudras as well. 
When child marriages were abolished, naturally ther e would be few, if any, 
young widows. As a general rule he was for one man one wife for life, and one 
woman one husband for life. Custom had familiarized  women in the so-called 
higher castes with enforced widowhood. Contrary was  the rule with men. He 
called it a disgrace, but whilst society was in tha t pitiable condition, he Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 335  advocated widow remarriage for all young widows. He  believed in equality of 
the sexes and, therefore, he could only think of th e same rights for women as 
men. -16-3-47, 67.  
 
The Choice of Mates and Social Interference  
800. (Referring to a case of suicide, Gandhiji wrot e:) 
In my opinion such marriages as are interdicted in a particular society cannot 
be recognized all at once or at the will of the ind ividual. Nor has society or 
relatives of parties concerned any right to impose their will upon and forcibly 
curtail the liberty of action of the young people w ho may want to contract such 
marriages. In the instance cited by the corresponde nt both the parties had fully 
attained maturity. They could well think for themse lves. No one had a right 
forcibly to prevent them from marrying each other i f they wanted to. Society 
could at the most refuse to recognize the marriage,  but it was the height of 
tyranny to drive them to suicide. 
Marriage taboos are not universal and are largely b ased on social usage. The 
usage varies from province to province and as betwe en different divisions. This 
does not mean that the youth may ride rough-shod ov er all established social 
customs and inhibitions. Before they decide to do s o, they must convert public 
opinion to their side. In the meantime, the individ uals concerned ought 
patientlyto bide their time, or if they cannot do t hat calmly and quietly to face 
the consequences of social ostracism.At the same ti me it is equally the duty of 
society not to take up a heartless, step-motherly a ttitude towards those who 
might disregard r break the established conventions . In the instance described 
by my correspondent the guilt of driving the young couple to suicide certainly 
rests on the shoulders of society if the version th at is before me is correct. –H, 
29-5-37. 125. 
 
801. Q. You advocate inter-caste marriages. Do you also favour marriages 
between Indians professing different religions? Sho uld they declare themselves 
as belonging to no denomination, or can they contin ue their old religious Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 336  practices and yet intermarry? If so, what form shou ld the marriage ceremony 
take? Is it to be a purely civil function or a reli gious function? 
Do you consider religion to be exclusively a person al matter? 
A. Though Gandhiji admitted that he had not always held the view, he had 
come to the conclusion long ago that an inter -reli gious marriage was a 
welcome event whenever it took place. His stipulati on was that such 
connection was not a product of lust. In his opinio n it was no marriage. It was 
illicit intercourse. Marriage in his estimation was  a sacred institution. Hence 
there must be mutual friendship, either party havin g equal respect for the 
religion of the other. There was no question in thi s of conversion. Hence the 
marriage ceremony would be performed by the priests  belonging to either 
faith. This happy event could take place when the c ommunities shed mutual 
enmity and had regard for the religions of the worl d. 
–H, 16-3-47, 63. 
 
802. Q. You say that you are in favour of inter-rel igious marriages, but at the 
same time you say that each arty should retain his or her own religion and, 
therefore, you said, you tolerated even civil marri ages. Are there any instances 
of parties belonging to different religions keeping  up their own religions to the 
end of their lives? And is not the institution of c ivil marriage a negation of 
religion and does it not tend towards laxity of rel igion? 
A. Gandhiji said that the questions were appropriat e. He had no instances in 
mind where the parties had clung to their respectiv e faiths up to death, 
because these friends whom he knew had not yet died . He had, however, under 
his observation men and women professing different religions and each clinging 
to his or her own faith without abatement. But he w ould go so far as to say that 
they need not wait for the discovery of past instan ces. They should create new 
ones so that timid ones may shed their timidity. 
As to civil marriages, he did not believe in them, but he welcomed the 
institution of civil marriage as a much needed refo rm for the sake of reform. –Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 337  H, 16-3-47, 67.  
 
Marriage and Love  
803. A correspondent laid down the following condit ions of marriage : (I) 
Mutual attraction or love; (2) Eugenic fitness; (3)  Approval and consent of the 
respective families concerned; and consideration fo r the interest of the social 
order to which one belongs; (4) Spiritual developme nt. 
I accept generally the conditions for an ideal marr iage enumerated by my 
correspondent. But I would change their order of im portance and put ‘love’ last 
in the list. By giving it the first place, the othe r conditions are liable to be 
overshadowed by it altogether and rendered more or less nugatory. Therefore, 
spiritual development ought to e given the first pl ace in the choice for 
marriage. Service should come next, family consider ations and the interest of 
the social order should have the third place, and m utual attraction or ‘love’ the 
fourth and the last place. This means that ‘love’ a lone, where the other three 
conditions are not fulfilled, should not be held as  a valid reason for marriage. 
At the same time, marriage where there is no love s hould equally be ruled out 
even though all the other conditions are fully comp lied with. I should score out 
the condition of eugenic fitness, because the beget ting of offspring being the 
central purpose of marriage, eugenic fitness cannot  be treated as a ‘condition’; 
it is the sine qua non of marriage. –H, 5-6-37, 131 .  
 
The Married Estate  
804. A sister, who is a good worker, and was anxiou s to remain celibate in order 
to serve better the country’s cause, has recently m arried having met the mate 
of her dreams. But she imagines that in doing so sh e has done wrong and fallen 
from the high ideal which she had set before hersel f. I have tried to rid her 
mind of this delusion. It is no doubt an excellent thing for girls to remain 
unmarried for the sake of service, but the fact is that only one in a million is 
able to do so. Marriage is a natural thing in life,  and to consider it derogatory in 
any sense is wholly wrong. When one imagines any ac t a fall it is difficult, Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 338  however hard one tries, to raise oneself. The idea is to look upon marriage as a 
sacrament and therefore to lead a life of self-rest raint in the married estate. 
Marriage in Hinduism is one of the four ashrams. In  fact the other three are 
based on it. 
The duty of the above-mentioned and other sisters w ho think like her is, 
therefore, not to look down upon marriage but to gi ve it its due place and 
make of it the sacrament it is. If they exercise th e necessary self-restraint, 
they will find growing within themselves a greater strength for service. She who 
wishes to serve will naturally choose a partner in life who is of the same mind, 
and their joint service will be the country’s gain.  –H, 22-3-42, 88.  
 
Divorce  
805. Marriage confirms the right of union between t wo partners to the 
exclusion of all the others when in their joint opi nion they consider such union 
to be desirable, but it confers no right upon one p artner to demand obedience 
of the other to one’s wish for union. What should b e done when one partner on 
moral or other grounds cannot conform to the wishes  of the other is a separate 
question. Personally, if divorce was the only alter native, I should not hesitate 
to accept it, rather than interrupt my moral progre ss, - assuming that I want to 
restrain myself on purely moral grounds. –YI, 8-10- 25, 346.  
 
Widow Remarriage  
806. The total of 1921 is a trifle higher than for the two (previous) decades 
They only demonstrate still further the enormity of  the wrong done to the 
Hindu girl widows. We cry out for cow-protection in  the name of religion, but 
we refuse protection to the girl widow. In the name  of religion we force 
widowhood upon our three lakhs of girl widows who c ould not understand the 
import of the marriage ceremony. To force widowhood  upon little girls is a 
brutal crime for which we Hindus are daily paying d early. If our conscience was 
truly awakened there would be no marriage before 15 , let alone widowhood, 
and we would declare that these three lakhs of girl s were never married. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 339  Voluntary widowhood consciously adopted by a woman who has felt the 
affection of a partner adds grace and dignity to li fe, sanctifies the home and 
uplifts religions itself. Widowhood imposed by reli gion or custom is an 
unbearable yoke and defiles the home by secret vice  and degrades religion. 
If we would be pure, if we would save Hinduism, we must rid ourselves of this 
poison of enforced widowhood. The reform must begin  by those who have girl 
widows taking courage in both their hands and seein g that the child widows in 
their charge are duly and well married –not remarri ed. They were never really 
married. –YI, 5-8-26, 276. 
 
807. Widow-remarriage is no sin—if it be, it is as much a sin as the marriage of 
a widower is .All widowhood is not holy. It is an a dornment to her who can 
observe it. If this sister has the courage, then le t her speak out her mind to her 
uncle and brothers and seek their help. It they can not assist in the marriage, 
then the sister will have to quit their house and t ake refuge in some widow-
remarriage institution. 
–(Translated from the Hindi Navajivan of 9-5-29.) 
 
808. Some Brahman students told me that they cannot  follow this principle, 
that they cannot get Brahman girls sixteen years ol d, very few Brahmans keep 
their daughters unmarried till that age, the Brahma n girls are married mostly 
before 10, 12 and 13 years. Then I say to the Brahm an youth, ‘Cease to be 
Brahman if you cannot possibly control yourself. Ch oose a grown up girl of 16 
who became a widow when she was a child. If you can not get a Brahman widow 
who has reached that age, then go and take any girl  you like. And I tell you that 
the God of the Hindus will pardon that boy who has preferred to marry out of 
his caste rather than ravish a girl of twelve.’ –YI , 15-9-27, 314.  
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 340  The Purdah  
809. Chastity is not a hot-house growth. It cannot be protected by the 
surrounding wall of the purdah. It must grow from w ithin, and to be worth 
anything it must be capable of withstanding every u nsought temptation. 
–YI, 3-2-27, 37. 
 
810. And why is there all this morbid anxiety about  female purity? Have women 
any say in the matter of male purity? We hear nothi ng of women’s anxiety 
about men’s chastity. Why should men arrogate to th emselves the right to 
regulate female purity? It cannot be superimposed f rom without. It is a matter 
of evolution from within and therefore of individua l self-effort. 
–YI, 25-11-26, 415. 
 
811. Q. Do you not think that a strict enforcement of the purdah system would 
improve the moral condition of women? 
A. Gandhiji was warned by some Muslim critics again st speaking on the purdah. 
He had therefore some hesitation in speaking about it. But he took heart when 
he turned round and saw that many Hindu women obser ved it and that 
numerous Malaya Muslim women of whom he had many fr iends did not observe 
the purdah. He also knew many distinguished Muslim women of India who did 
not observe it. Lastly the real purdah was of the h eart. A woman who peeped 
through the purdah and contemplated a male on whom her gaze fell violated 
the spirit behind it. If a woman observed it in spi rit, she was truly carrying out 
what the great Prophet had said. 
–H, 23-3-47, 78.  
 
Co-education  
812. I cannot definitely state as yet whether it wi ll be successful or not. It does 
not seem to have succeeded in the West. I tried it myself years ago when I even 
made boys and girls sleep in the same verandah with  no partition between Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 341  them, Mrs. Gandhi and myself sharing the verandah w ith them. I must say it 
brought undesirable results. 
Q. But do not worse things happen in purdah-ridden communities? 
A. Yes, of course, but co-education is still in an experimental stage and we 
cannot definitely say one way or the other as to it s results. I think we should 
begin with the family first. There boys and girls s hould  grow together freely and 
naturally. Then co-education will come of itself. – ABP, 12-1-35.  
 
Contraception  
813. If it is contended that birth control is neces sary for the nation because of 
over-population, I dispute the proposition. It has never been proved. In my 
opinion, by a proper land-system, better agricultur e and a supplementary 
industry, this country is capable of supporting twi ce as many people as there 
are today. But I have joined hands with the advocat es of birth control in India 
from the standpoint of the present political condit ion of the country. –YI, 2-4-
125, 118. 
 
814. Q. For the sake of the mother whose health is drained away by too many 
children and for the sake of children themselves, m ay not birth control through 
contraceptives be resorted to as the next best thin g to self-control? 
A. Women should have to resist their husbands. If c ontraceptives are resorted 
to, frightful results will follow. Men and women wi ll be living for sex alone. 
They will become soft-brained, unhinged, in fact me ntal and moral wrecks. 
Q. Even in exceptional cases where women are too we ak for childbearing or 
where either of the parents is diseased can’t this method be resorted to? 
A. No. In cases stated above it is better that husb and and wife should live 
apart.  
I consider it inhuman to impose sterilization law o n the people. But in cases of 
individuals with chronic diseases, it is desirable to have them sterilized if they 
are agreeable to it. Sterilization is a sort of con traceptive and though I am Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 342  against the use of contraceptives in case of women,  I do not mind voluntary 
sterilization in case of man since he is the aggres sor. 
(Mrs. Nair asked if contraceptives were not permitt ed, how the population 
problem could be solved; to which Gandhiji replied that nature would solve the 
problem. If people multiplied like rabbits, they wi ll die like rabbits.) ABP, 12-1-
35. 
 
815. Q. Is the reason you object to artificial mean s of birth control because of 
the means or the act? 
A: Yes. I object for the latter reason. I have felt  that during the years still left 
to me if I can drive home to women’s minds the trut h that they are free, we 
shall have no birth control problem in India. If th ey will only learn to say ‘no’ to 
their husbands when they approach them carnally.... . The real problem is that 
they do not want to resist them. 
Q. You are giving them advice which they cannot acc ept. Would it not make 
their condition worse? 
A. Not if they learn the art of resistance. It boil s down to education. I want 
woman to learn the primary right of resistance. She  thinks now that she has 
now got it. Among the women of India it is most dif ficult to drive home this 
truth. If I were to devote myself to birth control I would miss this primary 
education. 
The case for birth control is not hopelessly weak, otherwise these brilliant men 
would not be aligned with it. If you eliminate birt h control there would be 
other methods. As soon as you agree to eliminate ce rtain methods as harmful, 
you are bound to find others. In the cases you tell  of, as soon as I made the 
discovery I would have seen to it that the men and women were separated. 
Q. But what about the woman’s economic condition? S he has had no 
preparation to support herself, especially in India . She has depended upon 
marriage and her husband for maintenance and her br ead and butter. Who is to Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 343  take care of the children? You must think of these things when you suggest 
separation. 
A. You must devise means. I might suggest that the State take care of them. Or 
the law might be called in to give a divorce. At pr esent, divorce is granted on 
grounds of infidelity. In the future it may be gran ted on grounds of health. Even 
then some hard cases will occur. 
Q. Mr. Gandhi, there are thousands, millions, who r egard your word as that of a 
saint. How can you ask them who are so humble, so w eak, to follow, when you 
who are so much stronger and wiser, have taken year s to bring about that self-
control in your life? 
Mr. Gandhi just smiled. 
- Mrs. Margaret Sanger in Asia, November 1936, pp. 698-702. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 344   
19. ON EDUCATION 
 
816. Real education consists in drawing the best ou t of yourself. What better 
book can there be than the book of humanity? - H, 30-3-34, 55 . 
 
National Education  
817. So many strange things have been said about my  views on national 
education, that it would perhaps not be out of plac e to formulate them before 
the public.  
In my opinion the existing system of education is d efective, apart from its 
association with an utterly unjust Government, in t hree most important 
matters:  
(1) It is based upon foreign culture to the almost entire exclusion of indigenous 
culture.  
(2) It ignores the culture of the heart and the han d, and confines itself simply 
to the head. 
(3) Real education is impossible through a foreign medium. 
Let us examine the three defects. Almost from the c ommencement, the text-
books deal, not with things the boys and the girls have always to deal with in 
their homes, but things to which they are perfect s trangers. It is not through 
the text-books, that a lad learns what is right and  what is wrong in the home 
life. He is never taught to have any pride in his s urroundings. The higher he 
goes, the farther he is removed from his home, so t hat at the end of his 
education he becomes estranged from his surrounding s. He feels no poetry 
about the home life. The village scenes are all a s ealed book to him. His own 
civilization is presented to him as imbecile, barba rous, superstitious and useless 
for all practical purposes. His education is calcul ated to wean him from his 
traditional culture. And if the mass of educated yo uths are not entirely 
denationalized, it is because the ancient culture i s too deeply embedded in Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 345  them to be altogether uprooted even by an education  adverse to its growth. If I 
had my way, I would certainly destroy the majority of the present text-books 
and cause to be written text-books which have a bea ring on and 
correspondence with the home life, so that a boy as  he learns may react upon 
his immediate surroundings.  
Secondly, whatever may be true of other countries, in India at any rate where 
more than eighty per cent of the population is agri cultural and another ten per 
cent industrial, it is a crime to make education me rely literary and to unfit 
boys and girls for manual work in after-life. Indee d I hold that as the larger part 
of our time is devoted to labour for earning our br ead, our children must from 
their infancy be taught the dignity of such labour.  Our children should not be so 
taught as to despise labour. There is no reason, wh y a peasant’s son after 
having gone to a school should become useless as he  does become as 
agricultural labourers. It is a sad thing that our school boys look upon manual 
labour with disfavor, if not contempt. Moreover, in  India, if we expect, as we 
must every boy and girl of school-going age to atte nd public schools, we have 
not the means to finance education in accordance wi th the existing style, nor 
are millions of parents able to pay the fees that a re at present imposed. 
Education to be universal must therefore be free. I  fancy that even under an 
ideal system of government, we shall not be able to  devote two thousand 
million rupees which we should require for finding education for all the children 
of school-going age. It follows, therefore, that ou r children must be made to 
pay in labour partly or wholly for all the educatio n they receive. Such universal 
labour to be profitable can only be (to my thinking ) hand-spinning and hand-
weaving. But for the purposes of my proposition, it  is immaterial whether we 
have spinning or any other form of labour, so long as it can be turned to 
account. Only, it will be found upon examination, t hat on a practical, 
profitable and extensive scale, there is no occupat ion other than the processes 
connected with cloth-production which can be introd uced in our schools 
throughout India. 
The introduction of manual training will serve a do uble purpose in a poor 
country like ours. It will pay for the education of  our children and teach them Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 346  an occupation on which they can fall back in after- life, if they choose, for 
earning a living. Such a system must make our child ren self-reliant. Nothing will 
demoralize the nation so much as that we should lea rn to despise labour. 
One word only as to the education of the heart. I d o not believe, that this can 
be imparted through books. It can only be done thro ugh the living touch of the 
teacher. And, who are the teachers in the primary a nd even secondary schools? 
Are they men and women of faith and character? Have  they themselves 
received the training of the heart? Are they ever e xpected to take care of the 
permanent element in the boys and girls placed unde r their charge? Is not the 
method of engaging teachers for lower schools an ef fective bar against 
character? Do the teachers get even a living wage? And we know, that the 
teachers of primary schools are not selected for th eir patriotism. They only 
come who cannot find any other employment.  
Finally, the medium of instruction. My views on thi s point are too well known to 
need restating. The foreign medium has caused brain -fag, put an undue strain 
upon the nerves of our children, made them crammers  and imitators, unfitted 
them for original work and thought, and disabled th em for filtrating their 
learning to the family or the masses. The foreign m edium has made our 
children practically foreigners in their own land. It is the greatest tragedy of 
the existing system. The foreign medium has prevent ed the growth of our 
vernaculars. If I had the powers of a despot, I wou ld today stop the tuition of 
our boys and girls through a foreign medium, and re quire all the teachers and 
professors on pain of dismissal to introduce the ch ange forthwith. I would not 
wait for the preparation of text-books. They will f ollow the change. It is an evil 
that needs a summary remedy. 
My uncompromising opposition to the foreign medium has resulted in an 
unwarranted charge being levelled against me of bei ng hostile to foreign 
culture or the learning of the English language. No  reader of Young India could 
have missed the statement often made by me in these  pages, that I regard 
English as the language of international commerce a nd diplomacy, and 
therefore consider its knowledge on the part of som e of us as essential. As it 
contains some of the richest treasures of thought a nd literature, I would Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 347  certainly encourage its careful study among those w ho have linguistic talents 
and expect them to translate those treasures for th e nation in its vernaculars. 
Nothing can be farther from my thought than that we  should become exclusive 
or erect barriers. But I do respectfully contend th at an appreciation of other 
cultures can fitly follow, never precede, an apprec iation and assimilation of our 
own. It is my firm opinion that no culture has trea sures so rich as ours has. We 
have not known it, we have been made even to deprec ate its study and 
depreciate its value. We have almost ceased to live  it. An academic grasp 
without practice behind it is like an embalmed corp se, perhaps lovely to look at 
but nothing to inspire or ennoble. My religion forb ids me to belittle or disregard 
other cultures, as it insists under pain  of civil suicide upon imbibing and living 
my own.— YI, I-9-2I, 276 
 
The Cause of the Vernaculars  
818. It is evident that unless we advance this caus e, we shall not be able to 
remove the growing intellectual and cultural gulf b etween our men and women 
and between the classes and the masses. It is also equally certain that the 
vernacular medium alone can stimulate originality i n thought in the largest 
number of persons.— YI, 2I-4-20, Tagore, 465.  
 
Religious Instruction and the State  
819.Q. Should religious instruction form part of th e school curriculum as 
approved by the state? Do you favour separate schoo ls for children belonging to 
different denominations for facility of religious i nstruction? Or, should religious 
instruction be left in the hands of private bodies?  If so, do you think it is right 
for the state to subsidize such bodies? 
A. As to this question Gandhiji said that he did no t believe in state religion 
even though the whole community had one religion. T he state interference 
would probably always be unwelcome. Religion was pu rely a personal matter. 
There were in reality as many religions as minds. E ach mind had a different 
conception of God from that of the other. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 348  He was also opposed to state aid, partly or wholly,  to religious bodies. For he 
knew that an institution or group, which did not ma nage to finance its own 
religious teaching, was a stranger to true religion . This did not mean that the 
state schools would not give ethical teaching. The fundamental ethics were 
common to all religions.  –H, I6-3-47, 63.  
 
820. I do not believe that the state can concern it self or cope with religious 
instruction. I believe that religious education mus t be the sole concern of 
religious associations. Do not mix up religion and ethics. I believe that 
fundamental ethics is common to all religions. Teac hing of fundamental ethics 
is undoubtedly a function of the state. By religion  I have not in mind 
fundamental ethics but what goes by the name of den ominationalism. We have 
suffered enough from state-aided religion and a sta te church. A society or a 
group, which depends partly or wholly on state aid for the existence of its 
religion, does not deserve or, better still, does n ot have any religion worth the 
name. I do not need to give any illustrations in su pport of this obvious truth as 
it is to me. 
—H, 23-3-47, 76.  
 
821. Religion was a personal matter and if we succe eded in confining it the 
personal plane, all would be well in our political life. –H,31-8-47, 303.  
 
Character-building, First  
822.Q.What is your goal in education when India obt ains self-rule? 
A. Character- building. I would try to develop cour age, strength, virtue, to 
ability to forget oneself in working towards great aims. This is more important 
than literacy, academic learning is only a means to  this greater end. That is 
why India’s great lack of literacy, deplorable as i t is, does not appeal to me nor 
make me feel that India is unfit for self -rule. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 349  Q. Would you try to bring about any specific kind o f social organization through 
education? 
A. I would feel that if we succeed in building the character of the individual, 
society will take care of itself. I would be quite willing to trust the organization 
of society to individuals so developed. 
Q. In developing the new national spirit in India w ould you like to make 
patriotic feelings so strong that duty to one’s cou ntry would be a higher good 
than obeying one’s personal conscience? 
A. I hope that will never be. One’s own inner convi ctions come first always. But 
in a nation where character is developed in all ind ividuals, there can be no 
conflict between the dictates of one’s own conscien ce and those of the State.—
Carlton Wash-burne: Remakers of Mankind. (1932),PP.104-05.  
 
The place of Literacy  
823.Literary training by itself adds not an inch to  one’s moral height and 
character- building is independent of literary trai ning.—YI,1-6-21, 172.  
 
824.What is literary training worth if it cramp and  confine us at a critical 
moment in national life? Knowledge and literary tra ining are no recompense for 
emasculation. – YI,21-6-28, 205.  
 
825.Let them (students) realize that learning witho ut courage is like a waxen 
statue beautiful to look at but bound to melt at th e least touch of a hot 
substance. –YI,12-7-28,236.  
 
826.But although much good and useful work can be d one without a knowledge 
of the three R’s, it is my firm belief that we cann ot always do without such 
knowledge. It develops and sharpens one’s intellect , and it increases our 
capacity of doing good. I have never placed an unne cessarily high value on the 
knowledge of the three R’s. I am only attempting to  assign its proper place to Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 350  it. I have pointed out from time to time that there  is no justification for men to 
deprive women of, or to deny to them ,equal rights on the ground of their 
illiteracy. But education is essential for enabling  women to assert these natural 
rights, to exercise them wisely, and to work for th eir expansion; again, the true 
knowledge of self is unattainable by the millions w ho lack such education. Many 
a book is full of innocent pleasure, and this will be denied to us without 
education. It is no exaggeration to say that a huma n being without education is 
not far removed from an animal. Education, therefor e, is necessary for women 
as it is for men. 
—(Speech delivered on20-2-18) WSI,3.  
 
827.I am not sure that it is not better for the chi ldren to have much of the 
preliminary instruction imparted to them vocally. T o impose o children of 
tender age a knowledge of the alphabet and the abil ity to read before they can 
gain general know-ledge is to deprive them, whilst they are fresh, of the power 
of assimilating instruction by word of mouth. 
—YI, I6-9-26, 323.  
 
828. This utterly false idea that intelligence can be developed only through 
book-reading should give place to the truth that th e quickest development of 
the mind can be achieved by artisan’s work being le arnt in a scientific manner. 
True development of the mind commences immediately the apprentice is 
taught at every step why a particular manipulation of the hand or a tool is 
required. The problem of the unemployment of studen ts can be solved without 
difficulty, if they will rank themselves among the common labourers. — H, 9-I-
37, 386.  
 
Basic Education  
839. I hold that true education of the intellect ca n only come through a proper 
exercise and training of the bodily organs, e.g. ha nds, feet, eyes, ears, nose, Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 351  etc. In other words an intelligent use of the bodil y organs in a child provides 
the best and quickest way of developing his intelle ct. But unless the 
development of the mind and body goes hand in hand with prove to be a prove 
to be a poor lop-sided affair. By spiritual trainin g I mean education of the 
heart. A proper and all-round development of the mi nd, therefore, can take 
place only when it proceeds pari passu with the edu cation of the physical and 
spiritual faculties of the child. They constitute a n indivisible whole. According 
to this theory, therefore, it would be a gross fall acy to suppose that they can 
be developed piecemeal or independently of one anot her.—H, 8-5-37, I04. 
 
830. By education I mean an all-round drawing out o f the best in child and man-
body, mind and spirit. Literacy is not the end of e ducation nor even the 
beginning. It is only one of the means whereby man and woman can be 
educated. Literacy in itself is no education. I wou ld therefore begin the child’s 
education by teaching it a useful handicraft and en abling it to produce from the 
moment it begins its training. Thus every school ca n be made self-supporting, 
the condition being that the state takes over the m anufactures of these 
schools. 
I hold that highest development of the mind and the  soul is possible under such 
a system of education. Only every handicraft has to  be taught not merely 
mechanically as is done today but scientifically, i .e. the child should know the 
why and the wherefore of every process. I am not wr iting this without some 
confidence, because it has the backing of experienc e. This method is being 
adopted more or less completely wherever spinning i s being taught to workers. 
I have myself taught sandal-making and even spinnin g on these lines with good 
results. This method does not exclude o these lines  with good results. This 
method does not exclude a knowledge of history and geography. But I find that 
this is best taught by transmitting such general in formation by word of mouth. 
One imparts ten times as much in this manner as by reading and writing. The 
signs of the alphabet may be taught later when the pupil has learnt to 
distinguish wheat from chaff and when he has somewh at developed his or her 
tastes. This is a revolutionary proposal but it sav es immense labour and enables Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 352  a student to acquire in one year what he may take m uch longer to learn. This 
means all-round economy. Of course the pupil learns  mathematics whilst he is 
learning his handicraft.  
I attach the greatest importance to primary educati on which according to my 
conception should be equal to the present matricula tion less English. 
-H, 31-7-37, 197. 
 
831. We have up to now concentrated on stuffing chi ldren’s minds with all 
kinds of information, without ever thinking of stim ulating and developing them. 
Let us now cry a halt and concentrate on education the child properly through 
manual work, not as a side activity, but as the pri me means of intellectual 
training. You have to train the boys in one occupat ion or another. Round this 
special occupation you will train up his mind, his body, his handwriting, his 
artistic sense, and so on. He will be master of the  craft he learns. –H, 18-9-37, 
261. 
832. The scheme that I wish to place before you tod ay is not the teaching of 
some handicraft side with so-called liberal educati on. I want that the whole 
education should be imparted through some handicraf t or industry. It might be 
objected that in the middle ages only handicrafts w ere taught to the students; 
but the occupational training, then, was far from s erving an educational 
purpose. The crafts were taught only for the sake o f the crafts, without any 
attempt to develop the intellect as well. In this a ge those born to certain 
professions had forgotten them, had taken to cleric al careers and were lost to 
countryside. The remedy lies in imparting the whole  art and science of a craft 
through practical training and there through impart ing the whole education. 
I am very keen on finding the expenses of a teacher  through the product of the 
manual work of his pupils, because I am convinced t hat there is no other way to 
carry education to crores of our children. We canno t wait until we have the 
necessary revenue and until the Viceroy reduces the  military expenditure. You 
should bear in mind that this primary education wou ld include the elementary 
principles of sanitation, hygiene, nutrition, of do ing their won work, helping Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 353  parents at home etc. The present generation of boys  know no clean lines, no 
self-help, and are physically weak. I would therefo re, give compulsory physical 
training through musical drill.—Ed, Rec., 61-63 or H, 30-10-37, 323. 
 
833. I am a firm believer in the principle of free and compulsory primary 
education For India. I also hold that we shall real ize this only by teaching the 
children useful vocation and utilizing it as a mean s for cultivating their mental, 
physical and spiritual faculties. Let no one consid er these economic 
calculations in connection with education as sordid  or out of place. There is 
nothing essentially sordid about economic calculati ons. True economics never 
militates against the highest ethical standard, jus t as true ethics to be worth its 
name must at the same time, be also good economics.  –H, 9-10-37, 292. 
 
834. What kinds of vocation are the fittest for bei ng taught to children in urban 
schools? There is no hard and fast rule about it. B ut my reply is clear. I want to 
resuscitate the villages of India. Today our villag es have become a mere 
appendage to the cities. They exist, as it were, to  be exploited by the latter 
and depend on the latter’s sufferance. This is unna tural. It is only when the 
cities realize the duty of making an adequate retur n to the villages for the 
strength and sustenance which they derive from them , instead of selfishly 
exploiting them, that a healthy and moral relations hip between the two will 
spring up. And if the city children are to play the ir part in this great and noble 
work of social reconstruction, the vocations throug h which they are to achieve 
their education ought to be directly related to the  requirements of the villages. 
So far as I can see, the various processes of cotto n manufacture from ginning 
and cleaning of cotton to the spinning of yarn, ans wer this test as nothing else 
does. Even today the cotton is grown in the village s and is ginned and spun and 
converted into cloth in the cities. But the chain o f processes which cotton 
undergoes in the kills from the beginning to the en d constitutes a huge tragedy 
of waste in men, materials and mechanical power. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 354  My plan to impart primary education through the med ium of village handicrafts 
like spinning and carding, etc. is thus conceived a s the spearhead of a silent 
social revolution fraught with most far-reaching co nsequences. It will provide a 
healthy and moral basis of relationship between the  city and the village and 
thus go a long way towards eradicating some of the worst evils of the present 
social insecurity and poisoned relationship between  the classes. It will check 
the progressive decay of our villages and lay the f oundation of a just social 
order in which there is no unnatural division betwe en the ‘haves’ and the 
‘have-nots’ and everybody is assured of a living wa ge and the right to freedom. 
And all this would be accomplished without the horr or of a bloody class war or 
a colossal capital expenditure such as would be inv olved in the mechanization 
of a vast continent like India. Nor would it entail  a helpless dependence on 
foreign imported machinery of technical skill. Last ly, by obviating the necessity 
for highly specialized talent, it would place the d estiny of the masses, as it 
were, in their own hands. But who will bell the cat ? Will the city-folk listen to 
me at all? Or, will mine remain a mere cry in the w ilderness? Replies to these 
and similar questions will depend more on lovers of  education like my 
correspondent living in cities than on me. 
—H, 9-I0-37, 293.  
 
Higher Education  
835. I would revolutionize college education and re late it to national 
necessities. There would be degrees for mechanical and other engineers. They 
would be attached to the different industries which  would pay for the training 
of the graduates they need. Thus the Tatas would be  expected to run a college 
for training engineers under the supervision of the  state, the mill associations 
would run among them a college for training graduat es whom they need. 
Similarly for other industries that may be named. C ommerce will have its 
college. There remain arts, medicine and agricultur e. Several private arts 
colleges are today self-supporting. That State woul d. Therefore, cease to run 
its own. Medical colleges would be attached to cert ified hospitals. As they are 
popular among moneyed men they may be expected by v oluntary contributions Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 355  to support medical colleges. And agricultural colle ges to be worthy of the name 
must be self-supporting. I have a painful experienc e of some agricultural 
graduates. Their knowledge is superficial. They lac k practical experience. But if 
they had their apprenticeship on farms which are se lf-sustained and answer the 
requirements of the country, they would not have to  gain experience after 
getting their degrees and at the expense of their e mployers. 
—H, 3I-7-37, I97.  
 
836. The Rt. Hon. Shri Srinivasa Shastri has critic ized, as he had a perfect right 
to do, the views I timidly and very briefly express ed some time ago on higher 
education. I entertain a very high regard for him a s man, patriot and scholar. It 
is therefore always painful to me when I find mysel f disagreeing with him. And 
yet duty compels me to re-express my views on highe r education more fully 
than before, so that the reader may make out for hi mself the difference 
between his views and mine. 
I admit my limitations. I have no university educat ion worth the name. My high 
school career was never above the average, I was th ankful if I could pass my 
examinations. Distinction in the school was beyond my aspiration. Nevertheless 
I do hold very strong views on education in general , including what is called 
higher education. And I own it to the country that my views should be clearly 
known and taken for what they may be worth. I must shed the timidity that has 
led almost to self-suppression. I must not fear rid icule and even loss of 
popularity or prestige. If I hide my belief, I shal l never correct errors of 
judgment. I am always eager to discover them and mo re than eager to correct 
them. 
Let me now state my conclusions held for a number o f ears and enforced 
wherever I had opportunity of enforcing them:  
(1) I am not opposed to education even of the highe st type attainable in the 
world.  
(2) The state must pay for it wherever it has defin ite use for it.  
(3) I am opposed to all higher education being paid  for from the general Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 356  revenue.  
(4) It is my firm conviction that the vast amount o f the so-called education it 
arts, given in our colleges, is sheer waste and has  resulted in unemployment 
among the educated classes. What is more, it has de stroyed the health, both 
mental and physical, of the boys and girls who have  the misfortune to go 
through the grind in our colleges.  
(5) The medium of a foreign language through which higher education has been 
imparted in India has caused incalculable intellect ual and moral injury to the 
nation. We are too near our own times to judge the enormity of the damage 
done. And we judges-an almost impossible feat.  
I must give my reasons for the conclusions set fort h above. This I can best do, 
perhaps, by giving a chapter from my own experience .  
Up to the age of 12 all the knowledge I gained was through Gujarati, my mother 
tongue. I knew then something of Arithmetic, Histor y and Geography. Then I 
entered a High school. For the first three years th e mother tongue was still the 
medium. But the school-master’s business was to dri ve English into the pupil’s 
head. Therefore more than half of our time was give n to learning English and 
mastering its arbitrary spelling and pronunciation.  It was a painful discovery to 
have to learn a language that was not pronounced as  it was written. It was a 
strange experience to have to learn the spelling by  heart. But that is by the 
way, and irrelevant to my argument. However, for th e first three years, it was 
comparatively plain sailing. 
The pillory began with the fourth year. Everything had to be learnt through 
English-Geometry, Algebra, Chemistry, Astronomy, Hi story, and Geography. The 
tyranny of English was so great that even Sanskrit or Persian had to be learnt 
through English, not through the mother tongue. If any boy spoke in the class in 
Gujarati which he understood, he was punished. It d id not matter to the 
teacher if a boy spoke bad English which he could n either pronounce correctly 
nor understand fully. Why should the teacher worry?  His own English was by no 
means without blemish. It could not be otherwise. E nglish was as much a 
foreign language to him as to his pupils. The resul t was chaos. We the boys had Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 357  to learn many things by heart, though we could not understand them fully and 
often not at all. My head used to reel as the teach er was struggling to make his 
exposition on Geometry understood by us. I could ma ke neither head nor tail of 
Geometry till we reached the 13th theorem of the fi rst book of Euclid. And let 
me confess to the reader that in spite of all my lo ve for the mother tongue, I do 
not to this day know the Gujarati equivalents of th e technical terms of 
Geometry, Algebra and the like. I know now that wha t I took four years to learn 
of Arithmetic, Geometry, Algebra, Chemistry and Ast ronomy, I should have 
learnt easily in one year, if I had not to learn th em through English but 
Gujarati. My grasp of the subjects would have been easier and clearer. My 
Gujarati vocabulary would have been richer. I would  have made use of such 
knowledge in my own home. This English medium creat ed an impassable barrier 
between me and the members of my family, who had no t gone through English 
schools. My father knew nothing of what I was doing . I could not, even if I had 
wished it, interest my father in what I was learnin g. For though he had ample 
intelligence, he knew not a word of English. I was fast becoming a strange in 
my own home. I certainly became a superior person. Even my dress began to 
undergo imperceptible changes. What happened to me was not an uncommon 
experience. It was common to the majority. 
The first three years in the High School made littl e addition to my stock of 
general knowledge. They were a preparation for fitt ing the boys for teaching 
them everything through English. High schools were schools for cultural 
conquest by the English. The knowledge gained by th e three hundred boys of 
my High School became a circumscribed possession. I t was not for transmission 
to the masses. 
A word about literature. We had to learn several bo oks of English prose and 
English poetry. No doubt all this was nice. But tha t knowledge has been of no 
use to me in serving or bringing me in touch with t he masses .I am unable to 
say that if I should have missed a rare treasure. I f I had, instead, passed those 
precious seven years in mastering Gujarati and had learnt Mathematics, 
sciences and Sanskrit and other subjects through Gu jarati, I could easily have 
shared the knowledge so gained with my neighbours. I would have enriched Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 358  Gujarati, and who can say that I would not have, wi th my habit of application 
and my inordinate love for the country and mother t ongue, made a richer and 
greater contribution to the service of the masses? 
I must not be understood to decry English or noble literature. The columns of 
the Harijan are sufficient evidence of my love of E nglish. But the nobility of its 
literature climate or the scenery of England can av ail her. India has to flourish 
in her own climate and scenery and her own literatu re, even though all the 
three may be inferior to the English climate, scene ry and literature. We and 
our children must build on our own heritage. If we borrow another, we 
impoverish our own. We can never grow on foreign vi ctuals. I want the nation 
to have the treasures contained in that language, a nd for that matter in the 
other languages of the world, through its own verna culars. I do not need to 
learn Bengali in order to know the beauties of Rabi ndranath’s matchless 
productions. I get them through good translations. Gujarati boys and girls do 
not need to learn Russian to appreciate Tolstoy’s s hort stories. They learn them 
through good translations. It is the boast of Engli shmen that the best of the 
world’s literary output is in the hands of that nat ion in simple English inside of 
a week its publication. Why need I learn English to  get at the best of what 
Shakespeare and Milton thought and wrote? 
It would be good economy to set apart a class of st udents whose business would 
be to learn the best of what is to be learnt in the  different languages of the 
world and give the translation in the vernaculars. Our masters chose the wrong 
way for us, and habit has made the wrong appear as right. 
I find daily proof of the increasing and continuing  wrong being dome to the 
millions by our false de-Indianizing education. Tho se graduates who are my 
valued associates themselves flounder when they hav e to give expression to 
their innermost thoughts. They are strangers in the ir own homes. Their 
vocabulary in the mother tongue is so limited that they cannot always finish 
their speech without having recourse to English wor ds and even sentences. Nor 
can they exist without English books. I cite the ca se of my companions to show 
how deep the evil has gone. For we have made a cons cious effort to mend 
ourselves. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 359  It has been argued that the wastage that occurs in our colleges need not worry 
us if, out of the collegians, one Jagadish Bose can  be produced by them. I 
should freely subscribe to the argument, if the was tage was unavoidable. I hope 
I have shown that it was and is even now avoidable.  Moreover the creation of a 
Bose does not help the argument. For Bose was not a  product of the present 
education. He rose in spite of the terrible handica ps under which he had to 
labour. And his knowledge became almost intransmiss ible to the masses. We 
seem to have come to think that no one can hope to be like a Bose unless he 
knows English. I cannot conceive a grosser supersti tion than this. No Japanese 
feels so helpless as we seem to do. 
Nothing but a heroic remedy can deal with the deep- seated evil which I have 
endeavoured to describe. The Congress Ministers can , if they will, mitigate it, if 
they cannot remove it. 
Universities must be made self-supporting The State  should simply educate 
those whose services it would need. For all other b ranches of learning it should 
encourage private effort. The medium of instruction  should be altered at once 
and at any cost, the provincial languages being giv en their rightful place. I 
would prefer temporary chaos in higher education to  the criminal waste that is 
daily accumulating. 
In order to enhance the status and the market-value  of the provincial 
languages, I would have the language of the law cou rts to be the language of 
the law courts to be the language of the province w here the court is situated. 
The proceedings of the provincial legislatures must  be in the language, or even 
in the languages, of the province where a province has more than one language 
within its borders. I suggest to the legislators th at they could, by enough 
application, inside of a month, understand the lang uages of their provinces. 
There is nothing to prevent a Tamilian from easily learning the simple grammar 
and a few hundred words of Telugu, Malayalam and Ka narese, all allied to 
Tamil. At the centre Hindustani must reign supreme.  
In my opinion this is not a question to be decided by academicians. They cannot 
decide through what language the boys and girls of a place are to be educated. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 360  That question is already decided for them in every free country. Nor can they 
decide the subjects to be taught. That depends upon  the wants of the country 
to which they belong. Theirs is the privilege of en forcing the nation’s will in the 
best manner possible. When this country becomes rea lly free, the question of 
medium will be settled only one way. The academicia ns will frame the syllabus 
and prepare text-books accordingly. And the product s of the education of a 
free India will answer the requirements of the coun try as today they answer 
those of the foreign ruler. So long as we the educa ted classes play with this 
question, I very much fear we shall not produce the  free and healthy India of 
our dream. We have to grow by strenuous effort out of our bondage, whether it 
is educational, economical, social or political. Th e effort itself is three-fourths 
of the  battle. 
Thus I claim that I am not an enemy of higher educa tion. But I am an enemy of 
higher education as it is given in this country. Un der my scheme there will be 
more and better libraries, more and better laborato ries, more and better 
research institutes. Under it we should have an arm y of chemists, engineers 
and other experts who will be real servants of the nation, and answer the 
varied and growing requirements of a people who are  becoming increasingly 
conscious of their rights and wants. And all these experts will speak, not a 
foreign tongue, but the language of the people. The  knowledge gained by them 
will be the common property of the people. There wi ll be truly original work 
instead of mere imitation. And the cost will be eve nly and justly distributed. –
H, 9-7-38, 176.  
 
The Future Culture of India  
837. The Indian culture of our times is in the maki ng. Many of us are striving to 
produce a blend of all the cultures which seem toda y to be in clash with one 
another. No culture can live, if it attempts to be exclusive. There is no such 
thing as pure Aryan culture in existence today in I ndia. Whether the Aryans 
were indigenous to India or were unwelcome intruder s, does not interest me 
much. What does interest me is the fact that my rem ote ancestors blended 
with one another with the utmost freedom and we of the present generation Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 361  are a result of that blend. Whether we are doing an y good to the country of our 
birth and the tiny globe which sustains us or wheth er we are a burden, the 
future alone will show. –H, 9-5-36,100. 
 
838. I do not want my house to be walled in on all sides and my windows to be 
stuffed. I want the cultures of all lands to be blo wn about my house as freely as 
possible. But I refuse to be blown off my feet by a ny. I would have our young 
men and women with literary tastes to learn as much  f English and other world-
languages as they like, and then expect them to giv e the benefits of their 
learning to India and to the world like a Bose, a R oy or the Poet himself. But I 
would not have a single Indian to forget, neglect o r be ashamed of his mother 
tongue, or to feel that he or she cannot think or e xpress the best thoughts in 
his or her own vernacular. Mine is not a religion o f the prison-house. –YI, 1-6-
21, 170. 
 
839. The (Gujarat) Vidyapith does not propose merel y to feed on, or repeat, 
the ancient cultures. It rather hopes to build a ne w culture based on the 
traditions of the past and enriched by the experien ce of later times. It stands 
for synthesis of the different cultures that have c ome to say in India, that have 
influenced Indian life, and that, in their turn, ha ve themselves been influenced 
be the spirit of the soil. This synthesis will natu rally be of the Swadeshi type, 
where each culture is assured its legitimate place,  and not of the American 
pattern, where one dominant culture absorbs the res t, and where the aim is 
not towards harmony, but towards an artificial and forced unity. –YI, 17-11-20, 
Tagore, 45. 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 362   
20. MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Guide to Health  
840. Our body has been given to us on the understan ding that we should render 
devoted service to God with its aid. It is our duty  t keep it pure and unstained 
from within as well as from without, so as to rende r it back to the Giver when 
the time comes for it, in the state of purity in wh ich we got it. – GH, 129.  
 
841. The relation between the body and the mind is so intimate that, if either 
of them got out of order, the whole system would su ffer. Hence it follows that 
a pure character is the foundation of health in the  real sense of the term; and 
we may say that all evil thoughts and evil passions  are but different forms of 
disease. – GH, 8.  
 
842. Perfect health can be attained only by living in obedience to the laws of 
God, and defying the power of Satan. True happiness  is impossible without true 
health and true health is impossible without a rigi d control of the palate. All 
the other senses will automatically come under cont rol when the palate has 
been brought under control. And he who has conquere d his senses has really 
conquered the whole world, and he becomes a part of  God. –GH, 131.  
 
Municipal Sanitation  
843. The one thing which we can and must learn from  the West is the science 
of municipal sanitation. The peoples of the West ha ve evolved a science of 
corporate sanitation and hygiene from which we have  much to learn. We must 
modify Western methods of sanitation to suit our re quirements. And as my 
patriotism is inclusive and admits of no enmity or ill-will, I do not hesitate, in 
spite of my horror of Western materialism, to take from the West what is Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 363  beneficial for me. –YI, 26-12-24, 430.  
 
Institutions and Public Support  
844. It is my settled conviction that no deserving institution ever dies for want 
of support. Institutions that have died have done s o either because there was 
nothing in them to commend them to the public or be cause those in control 
lost faith, or which is perhaps the same thing, los t stamina. I would therefore 
urge the conductors of such institutions not to giv e in because of the general 
depression. It is a time of test for worthy institu tions. –YI, 15-10-25, 351.  
 
845. Q. What is the outlook, in view of the precari ous financial position of our 
Ashrams and institutions (for Harriman work) today?  
A: It is not our financial position, but our moral position that is precarious. No 
movement or activity that has the sure foundation o f the purity of character of 
its workers, is ever in danger to come to an end fo r want of funds. Then we in 
Gujarat have to realize that we must not always dep end only on our moneyed 
men. We have to tap humbler resources. Our middle c lasses and even poor 
classes support so many beggars, so many temples, w hy will they not support a 
few good workers? We must beg from door to door, be g grain, beg copper coins, 
do as they do in Bihar and Maharashtra. In Maharash tra they have paisa funds 
and mushti funds. It will be the finest form of pro paganda. But remember that 
everything will depend on the singleness of your pu rpose, your devotion to the 
task and the purity of your character. People won’t  give for such work unless 
they are sure of our selflessness. 
Q. If it is impossible to get the caste Hindus’ co- operation in anti-untouchability 
work, would it not be better to take up the village  industries work? 
A. That is a delusion. You may be sure that he who gives up Harijan work on a 
pretext like that will be able to do less for the v illage industries work. You 
can’t settle down in a village and miss the Harijan s who are the foundation of 
society. –H, 28-11-36, 331.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 364  Running Institutions on Public Money  
846. I had learnt at the outset not to carry on pub lic work with borrowed 
money. One could rely on people’s promise in most m atters except in matters 
of money. – Auto, 186.  
 
847. The public should be the bank for all public i nstitutions, which should not 
last a day longer than the public wish. An institut ion run with the interest of 
accumulated capital ceases to be amenable to public  opinion and becomes 
autocratic and self-righteous.  –SA, 202.  
 
848. Take the illustration of the new educational e xperiment. The experiment I 
said must go on without asking for monetary help. O therwise, after my death 
the whole organization would go to pieces. The fact  is that the moment 
financial stability is assured, spiritual bankruptc y is also assured. – H, 10-12-38, 
371.  
 
849. After considerable experience with the many pu blic institutions which I 
have managed, it has become my firm conviction that  it is not good to run 
public institutions on permanent funds. A permanent  fund carries in itself the 
seed of the moral fall of the institution. A public  institution means an 
institution conducted with the approval, and from t he funds, of the public. 
When such an institution ceases to have public supp ort, it forfeits its right to 
exist. Institutions maintained on permanent funds a re often found to ignore 
public opinion, and are frequently responsible for acts contrary to it. In our 
country we experience this at every step. Some of t he so-called religious trusts 
have ceased to render any accounts. The trustees ha ve become the owners and 
are responsible to none. I have no doubt that the i deal is for public institutions 
to live, like nature, from day to day. The institut ion that fails to win public 
support has no right to exist as such. The subscrip tions that an institution 
annually receives are a test of its popularity and the honesty of its 
management, and I am of opinion that every institut ion should submit to that Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 365  test. But let no one misunderstand me. My remarks d o not apply to the bodies 
which cannot, by their very nature, be conducted wi thout permanent buildings. 
What I mean to say is that the current expenditure should be found from 
subscriptions voluntarily received from year to yea r. –Auto, 243.  
 
850. Because an institution happens to have plenty of funds it does not mean 
that it should anyhow spend away every pie that it possesses. The golden rule is 
not to hesitate to ask for or spend even a crore wh en it is absolutely necessary 
and when it is not, to hoard up every pie though on e may have a crore 
of rupees at one’s disposal. – YI, 21-5-31, 118.  
 
Public Accounts  
851. Public money belongs to the poor public of Ind ia than whom there is none 
poorer on earth. We have t9 be more wakeful, none c autious, more careful; 
and let us be ready to account for every pie that w e receive from the public. –
YI, 16-4-31, 74.  
 
852. Carefully kept accounts are a sine qua non for  any organization. Without 
properly dept accounts it is impossible to maintain  truth in its pristine purity. –
Auto, 188.  
 
853. If we do not account for every single pie we r eceive and do not make a 
judicious use of the funds, we shall deserve to be blotted out of public life. –YI, 
6-7-21, 209.  
 
On Journalism  
854. The sole aim of Journalism should be service. –Auto, 349.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 366  855. One of the objects of a newspaper is to unders tand the popular feeling 
and give expression to it; another is to arouse amo ng the people certain 
desirable sentiments; and the third is fearlessly t  expose popular defects. – IHR, 
1.  
 
865. Reference to abuses in the States is undoubted ly a necessary part of 
journalism and it is a means of creating public opi nion. Only, my scope is 
strictly limited; I have taken up journalism not fo r its sake but merely as an aid 
to what I have conceived to be my mission in life. My mission is to teach by 
example and precept under severe restraint the use of the matchless weapon of 
satyagraha which is as direct corollary of nonviole nce and truth. I am anxious, 
indeed I am impatient, to demonstrate that there is  no remedy for the many ills 
of life wave that of nonviolence. It is a solvent s trong enough to melt the 
stoniest heart. To be true to my faith, therefore, I may not write merely to 
excite passion. The reader can have no idea of f th e restraint I have to exercise 
from week to week in the choice of topics and my vo cabulary. It is training for 
me. It enables me to peep into myself and to make d iscoveries of my 
weaknesses. Often my vanity dictates a smart expres sion or my anger a harsh 
adjective. It is a terrible ordeal but a fine exerc ise to remove these weeds. The 
reader sees the pages of the Young India fairly wel l-dressed-up and sometimes, 
with Romain Rolland, he is inclined to say ‘what a fine old man this must be’. 
Well, let the world understand that the fineness is  carefully and prayerfully 
cultivated. And if it has proved acceptable to some  whose opinion I cherish, let 
the reader understand that when that fineness has b ecome perfectly natural, i. 
e. when I have become incapable of evil and when no thing harsh or haughty 
occupies, be it momentarily, my thought-world, then  and not till then, my 
nonviolence will move all the hearts of all the wor ld. I have placed before me 
and the reader no impossible ideal or ordeal. – YI, 2-7-25, 232.  
 
857. Unfortunately, the newspapers had become more important to the average 
man than the scriptures. He would fain advise them to give up reading Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 367  newspapers. They would lose nothing by so doing whe reas real food for their 
minds and spirits lay in the scriptures and other g ood literature. 
The press was called the Fourth Estate. It was defi nitely a power but to misuse 
that power was criminal. He was a journalist himsel f and would appeal to 
fellow journalists to realize their responsibility and to carry on their work with 
no idea other than that of upholding the truth. –H, 27-4-47, 128.  
 
The Learned Professions  
858. If you would spiritualize the practice of law,  you must not make your 
profession subservient to the interests of your pur se, but use your profession 
for the service of your country. –Ceylon, 36.  
 
859. Put your talents in the service of the country  instead of converting them 
to f. s. d. If you are a medical man, there is dise ase enough in India to need all 
your medical skill. If you are a lawyer, there are differences and quarrels 
enough in India. Instead of fomenting more trouble,  patch up those quarrels 
and stop litigation. If you are an engineer, build model houses suited to the 
means and needs of your people and yet full of heal th and fresh air. There is 
nothing that you have learnt which cannot be turned  to account. 
(The friend who had asked the question was an accou ntant and Gandhiji 
accordingly said to him): There is dire need every- where for accountants to 
audit the accounts of the Congress and its adjunct associations. Cone to India—I 
will give you enough work and also hire—four annas  per day which is surely 
more than millions in India get. – YI, 5-11-31, 334.  
 
860. A medical practitioner from Kenya asks whether  medical practitioners can 
engage in money-lending business or speculation. I have long held the opinion 
that professional men, whether medical or legal or other, should not seek to 
add to their income by speculation or other pursuit s. It tends to make them 
careless in their special work, There have been cas es in which doctors and Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 368  lawyers have ruined their reputation by going outsi de their profession to make 
money.— H, I6-I2-39, 379.  
 
On Art  
861. There are two aspects of things-the outward an d the inward. It is purely a 
matter of emphasis with me. The outward has no mean ing except in so far as it 
helps the inward. All true art is thus the expressi on of the soul. The outward 
forms have value only in so far as they are the exp ression of the inner spirit in 
man. Art of that nature has the greatest possible a ppeal for me. But I know 
that many call themselves artists, and are recogniz ed as such, and yet in their 
works there is absolutely no trace of the soul’s up ward urge and unrest. 
All true art must help the soul to realize its inne r self. In my own case, I find 
that I can do entirely without external forms in my  soul’s realization. My room 
may have blank walls; and I may even dispense with the roof, so that I may 
gaze out upon the starry heavens overhead that stre tch in an unending expanse 
of beauty. What conscious art of man can give me th e panoramic scenes that 
open out before me, when I look up to the sky above  with all its shining stars? 
This, however, does not mean that I refuse to accep t the value of productions 
of art, generally accepted as such, but only that I  personally feel how 
inadequate these are compared with the eternal symb ols of beauty in Nature. 
These productions of man’s art have their value onl y so far as they help the 
soul onward towards self-realization. 
All truths, not merely true ideas, but truthful fac es, truthful pictures, or songs, 
are highly beautiful. People generally fail to see beauty in truth; the ordinary 
man runs away from it and becomes blind to the beau ty in it. Whenever men 
begin to see beauty in truth, then true art will ar ise. 
Truly beautiful creations come when right perceptio n is at work. If these 
moments are rare in life they are also rare in art. —YI, 13-11-24, 377 . 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 369  862. True art takes note not merely of form but als o of what lies behind. There 
is an art that kills and an art that gives life. Tr ue art must be evidence of 
happiness, contentment and purity of its authors. 
—YI, 11-821,253.  
 
863. We have somehow accustomed ourselves to the be lief that art is 
independent of the purity of private life. I can sa y with all experience at my 
command that nothing could be more untrue. As I am nearing the end of my 
earthly life I can say that purity of life is the h ighest and truest art. The art of 
producing purity of life is the highest and truest art. The art of producing good 
music from a cultivated voice can be achieved by ma ny, but the art of 
producing that music from the harmony of a pure lif e is achieved very rarely.—
H, 19-2-38, 10.  
 
Music  
864. Music means rhythm, order. Its effect is elect rical. It immediately soothes. 
Unfortunately like our shastras, music has been the  prerogative of the few. It 
has never become nationalized in the modern sense. If I had any influence with 
volunteer boy scouts and Seva Samiti organizations,  I would make compulsory a 
proper singing in company of national songs. And to  that end I should have 
great musicians attending every Congress or Confere nce and teaching mass 
music.—YI, 8-9-20, Tagore, 763.  
 
Music and Education  
865. In Pandit Khare’s opinion, based upon wide exp erience, music should form 
part of the syllabus of primary education. I hearti ly endorse the proposition. 
The modulation of the voice is as necessary as the training of the hand. Physical 
drill, handicrafts, drawing and music should go han d in hand in order to draw 
the best out of the boys and girls and create in th em a real interest in their 
tuition. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 370  That this means a revolution in the system of train ing is admitted. If the future 
citizens of the State are to build a sure foundatio n for life’s work, these four 
things are necessary. One has only to visit only pr imary school to have a striking 
demonstration of slovenliness, disorderliness and d iscordant speech. I have no 
doubt, therefore, that when the Education Ministers  in the several provinces 
recast the system of education and make it answer t he requirements of the 
country, they will not omit the essentials to which  I have drawn attention. My 
plan of primary education certainly comprises these  things which easily become 
possible the moment you remove from the children’s shoulders the burden of 
having to master a difficult foreign language. –H, 11-9-37, 250.  
 
Drill 
866. The object of mass drill is to enable large bo dies of people to perform any 
movement rhythmically and swiftly and with absolute  precision. What a saving 
in national time and energy it would mean if we cou ld do that in our public 
meetings and functions! There is a silent music in disciplined movement of 
masses of men and women. Just now I asked you to mo ve a little towards me so 
that my low voice may reach you. Had you advanced f ar enough in your drill, 
you would have been able to perform that movement w ith ease, without any 
noise or confusion. There is a rhythm and music in drill that makes action effort 
less and eliminates fatigue. If the whole nation of  three hundred millions could 
be drilled so as to move together and act together and if necessary to die 
together as one man, we should attain independence without striking a blow 
and set an example of a peaceful revolution the who le world to emulate.-- H, 
31-12-38, 411.  
 
Regarding Ancient Things  
867. I do not subscribe to the superstition that ev erything is good because it is 
ancient. I do not believe either that anything is g ood because it is Indian. –YI, 
8-1-25, 11.  
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 371  868. I am no indiscriminate worshipper of all that goes under the name 
‘ancient’. I never hesitate to demolish all that is  evil or immoral, no matter 
how ancient it may be, but with that reservation. I  must confess to you that I 
am an adorer of ancient institutions and it hurts m e to think that people in 
their rush for everything modern despise all their ancient traditions and ignore 
them in their lives. – Ceylon, 107.  
 
869. I came by a process of examination to this irr esistible conclusion that 
there was nothing so very ancient in this world as these two good old things—
truth and non-violence. I also discovered that I mu st not attempt to revive 
ancient practices if they were inconsistent with, c all it if you will, modern life 
as it must be lived. Ancient practices may have bee n perfectly good and 
perhaps absolutely necessary at the time when those  practices were adopted, 
but they might be entirely out of date with modern needs and still not be 
contrary to truth or non-violence. – Ceylon, 131.  
 
Swadeshi  
870. I have never considered the exclusion of every thing foreign under every 
conceivable circumstance as a part of Swadeshi. The  broad definition of 
Swadeshi is the use of all home-made things to the exclusion of foreign things, 
in so far as such use is necessary for the protecti on of home-industry, more 
especially those industries without which India wil l become pauperized. In my 
opinion, therefore, Swadeshi which excludes the use  of everything foreign, no 
matter how beneficent it may be and irrespective of  the fact that it 
impoverishes nobody, is a narrow interpretation of Swadeshi. - YI, 17-6-26, 218.  
 
871. But even Swadeshi, like any other good thing, can be ridden to death if it 
is made a fetish. That is a danger that must be gra ded against. To reject 
foreign manufactures merely because they are foreig n, and to go on wasting 
national time and money in the promotion in one’s c ountry of manufactures for 
which it is not suited would be criminal folly, and  a negation of the Swadeshi Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 372  spirit. A true votary of Swadeshi will never harbou r ill-will towards the 
foreigner; he will not be moved by antagonism towar ds anybody on earth. 
Swadeshism is not a cult of hatred. It is a doctrin e of selfless service, that has 
its roots in the purest ahimsa, i.e. love. – YM, 95.  
 
872. I wish to utter a word of caution against your  believing that I am an 
indiscriminate despiser of everything that comes fr om the West. There are 
many things which I have myself assimilated from th e West. –Ceylon, 108.  
 
True Swadeshi  
873. If I have to use the adjective ‘true’ before S wadeshi, a critic may well ask, 
‘Is there also false Swadeshi?’ Unfortunately I hav e to answer ‘Yes’. As, since 
the days of Khadi, I am supposed to be an authority  on Swadeshi, numerous 
conundrums are presented to me by correspondents. A nd I have been obliged to 
distinguish between the two kinds of Swadeshi. If f oreign capital is mixed with 
indigenous, or if foreign talent is mixed with indi genous, is the enterprise 
Swadeshi? There are other questions too. But I had better reproduce the 
definition I gave to a Minister the other day. ‘Any  article is Swadeshi if it sub 
serves the interest of the millions, even though th e capital and talent are 
foreign but under effective Indian control.’ Thus K hadi of the definition of the 
A. I. S. A. would be true Swadeshi even though the capital may be all foreign 
and there may be Western specialists employed by th e Indian Board. 
Conversely, Bata’s rubber or other shoes would be f oreign though the labour 
employed may be all Indian and the capital also fou nd by India. The 
manufactures will be doubly foreign because the con trol will be in foreign 
hands and the article, no matter how cheap it is, w ill oust the village tanner 
mostly and the village mochi always. Already the mo chis of Bihar have begun to 
feel the unhealthy competition. The Bata shoe may b e the saving of Europe; it 
will mean the death of our village shoemaker and ta nner. I have given two 
telling illustrations, both partly imaginary. For i n the A. I. S. A. the capital is all 
indigenous and the whole of the talent also. But I would love to secure the Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 373  engineering talent of the West to give me a village  wheel which will beat the 
existing wheels, though deep down in me I have the belief that the 
improvements that indigenous talent has made are by  no means to be despised. 
But this is a digression. I do hope that those Mini sters and others who guide or 
serve the public will cultivate the habit of distin guishing between true and 
false Swadeshi. – H, 25-2-39, 25 
 
European Civilization  
874. European civilization is no doubt suited for t he Europeans but it will mean 
ruin for India, if we endeavour to copy it. This is  not to say that we may not 
adopt and assimilate whatever may be good and capab le of assimilation by us 
as it does not also mean that even the Europeans wi ll not have to part with 
what-ever evil might have crept into it. The incess ant search for material 
comforts and their multiplication is such an evil, and I make bold to say that 
the Europeans themselves will have to remodel their  outlook, if they are not to 
perish under the weight of the comforts to which th ey are becoming slaves. It 
may be that my reading is wrong, but I know that fo r India to run after the 
Golden Fleece is to court certain death. Let us eng rave in our hearts the motto 
of a Western philosopher, ‘plain living and high th inking’. Today it is certain 
that the millions cannot have high living and we th e few who profess to do the 
thinking for the masses run the risk, in a vain sea rch after high living, of missing 
high thinking. –YI, 30-4-31, 88. 
 
875. As to the habit of looking to the West for lig ht, I can give little guidance of 
the whole of my life has not provided any. Light us ed to go out from the East. If 
the Eastern reservoir has become empty, naturally t he East will have to borrow 
from the West. I wonder if light, if it is light an d not a miasma, can ever be 
exhausted. As a boy I learnt that it grew with the giving. Anyway I have acted 
in that belief and have, therefore, traded on the a ncestral capital. It has never 
failed me. This, however, does not mean that I must  act like a frog in the well. 
There is nothing to prevent me from profiting by th e light that may come from Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 374  the West. Only I must take care that I am not overp owered by the glamour of 
the West. I must not mistake the glamour for true l ight. -H, 13-1-40, 414.  
 
To Foreigners in any Land  
876. Even as a cup of milk which is full up to the brim does not overflow when 
sugar is gently added to it, the sugar accommodatin g itself in the milk, in the 
same way, I would like you to live in this island s o as not to become interlopers, 
and so as to enrich the life of the people in whose  midst you may be living. –
Ceylon, 116.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 375   
REFERENCES 
ABP  The Amrit Bazar Patrika. 
Asia  Monthly magazine, published from America. 
Auto  An Autobiography of The Story of My Experiments wit h Truth 
by M. K. Gandhi. Navajivan Press, Ahmedabad. Second 
Edition, May, 1940. 
CB  Congress Bulletin. Published by the All India Congr ess 
Committee, Allahabad. 
CP  Constructive Programme: Its Meaning and Place by M. K. 
Gandhi. Navajivan Press, Ahmedabad, 1944 . 
C. P. Ministerial Crisis (1937-38) - Bulletin publi shed by the 
All India Congress Committee, Allahabad. 
Ceylon  With Gandhiji in Ceylon by Mahadev Desai. S. Ganesan , 
Triplicane, Madras, 1928. 
Ed.Rec.- Educational Reconstruction. Hindustani Tal imi 
Sangh. Segaon, Wardha, C.P  Second Edition, March, 1939. 
ER  Ethical Religion by M. K Gandhi. S. Ganesan, Tripli cane, 
Madras S.E. 1930. 
EVI Cent Percent Swadeshi or Economics of Village Indus tries by 
M. K. Gandhi. Navajivan Press, Ahmedabad, 1938. 
Gandhiji Gandhiji: His Life and Works. Edited by D. G. Tendu lkar, M. 
Chalapati Rau, Mridula Sarabhai, Vithalbhai K. Jhav eri. 
Karnataka Publishing House, Bombay, 1944 
Ganesh  M.K.Gandhi Speeches and Writings. Ganesh &Co. 
Madras,1918 
GC  Gandhiji's Correspondence with the Government 1942-4 4. 
Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad. Second Edition , 
September. 
GH  A Guide to Health by Mahatma Gandhi translated from   the Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 376  Hindi by Rama Iyer. M.A. S. Ganesan Triplicane. 
Madras,1930. 
Gram Udyog Patrika 
H The Harijan  1933 onwards. 
HS  The Hindustan Standard. 
IC  India's case for Swaraj by Mahatma Gandhi, Edited a nd 
Compiled by W. P. Kabadi, Feb.1932. 
IHR  Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule by M. K. Gandhi. Na vajivan 
Publishing House, Ahmedabad. 
Incidents 
in 
Gandhiji's 
life  Edited by Chandrashankar Shukla, Vora and Co. Bomba y, 
1949. 
Is India 
Different?  Being correspondence between Shapurji Saklatwala an d M.K. 
Gandhi Published by the Communist Party of Great 
Britain,16, King Street, London, W.C.2. December, 1 927. 
IV  Gandhiji in Indian Villages by Mahadev Desai. S. Gan esan, 
Triplicane, Madras, 1927. 
MR  The Modern Review, October 1935. 
My Soul's 
Agony  Being Gandhiji's statements issued from Yeravda Pris on on 
the Removal of Untouchability among Hindus. Bombay 
Provincial Board, Servants of Untouchables Society,  The 
Recluse, Marzban Road, Fort, Bombay. 
Nat  Speeches and Writings  of Mahatma Gandhi. Fourth Ed ition. 
G.A. Natesan & Co. Madras. 
Navajivan  Weekly issued in Gujarati and Hindi. 
NV  The Nation's Voice. Navajivan Press, Ahmedabad. 
Polak  Mr. Gandhi: The Man by Millie Graham Polak, George Allen 
and Unwin Ltd. Museum Street, London. 1931. 
Remakers By Carlton Washburne, 1932. Selections From Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 377  of Mankind  
SA  Satyagraha  in South Africa by M. K. Gandhi. First Edition, S. 
Ganesan, Triplicane, Madras, 1928. Second Edition, 
Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad,1950. 
Sabarmati-
1928  Being the Report of the First Annual Meeting of the  
Federation of International Fellowships held at the  
Satyagraha Ashram, Sabarmati. Jan.13th to 15th, '28 . 
Published by the Federation of International Fellow ships. 
Sita  History of the Congress by Pattabhi Sitaramaiyya. A ll India 
Congress Committee, Allahabad. 
SR  Self- restraint v. Self- indulgence by M. K Gandhi. 
Stc  Swaraj through Charkha by M. K Gandhi compiled by K anu 
Gandhi. All-India Spinners' Association, Sevagram, Wardha. 
15-9-1945. 
Tagore  Young India 1919-22. Published in book form by Tago re & Co. 
Madras, 1922. 
Visva-Bharati Quarterly - Published from Shantiniket an, 
Bengal. 
WSI Women and Social Injustice by M. K. Gandhi. Navajivan  
Publishing House, Ahmedabad, Second Edition, 1945. 
YI Young India, 1919-1932. 
YM  From Yeravda Mandir by M. K. Gandhi. Navajivan Press, 
Ahmedabad, 2nd edition, 1935. 
 