 
Spitting at the Sun 
Assassination of Gandhi : Facts vs. Falsehood  
 
Edited by : Chunibhai Vaidya 
 
 
 
Translated by : Ramesh Dave 
 
 
 
First Published : 1998 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Printed by: 
Umiya Offset, Tavdipura, Ahmedabad - 380 014, India . 
 
Published by: Gujarat Loksamiti, Loksamiti Compound , 
Lal Darwaja, Ahmedabad - 380 001 
 
Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
TELL THE WORLD 
If I die of a lingering illness, nay even by as muc h as a boil or a pimple, it will 
be your duty to proclaim to the world, even at the risk of making people angry 
with you, that I was not the man that I claimed to be. If you do that it will give 
my spirit peace. Note down this also that if someon e were to end my life by 
putting a bullet through me—as someone tried to do with a bomb the other 
day—and I met his bullet without a groan, and breat hed my last taking God's 
name, then alone would I have made good my claim.  
- Gandhi  
(The words uttered less than twenty hours before hi s death) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3   
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Dr. Pravin Sheth  
Shri Chunibhai Vaidya is a committed sarvodaya work er. Even at 88, Shri 
Vaidya, as an able leader of Gujarat Lok Samiti, co ntinues to make significant 
contribution to the fields of water management, lan d to the landless, Gandhian 
thought and action, secularism and equitable develo pment.  
Inspired by Gandhi's struggle for freedom, Shri Vai dya left formal education to 
get experience in the school of life. Remaining und erground, he worked against 
the British Raj during the Quit India Movement. He then joined Shri Vinoba 
Bhave's Bhoodan Movement. Along with Narayan Desai and Prabodh Choksi, he 
was one of the founders of Yajnya Prakashan Samiti,  and later on he edited 
'Bhoomiputra'.  
Twice, he had lived in Kashi to look after the publ ications of Sarva Seva Sangh. 
During Shri Vinobaji's Assam Yatra, he went to Assa m. Meanwhile, in the wake 
of the Chinese aggression, following Vinobaji's dir ective, he stayed on there for 
twelve years. On his return to Gujarat, he worked a s the editor of 
'Bhoomiputra'. Its role as the fearless voice again st the Emergency landed him 
into jail for seven months. 'Bhoomiputra' made hist ory by winning the case 
against pre-censorship of the government.  
Shri Vaidya then took up the leadership of Gujarat Lok Samiti and led many a 
successful battle on issues like pension of Gujarat  MLAs, and closure of the 
liquor shop at Ratanpur. As an active member of the  peace committee of the 
Nagarika Sangathan, he contributed to restoring pea ce and bringing about the 
amicable settlement of the dispute around reservati on issue during the 
turbulent agitation of 1985 in Gujarat.  
Shri Vaidya's perseverance is reflected in his half  a decade long successful 
struggle to attain the riparian rights of communiti es living in the downstream 
region of the river Banas. He initiated the modifie d concept of the hidden dam 
in the Sipu-Banas areas. Such dams have become symb ols of grass-root Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  development for water conservation. More than 10,00 0 Bighas of land 
areirrigated by these dams.  
On behalf of the Sarva Seva Sangh, and Gujarat Sarv oday Mandal, he 
successfully carried out the movement against the m ultinational Cargill 
Corporation. The Gujarat government had sold public  land of 200 Bighas in 
Kadadara village to an MNC. He led the villagers' s truggle against such a deal, 
which forced the government to abandon it. And he s till leads number of 
movements on the issues of justice to the poor, com munal harmony, land to 
the landless, a mega-port etc.  
His sensitivity developed while undertaking relief work in the arid regions of 
Gujarat during 1986-88; and the awareness about the  scarce water resources 
led him to support the Sardar Sarovar Narmada Proje ct and carry out pro-dam 
movement.  
He undertook rehabilitation of 230 plus riot affect ed families in Gujarat in 2002 
post Godhara riots and helped reconstruction work i n Kutch, post Kutch 
earthquake.  
Recently the virus of communalism is systematically  sought to be spread by the 
champions of Nathuram Godse, the assassin of Mahatm a Gandhi. This has led 
Shri Vaidya to write a booklet in Gujarati as an id eational counterpoint, which, 
by now, has been translated and published in eleven  languages.  
Shri Vaidya has succeeded in reviving our faith in Gandhi at a time when we 
need to follow him the most. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5   
LIGHT BEYOND DARKNESS 
Prakash N. Shah  
All of us, especially the rising and pulsating gene ration, will remain grateful to 
Chunikaka for setting forth, in a dialogue form, so me of the fundamental ideas, 
in a climate in which the cult of killing appears t o be the order of the day as it 
were.  
Our struggle for freedom and its leadership of Gand hi constitute an epic of our 
times, spanning over the earlier half of the twenti eth century, the way 
Ramayana  and Mahabharata  present the living images of our cultural transiti ons 
and tensions involved in the social change of earli er times.  
Of late, there has been going on a sort of continua l symposium at the rate of 
three sessions a day on misinformation and disinfor mation about Gandhi, who 
attained the bliss of death while leading an epic l ife as Socrates and Jesus did, 
rather more so as Lincoln did. And there seems to h ave been generated an 
environment in which the elements and forces indulg ing in the inhuman politics 
of the cult of killing masquerade as the authoritie s on our national life. In this 
context, the controversy centering round the play, "Mee Nathuram Godse 
Boltoy" furnishes an opportunity for the crystalliz ation of ideas in the new era. 
Chunikaka has drawn very well its constructive quin tessence which throws light 
on the personality and action of one with whose hel p and support we have to 
move into the twenty-first century as well as under stand what to give up for 
going forward. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6   
A WORD OR TWO 
Chunibhai Vaidya  
The Gandhians suffer from an apparent handicap. The y hardly study, but tend 
to be up to their neck in work. Needless to say, I am, too, one of them. But the 
moment there was commotion at Mumbai and Delhi in r eaction against the 
staging of Pradeep Dalvi's play, 'Mee Nathuram Gods e Boltoy' [I, Nathuram 
Godse Speak], they woke up with a start as it were.  Thanks to the write-ups of 
Prakash N. Shah, Jagan Fadnis, Ramesh Oza and other s and particularly to my 
conversations with Prakash, I gathered more relevan t information than I was 
aware of. This furnished a vital context to the wri ting of this brochure. We 
could venture to present it to the readers because of the zest of friends who 
wished to disseminate it. While preparing this book let I was not unmindful of 
the facts that the bigot followers of all religions  had fallen a prey to dogmatism 
culminating into fanaticism, intolerance, and viole nce and also that Hinduism 
was regarded the world over as one of the most plur alistic religions and 
catholic in essence and practice. I was also aware of the fact that the Bharatiya 
Janata Party had very recently, in its organ "BJP T oday", had come out with an 
article which implied that Godse played a tool in t he hands of the British 
Imperialists. Indeed, no sane person, not to talk o f a national party, could own 
up a heinous crime as the one committed by Godse. B ut I must add, much more 
will have to be done to clear the dust gathered til l now.  
I am sorry, there might be some insinuations agains t RSS in this small work, and 
that too in spite of the organisation's publicly di sowning of the perpetrator of 
crime. But its anti-Muslim and anti-Gandhi mindsets  are two handicaps—one 
born and the other acquired. These are also denied,  but its followers and their 
deeds tell a different story altogether. I wish I w ere wrong. 
I am thankful to Shri Bang Saheb of Sarva Seva Sang h who expressed his 
readiness to send its Hindi version round the Hindi  speaking world while at the 
same time assuring me to endeavour to render it in all the other Indian 
languages as far as possible. Gandhi did not belong  to Gujarat alone, nor to Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  India alone either. He belonged to the whole of hum anity. He admitted of no 
frontiers of caste, creed or nationality that tend to divide man and man. We 
thought it desirable, that this little document of facts, centering round the 
assassination of Gandhi, were also put in the world  language. And hence the 
English version for readers at home and abroad.  
Professor Ramesh Dave, putting aside all his commit ments, attended to my SOS 
and took great care while translating the original Gujarati into English. I am 
happy to see that it reads as if it was originally written in English. His Epilogue 
is a sensitive summing-up.  
I can't help acknowledging the contribution of Dr P ravin Sheth, Shri C.N. Patel 
and his daughter Dina Patel, and my young colleague  Sagar Rabari who shared 
my concern for improving the book as far as possibl e.  
The encouraging response of so many readers who hav e read this little book has 
overwhelmed me. This is the real source of support to my endeavors.  
I shall feel gratified if this little book enables me to serve a little the cause of 
truth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8   
SOME POINTS DEALT WITH IN THIS BOOK 
1. The foremost is the freedom of ideas and expression . One might argue that 
Godse was free to have his own approach and gag Gan dhi's utterances, 
even to eliminate him heinously! But how about the logic of those who 
misinterpret the ban on a play, based on utter dist ortion of truth, as a 
violation of the fundamental freedom of expression,  particularly when the 
sole motive of writing the play was to justify the assassination of one of 
the greatest men of our age, and cause grave and wi despread provocation?  
2. The chronology of attempts to kill Gandhi.  
3. So far as the question of crime and punishment is c oncerned, the state 
alone has the authority to punish, none else.  
4. The excuses put forward for assassination are fabri cated—patent lies. Even 
long before there was anywhere a brainwave of parti tion, there were 
attempts on Gandhi's life. Why?  
5. The efforts to bring the Muslims into the mainstrea m of the nation were 
there prior even to Gandhi's return home: separate electorates; the part 
played by the other leaders in securing greater mea sure of representation 
for Muslims exceeding their legitimate share etc. G andhi never took any 
partisan stand.  
6. The concept of Pakistan; the open though unconsciou s support of the 
Hinduists.  
7. The ambivalent process of accepting as well as alie nating the Muslims.  
8. A sense of futility and helplessness of the so-call ed Hindu protagonists in 
the face of Gandhi's faith in God, religion, humani ty, and unity.  
9. Gandhi's pursuit of integral oneness vs. the reacti onary process of the 
separatist Hinduists.  
10. A Gobellian move to defame Gandhi and the Indian Na tional Congress: 
"Repeat a lie a hundred times and people will start  taking it as truth."  Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  11. The nationalist Mahomedans and the Indian National Congress.  
12. Mountbatten's ultimatum—a puzzle for the Congress.  
13. The sense of betrayal—helpless reconciliation with the inevitable.  
14. An incomprehensible demand of the Hinduists: Why di d Gandhi not join 
hands with the others who were opposed to partition ?  
15. The problem of fifty-five crores of rupees—the reje ction of tit for tat 
policy—the universal moral principle.  
16. The reason why Gandhi pervaded all over.  
17. Why was the conspiracy to kill Gandhi hatched? Who was responsible?  
18. Gandhi's harsh words not merely to the misguided Hi ndus but also to the 
Muslims.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10   
DIALOGUE 
Q: Is not the ban on the play, "Mee Nathuram Godse Bol toy", a violation of the 
fundamental freedom of expression of thought? Godse  firmly believed that his 
act was a ritual, and there was at bottom a religio us thought. This play 
delineates that Gandhivadh like 'Sisupalvadh' was a n act prompted by religion. 
An idea should be refuted only by an idea, not by t he ban that strangles 
expression.   
A:  Let us begin with the last argument first. When yo u argue that an idea 
should only be answered by an idea and not a ban, c ould one put a simple 
question? What did Godse do? Did he answer an idea with an idea? One is 
intrigued by the logic that upholds Godse's right t o assassinate Gandhi, just to 
gag for ever his freedom of expression, and all the  same condemn the ban on 
the play, based on utter falsehood and calculated t o justify the inhuman killing 
and cause grave and widespread provocation, as the violation of a fundamental 
freedom. The crime that Godse perpetrated cannot be  undone. It puts us in the 
mind of the saying, "Even Satan can cite scriptures ", particularly when the 
heretical deed of taking the life of a universally revered great man is described 
as an act of religion, a sacrificial ritual.  
Next, the freedom of expression is indeed a fundame ntal freedom but not a 
charter of license. If there is in the Constitution  section 19(1) regarding the 
fundamental freedom of expression as a basic right,  there is section 19(2) also 
to curb its abuse. The Constitution has legally acc epted dissent. That is 
precisely the reason why the leader of the oppositi on enjoys the same 
privileges and status as a cabinet minister. Noneth eless, it is not limitless, it is 
liable to certain restraints. What happens when one  while exercising his 
autonomy of expression, lets himself lose all sense  of veracity and discretion 
and acts in a way detrimental to the society? Then there is no way; the state 
ought to intervene. The society cannot do so lest i t should be tantamount to 
taking law in their hands. It might perhaps sometim es seem to be proper, but 
often inappropriate, even disastrous.  Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11  In Dalvi's play the facts are misinterpreted, even distorted. During the actual 
performance of the play, they say, there used to be  wholesale deviation from 
the original script submitted to the Censor Board f or approval. Many more 
provoking words and statements were interpolated. T he playwright publicly 
contended that he would deem it a success only when  the audiences exiting 
from the playhouse after watching the play went on a rampage, demolishing 
Gandhi's statues and monuments or smashing even the  boards bearing his name. 
What a raison d'etre! It is as clear as daylight th at the motive of writing the 
play is to vindicate Godse and cause grave provocat ion. Here is a distinct 
dichotomy of appearance and reality, a strategy to evade the rule of law. This 
is not merely a lack of discretion, it is willful d ishonesty. The pursuit of 
defending, nay justifying a crime such as this is n othing short of mental 
perversity, a criminal attempt to waylay the societ y by manipulating falsehood 
as facts. We value the freedom of expression and ha ve also courted 
imprisonment while serving its cause. But let us no t forget that the condition is 
adherence to truth and self-restraint. Liberty does  not ever mean license.  
 
Q: Godse's statement in self-defence in the court seem s to be a very well 
organized and cogent argument, doesn't it?  
A:  Godse had got ample time to draft his defence afte r the assassination. As 
such, he was fairly educated. He used his time to g loss over the heinous sin. 
But none else than the state alone has a right to p unish. Murder is murder, call 
it what you will. It admits of no defence or justif ication. May be, Godse's 
argument might seem to be so cogent as to leave one  tongue-tied and even 
dazzled. So what? Don't even judges, at times, get misled by deceptive words 
or eloquence? Don't we sometimes see right mis-pres ented as wrong and wrong 
as right? Granting that Godse could do so, he does not cease to be guilty. He 
did commit a crime against humanity. All he did was  to fabricate falsehood to 
cover it. 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12   
Q: Two reasons are put forth as to why Godse killed Ga ndhi:  
(1) Gandhi partitioned the country by conceding the  demand of Pakistan.  
(2) He compelled the Government to pay to Pakistan rupees fifty-five crores, 
when it was waging an undeclared war against India.  What have you to say?  
A:  This was certainly not the first attempt on his li fe; there were about ten 
attempts in all, of which six I have been able to v erify as recorded.  
1.  Way back in 1934, while Gandhi was on his way to a ttend the reception held 
in his honour by Poona Municipality, a bomb was hur led at him. But it hit the 
car ahead, and Gandhi was saved. The Chief Municipa l Officer, a couple of 
police constables, and four others were injured the n. Where was then any 
problem of partition or fifty five crores of rupees  in the year 1934? 
Nevertheless there was the dastardly attack.  
2.  Another attempt on his life was at Panchgani in 19 44. A man with a dagger in 
his hand rushed toward him. According to Manishanka r Purohit, the proprietor 
of Poona Surati Lodge, the assailant was none else but Nathuram Godse. It has 
been a recorded evidence that B.D. Bhisare Guruji, the ex-Congress MLA from 
Mahabaleshwar and Chief of Satara District Central Bank had snatched away the 
dagger from Godse. Gandhiji soon sent for Godse, bu t he did not turn up! Those 
who insist on an idea being answered by an idea sha ll only do well to take a 
serious note of this. Gandhi was forever accessible  to all. But Godse not even 
once cared to meet him, at least for exchanging ide as. Why? Surely, in 1944 
also neither the issue of paying fifty-five crores nor partition was anywhere 
there. And still, however, there was this attempt o n Gandhi's life!  
3.  The third attempt dates back to September 1944. Ga ndhi was scheduled to 
go from Wardha to Bombay to meet Mahomed Ali Jinnah . A group from Poona 
went to Wardha, to attack Gandhi and sabotage the p rogram. When Gandhi 
came to know about this, he insisted that he would walk along with the 
demonstrators and not board the car until they allo wed. But before his 
departure, the police had apprehended the group. On e of them, G.L. Thatte, Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13  was detected to be carrying a dagger, but he told t he police that he had only 
intended to tear off the tyre of the car by which G andhi was to travel! Quite 
early in the morning Mahatma Gandhi's personal secr etary, Pyarelal, had also 
received a phone-call from the D.C.P. cautioning ag ainst any probable 
untoward happening at the hands of the demonstrator s. There was no cause or 
ground then for any allegation against Gandhi favou ring partition or insisting on 
paying off fifty-five crores of rupees to anybody.  
4.  The fourth attempt took place in June 1946. Gandhi  was traveling to Poona 
by a special train. They had hatched a plot to dera il the train in that dark night 
between Neral and Karjat by putting huge stones on the rail track. Thanks to 
the engine driver's vigilance and skill the tragedy  was averted although the 
engine was damaged. At that time also partition was  not on the agenda. Why 
was even then a plot to kill him? Later on, mention ing this incident in a prayer 
meeting Gandhi said: "So far I have been saved from  seven attempts on my life. 
But I am not going to end up that way. I hope to li ve for 125 years." Nathuram 
Godse responded retortingly in his journal, "Agrani ": "But, who will let you live?" 
This implies that he had already determined to kill  Gandhi, long before the 
partition which was used as a pretext for what they  call 'Gandhi-vadh.'  
5-6.  On January 20, 1948 one fanatic, Madanlal Pahwa, h ad hurled a bomb at 
Gandhi at the prayer meeting. It missed him, and Ga ndhi continued his prayers 
unperturbed. At last, on January 30, ten days later , Godse assassinated Gandhi 
on the prayer ground. Let us not forget that the pr oblem of fifty-five crores 
etc. had cropped up only after January 12 and not e arlier. But over a long span 
of years attempts by the Hindu fundamentalists to e liminate Gandhi were 
afoot. All they were looking for was a chance to do  so; any excuse was good 
enough to assassinate Gandhi, and they spared no pa in to find one or fabricate 
it. 
 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14   
Q: Don't you subscribe to the view that had Gandhi not  pampered the Muslims 
so much, Pakistan could not have been created?  
A:  There are three stages of the process that divides  man and man. It starts off 
with a sense of discrimination between "ours" and " other's" as we call it. That is 
exactly where you have the seed of separation. Ther e stems from it verbal 
conflict, eventually leading to isolation or separa tion. So far as the 
maintenance of the country's integral unity was con cerned, Gandhi and the 
other nationalists were as much concerned or even m ore so than the Hindu 
fundamentalists. They had all stood up against the partition of the country. But 
the ways of the two were different, diametrically o pposite. The Hindu 
fundamentalists considered the Muslims 'Mlechchha'— aliens and saw no way to 
live with them in harmony. They contended that the land was theirs alone. 
They seemed to be saying: "This land is Bharatvarsh . You are aliens, but you 
don't have to part. We are the masters of the land,  and you have got to live 
here the way we want." Gandhiji and the other natio nalist leaders warned them 
against continually dubbing the Mahommedans as alie ns or outsiders, for that 
was apt to intensify their sense of alienation or n ot belonging. Nor would it 
suffice to call them "ours" only superficially. Onl y if they were accepted 
wholeheartedly that their sense of alienation would  go and they would imbibe a 
sense of belonging. Working unitedly and thus livin g together, our sense of 
oneness will be reinforced genuinely. In the passag e of time, wounds could be 
healed or festered. What do we really want to do? T o heal it or add salt to the 
sore? The fundamentalists kept on adding salt to th e sore whereas Gandhi and 
his associates endeavoured to heal it.  
Casteism, discrimination between the ‘high' and the  'low' prevalent in the Hindu 
society also played a part. How come, there is such  a large Muslim population 
in India, much higher than in any Islamic country b arring Indonesia? Because of 
the discrimination between the 'high' and the 'low'  and idolatry of multiple 
deities some Hindus themselves courted Islam. Some of them, who were 
treated and condemned as untouchables, underwent co nversion with a sense of Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  bitterness, whereas there were many of them who wer e coerced into 
conversion. Later on, quite a few of them desired t o return to Hinduism but the 
doors were closed on them. Most of the Muslims toda y in India and even in 
Pakistan and Bangladesh were, once upon a time, Hin dus. A very few of them, a 
microscopic minority, hailed from Arabia.  
There is Hindu blood in their veins. But the Hindus , with their professed non-
dualism versus dualism in practice, fostered in the m a sense of separation. The 
Hindu society could not take them back because of t heir intense discrimination 
and sense of untouchability. It has been a recorded  history that the Kashmiri 
Muslims expressed once their willingness to be reco nverted to Hinduism. But 
after a prolonged discussion the pundits of Kashi a t last turned them down. As a 
result Kashmir remained predominantly Islamic, the situation that Pakistan 
exploits to the hilt. Kashmir has been, till today,  our great headache. 
Generation after generation this sense of alienatio n persisted and prevailed. 
The British rulers who perceived their vested inter ests in this situation of 
tension supported and aggravated it with a selfish motive. At last came Jinnah 
and his followers, exploiting, with the British sup port, this divisive sentiment 
and created Pakistan as a separate nation. The part ition was the tragic 
outcome of the divide and rule policy of the Britis h.  
 
Q: What do you think of the charge that Gandhi put in efforts, out of all 
proportion, to appease the Muslims?   
A:  Gandhi is accused of appeasing the Muslims, and th ey say, the partition was 
only the result of this attitude. But it is far fro m truth. Much prior to Gandhi's 
return home from South Africa efforts were on to br ing the Mahomedans into 
the mainstream of the nation. For instance, during the fiftieth anniversary of 
1857, way back in 1907 in England, Savarkar had des cribed the Mahomedans in 
India as one of the hues of the rainbow. By the Luc know Pact in 1916 the 
Muslims were given greater measure of representatio n in proportion to their 
population. Gandhi had indeed arrived but he was th en a new entrant in the 
public life of the country. He had no share in the Lucknow negotiations. Who Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16  were then the leaders? Annie Besant, Lokmanya Tilak  and Mahomed Ali Jinnah.  
Justifying the pact, Tilak observed:  
“Some eminent people accuse us of attaching far 
greater importance to the Mahomedans. I would go to  
the extent of saying that personally I would have n o 
objection if self-rule were granted to the Muslims 
alone. If the Rajputs also got a similar right I wo n't 
mind. Nor would I object to this right being given to 
the most backward classes among the Hindus. This 
statement of mine reflects the national spirit of a ll 
India. When you are struggling against the third 
force, above everything else, all you need is your own 
unity—communal, religious, political and 
ideological.” 1  
This courageous affirmation of Lokmanya silenced al l those who had opposed 
the pact.  
Even Dr. Shyama Prasad Mookherji, after quitting th e first Cabinet of Ministers 
of the Independent Indian Government, did not retur n to the Hindu Mahasabha, 
for he thought it improper on the part of any polit ical party not to 
accommodate the Muslims and the other communities. Subhash Chandra Bose 
too complained against the inadequate representatio n of the Muslims in the 
Indian National Congress. It is quite clear that it  was not Gandhi alone who 
persevered in his efforts to take the Muslims along . The other leaders also, 
including the Hinduists, were working toward it. Ho w could then Gandhi alone 
be accused of appeasement or partisan stand? 
 
 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17   
Q: It was the Indian National Congress and Gandhi who had accepted the 
proposal for Pakistan. Should Pakistan have ever co me into being if they had 
stood up against it?  
A:  Although the proposal for Pakistan was set forth l ater, in principle its 
concept had cropped up much earlier. We are never t ired of singing with joy 
and zest "Sare jahan se achchha Hindostan hamara" o n all occasions of the 
celebration of our national independence. Are we? T he very poet of this 
patriotic, beautiful song, Iqbal, while addressing the Allahabad convention of 
the Muslim League as early as in 1930 had said:  
I wish that the Punjab, North-West Frontier, Sindh 
and Baluchistan were bunched up together in a singl e 
state. So far as the West-North and India are 
concerned, let the West-North be an Islamic state, 
within or without the framework of the British rule . 
This alone seems to be the destiny of Mahommedans.  
This argument of Iqbal was stoutly supported in 193 7. Please read:  
“India cannot be assumed today to be a unitarian an d 
homogenous nation, but on the contrary there are 
two nations in the main—the Hindus and the 
Muslims.” 2  
Don't they sound to be Mahomed Ali Jlnnah's words, as it were? Isn't it a 
pronounced acceptance of the two-nation theory? Do you guess, who affirmed 
thus and when? Would you know? It was none else tha n Veer Savarkar, who as 
the President of the Hindu Mahasabha, had proclaime d this at their Ahmedabad 
convention as far back as 1937. One more excerpt fr om Savarkar's statement on 
August 15, 1943:  
"I have no quarrel with Mr Jinnah's two-nation theo ry. 
We, the Hindus, are a nation by ourselves and it is  a Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  historical fact that the Hindus and the Muslims are  
two nations.” 3  
Iqbal demands for the Muslims a separate state at a  Muslim League convention 
as the only solution of the crisis, whereas Veer Sa varkar proclaims from the dais 
of the Hindu Mahasabha that the Hindus and the Maho mmedans are two distinct 
and separate nations. Naturally, the division was i nevitable. Who reinforced the 
idea of Pakistan? Unquestionably Iqbal and Savarkar  to begin with. So far as 
Savarkar is concerned, among the Hindu fold he was not alone.  Later on, he 
was equally strongly supported by Guru Govalkar in propounding this theory.  
They did not merely utter these words, the very fou ndation of the Hinduistic 
movement was the separatist. The Hinduists are as m uch responsible as the 
Muslim League for the partition.  
We have a point-counterpoint political scenario. On  one hand the separatist 
forces were steadily advancing, on the other the In dian National Congress and 
Gandhi were striving for the Hindu-Muslim unity. Ev en while he was in South 
Africa, the hymns of all religions— Hindu. Islam, C hristianity, Buddhism, etc—
were being recited during Gandhi's prayer meetings.  That we are all God's 
children is the truth which was continually repeate d and recognized. There 
were at the Sabarmati Ashram in Ahmedabad ideal Mus lims like Qureshi Saheb 
as inmates. Communal harmony was a vital force of t he freedom movement. 
The conscious efforts in this direction have been r ecorded in history. The Indian 
National Congress included scores of Muslim leaders  of national stature—Dr. 
Ansari, Hakim Ajmal Khan, Badruddin Taiyabji, even the earlier Mahomed Ali 
Jinnah, to name a few. The greatest of them was Kha n Abdul Gaffar Khan 
whereas Maulana Abul Kalam Azad was the Congress Pr esident. But the 
Hinduists like the Muslim fundamentalists had a sin gle agenda: clash and 
conflict. Now judge, who nurtured the separatist sp irit? 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19   
Q: How about the charge that it was the Congress and G andhi who supported 
the making of Pakistan?   
A:  Remember Gobells of the Hitler gang? He believed t hat if you repeated a lie 
a hundred times people would be taken in and start believing it, thus turning it 
into 'truth'. Those fundamentalist politicians, who  were out to grind their axe 
and win elections by hook or by crook, propagated f alse charges all over the 
country in a systematic way. The people were hoodwi nked, and these 
politicians reaped the benefit. This is the fact ab ove all questioning. Else, how 
would those, whose contribution to the freedom stru ggle was nil, come to 
power? Mainly due to the misinformation calculatedl y given to the people.  
So far as Gandhi and the Indian National Congress a re concerned, we have the 
open pages of history. Lord Wavell invited Jinnah a nd Gandhi for negotiations, 
one to represent the Mahommedans, the other the Hin dus. Gandhi could at 
once see through the game, 'divide and rule'. He re plied saying that Jinnah 
represented only the Muslim League and not the tota l Muslim community; and 
deputed Abul Kalam Azad to represent the Indian Nat ional Congress. The net 
result was, on both the sides of the Viceroy there were Muslims, one 
fundamentalist, the other nationalist. The Congress  had not at all subscribed to 
the two-nation or two-community theory. The questio n of Gandhi ever 
conceding it does not arise. He had gone to the ext ent of saying that partition 
could take place only on his dead body. But Jinnah had succeeded in poisoning 
the minds of a big chunk of Muslims in India.  
In the 1946 elections to the Central Assembly the M uslim League won all the 30 
seats i.e. cent percent whereas in the Provincial A ssemblies it secured 425 
seats out of 492 which means more than 86 per cent.  The tide had certainly 
turned in favour of the Muslim League and what it s tood for. This too had a 
bearing on the minds of all concerned including the  British Government. A 
number of nationalist Muslim leaders—Zakir Hussian,  Maulana Azad, Rafi Ahmed 
Kidwai, Prof Abdul Bari of Bihar and above all, Kha n Abdul Gaffar Khan were all 
opposed to it. But because of the grave provocation  by Jinnah and his company Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20  there broke out violence and bloodshed all over the  country that had come out 
of the Pandora's box of the divide-and-rule policy of the foreign rulers. Poor 
common man was confused in the traumatic nightmare.   
There was a patent hazard. If the political parties  failed to arrive at an 
agreement at the national level, the British would exploit the situation and 
evade independence of India under one pretext or an other. For a moment it 
appeared as if the prospects of freedom were just s lipping off. On top of it all 
Mountbatten had a plan to quit leaving India in the  lurch, which implied that 
about seven hundred native states, big and small, w ould be absolutely free. 
The vast British ruled territory would also be left  free. 5 The massacre would not 
then be confined to the clashes between the Hindus and the Mahommedans 
alone. Even the native states would be free to inva de one another as well as 
the erstwhile British territory. The national leade rs were confronted with the 
prognosis of terrible anarchy and wholesale genocid e. What was the way out? 
The Indian National Congress gave in following the adage "something is better 
than nothing." But so far as Gandhi was concerned, he was still not reconciled 
to the idea of partition. He even floated an idea f or the foreign rulers to 
appoint Jinnah as the Prime Minister and quit India . 6 But, both Mountbatten and 
to an extent the Congress under his spell, found Ga ndhi's suggestion 
impracticable.  
Gandhi felt betrayed and let down. But once he came  out of the trauma, he 
started wondering as to who he really was! What was  the value or power of his 
solitary wish and views?  In utter frustration he s tarted to speak in an anguished 
idiom: "O God, please take me away!" He was complet ely frustrated and broken 
down. He carried on his mission of peace though. Wh en a lady returning to 
Sevagram, asked for a message, he replied: "No; peo ple must now be guided by 
what they have assimilated from my teaching.  It is  not good for them always to 
look for guidance from me. In fact, my prayer to Go d is to take me away from 
the bed of torture that life has become to me." To a friend he wrote: "There is 
no prospect of my ever returning to Sevagram." What  an intuition!  Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21  Gandhi was let down, deserted, left alone. Even Jaw aharlal Nehru and Sardar 
Patel apprised him of partition as a fait accompli after the decision was already 
taken! But there was no way out really. For, if the  Congress were weakened it 
would be an incalculable harm to the country. There  was no other viable force 
or credible leadership which could handle the Himal ayan task of governance of 
the post-partition India. 
 
Q: Why did Gandhi not resort to fast unto death agains t the partition the way 
he did with reference to his insistence on giving a way fifty-five crores of 
rupees to Pakistan later?  
A:  Gandhi himself has answered the question. While ta lking about a letter he 
had received stated to this effect:  
Who am I? As an individual I have no value. The 
people, whom I represented and spoke for, have 
deserted me. They do not share my views. They have 
accepted the partition. It might be their 
helplessness. I have an unswerving faith in my ways  
even today. But for whom shall I struggle when thos e 
whom I represented and fought for so far find the 
partition acceptable and have lost faith in me? The  
whole country has been staging the dance of death 
and violence. They are not happy with my plea for 
friendship, fraternity, peace, and love. The Hindus  
want to drive the Mahommedans out of this country. 
When the entire situation has changed, with whose 
support shall I fight for an integral and undivided  
nation? The negation of partition is no small job!  
The country was at last physically divided, but hea rts could certainly be united. 
Gandhi had often expressed his desire to go to Paki stan to meet Khan Abdul 
Gaffar Khan, and also to ascertain how in reality w ere implemented Jinnah's 
promises to the minorities. Gandhi had declared tha t he considered Pakistan Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22  also his own country. Had he lived longer, the worl d should have perhaps 
witnessed him offering 'satyagraha' across the fron tiers of Pakistan, the way he 
had done across the border of Transvaal in South Af rica. This could be also his 
way of protest against the partition. He must have surely experienced a most 
painful sense of betrayal. Nevertheless, he also re alised how helpless his 
associates were. The evil of partition was inevitab le.  
There was another aspect also. Some people had offe red to rally round Gandhi 
if he chose to fight against the partition. But who  were they really? They were 
only those who were opposed to Gandhi's way of love , peace, and nonviolence 
all along. They wanted to maintain the geographic o r physical integrity of the 
country, but at the same time intensify and aggrava te the communal dichotomy 
and reinforce the two-nation theory. They thought t hat the Muslims could live 
here merely as second class citizens. The essential  Hinduism inheres the 
concept of non-duality, the whole world as a family . But here were the people 
who wanted to divide hearts; they were bent on sett ling scores. It is a fact 
universally acknowledged that once there is heart b urning or split in a family, it 
would certainly be divided. The Hinduists had faile d to recognize this fact; they 
refuse to face it even today. They might be loving the country. Who does not? 
But they are out and out for discrimination. They w anted to divide the children 
of the land as the privileged and the unprivileged.  They had been fumbling for 
excuses to clash. If the Hindus and the Muslims wer e not divided, what should 
happen to their leadership, to their vocation and a vocation? How could Gandhi 
join hands with such as they?  
What is most intriguing, and calls for an explanati on is this. Why did the 
Hinduists alone demand that Gandhi should have fast ed against the partition? 
All along, they looked down upon him as a traitor, anti-Hindu, and deserving to 
be sacrificed. How come they looked forward to Gand hi's championing their 
cause, hands in gloves so to say? Where were then t heir own leaders—Savarkar, 
Hedgewar, Mookerji, Bhopatkar, Munje, Khare and oth ers? They knew too well 
that barring one or two of them, fast, if at all un dertaken by them, would have 
no moral effect on the masses, for they had not suf fered or sacrificed anything Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23  for the cause of freedom. The masses had hardly hea rd anything about them. 
Gandhi alone commanded that strength and stature. G andhi had returned home 
during Tilak era. Savarkar then was a budding youth , ten years Gandhi's junior. 
There were some other leaders also. But how come th ey all failed to do 
anything akin to what Gandhi did? It was so simply because their words sounded 
hollow; they had no moral appeal. They had only one  agenda—to poison the 
people's mind and sow therein the seeds of enmity a nd hatred and thus to 
provoke violence. 
 
Q: You haven't yet referred to the giving away of fift y-five crores of rupees to 
Pakistan. Wasn't the fast undertaken merely to coer ce the Government to pay 
off the money? Does it not reveal Gandhi's pro-Paki stan and pro-Muslim 
attitude?  
A:  It would be inappropriate to describe this as his "pro-Muslim" attitude. 
Gandhi could foresee things; his vision was very wi de, cosmic. Like the partition 
of the country, the division of the movable and imm ovable property of the 
country was done under the mediation of the British . Normally, therefore, 
Mountbatten would insist on India keeping the promi se. He also talked to 
Gandhi in that context on January 6 and January 12.  But Gandhi did not decide 
to undertake his fast on this issue. Gandhi himself  has observed that when he 
arrived from Calcutta on September 9, on his way to  the Punjab, Delhi, which 
once upon a time was overflowing with joy, appeared  to be as desolate as a 
grave-yard. He at once realised that he had no way but to stay on at Delhi and 
work following the principle, "Do or die." On the e ve of undertaking the fast he 
had stated that of late, he had been hearing some i nner voice, but he could not 
arrive at any conclusion with reference to it. At l east for three days prior to his 
going on fast, his mind was seized with that idea. It ought to also be conceded 
that it was his conviction that the payment of fift y five crores was the moral 
responsibility of the Government of India. How was it ever possible that the 
man, who was devoted to truth all his life and had rejected the policy of tit for 
tat (shatham prati shathyam) but followed the princ iple of truth and goodness Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  in response even to deception (shatham pratyapi sat yam) would swerve from 
the path of truth in the nick of time? The moment G andhi announced his 
decision to go on fast, Dr. Sushila Nayar, who took  his constant care, "came 
running to me with the news—Gandhiji had decided to  launch fast unto death 
unless the madness in Delhi ceased" writes Pyarelal , the brother of Dr. Nayar 
and author of "Mahatma Gandhi: The Last Phase."  
(i)  There was no reference whatsoever to fifty five cr ores of rupees here. 
Nonetheless, even in that climate of momentary and deep anguish the mention 
of the fifty five crores did not come out of her mo uth which shows that the 
issue was not at all there. Maybe, some such words might have perhaps been 
missed by her, but there is not even a trace of any thing of the sort in the 
statements of Gandhi made in a cool light of reason .  
It would be untrue, hence, to say that he undertook  the fast for this purpose. In 
case it was really so, Gandhi should have definitel y mentioned it as a condition 
before going on fast. In fact there was not a singl e syllable about this in his 
statements. Secondly, acetone was traced in his uri ne on the third day of his 
fast, and although immediately there was no serious  risk, there was a hazard of 
some permanent handicap and therefore he should hav e given up the fast. 
Moreover, on the very day, the Government of India had announced the 
decision to pay off the sum. In spite of there bein g these two sound reasons of 
giving up the fast, he did not do so. He broke his fast only when the committee 
headed by Rajendrababu assured him to take four ste ps towards the restoration 
of peace. (vide: Appendix-v). Nowhere was there any  reference to the payment 
of fifty-five crores then.  
(ii)  Nor is there any reference in the declaration of t he Government of India to 
suggest that the decision to pay off was ever in re sponse to Gandhi's demand. 
(vide Appendix-iv)  
(iii)  In reply to a query, Gandhi clearly stated that hi s fast was not undertaken 
to condemn any action of the Home Ministry of the I ndian government; the fast 
was undertaken in protest against the Hindus and th e Sikhs of India and the 
Muslims in Pakistan. It was in defence of the minor ities in India and Pakistan. Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25  Things would be in perspective if one reads the tex ts of Gandhi's statements on 
January 12 and 13 as well as the proclamation of th e Government of India 
printed here (vide Appendices-i, iii, iv). It is qu ite clear that nowhere is there 
any reference to the money. But it intensely troubl ed his mind that the 
subcontinent that had attained freedom following th e way of peace and non-
violence and was in a position to lead the world on  the right way, was going to 
pieces through the acme of violence by spilling who lesale blood of their own 
brethren and molesting and raping women both in Ind ia and Pakistan. One of 
the desperate remedies to bring round the people wh o had gone mad in both 
the countries was to go on fast and nothing else.  
Above all, he could perhaps perceive the effect of India's liberal attitude on the 
world. At a deeper level, he was hoping that India and Pakistan would be re-
united failing which they would at least live in pe ace, love, and friendship. 
Even for an objective like this a gesture of sports man spirit was quite essential. 
Gandhi's fast stemmed from this profoundly human as piration. It had not failed. 
Maulvi of Bareily had publicly stated in response t o Gandhi's fast:  
There is no greater friend of Musalmans than you, 
whether in Pakistan or Hindustan. My heart bleeds 
with yours at recent Karachi and Gujarat (Pakistan)  
atrocities, the massacre of innocent men, women and  
children, forcible conversions and the abduction of  
women. These are crimes against Allah for which 
there is no pardon. Let the Pakistan government 
know that. Much less, can an Islamic state be found ed 
upon such heinous crimes against Allah's creation? I 
order my followers in Pakistan and appeal to the 
Pakistan Muslims and government to put an end to 
these shameful, un-Islamic misdeeds and express 
unqualified repentance. My order to my followers an d 
to the Muslims of Hindustan is....(that) they must 
remain loyal to you and to the Union Government to Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26  the last....condemn the misdeeds of their co-
religionists in Pakistan in unambiguous and emphati c 
terms to create public abhorrence against such 
action....It is high time that Musalmans should rea lise 
that their sincere loyalty to the union and their 
leaders' confidence in themselves are the only 
safeguards that can protect them. The secret desire  
to look to Pakistan for guidance and help will be t heir 
doom. Pray break your fast and save Hindustan and 
Pakistan from ruin, disaster and death” 8  
Raja Ghazanafar Ali Khan, the Minister for Relief a nd Rehabilitation in Pakistan 
Government, in a press interview declared:  
The appalling degradation of morals which has 
manifested itself in both India and Pakistan during  
recent months called for a drastic remedy and 
Mahatma Gandhi has lodged his protest against these  
conditions in the extreme form....If the present st ate 
of affairs lasts, our hard-won freedom is bound to 
come to an inglorious end. 9  
Moving references to Gandhiji's fast were made in t he course of their speeches 
by the members on the floor of the West Punjab (Pak istan) Assembly. Malik 
Feroz Khan Noon remarked:  
“No country in the world has produced a greater 
man, religious founders apart, than Mahatma 
Gandhi." 10  
Mian Mumtaz Khan Daulatana, the Finance Minister, s aid that it was their 
foremost duty to appreciate   
the feeling which Mahatma Gandhi's fast reveals 
towards the Muslims. This shows that there is at le ast 
one man In India who is ready to sacrifice even his  Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27  life for Hindu-Muslim unity….I assure Mahatma 
Gandhi from the floor of this House that his feelin gs 
for the protection of minorities are fully shared b y 
us. 11  
The Chief Minister, the Khan of Mamdot, speaking on  his own and his colleagues' 
behalf expressed:  
deep admiration and sincere appreciation with great  
feeling of concern for Mahatma Gandhi's great 
gesture for furtherence of a noble cause, no effort s 
will be spared in this province to help in saving h is 
precious life. 12  
A message from the High Commissioner for Pakistan i n India, Zahid Hussain on a 
different occasion also shows similar feelings of r espect for the Mahatma:  
Today the people of India—in which I include 
Pakistan—are suffering untold miseries and privatio ns 
resulting from hatred and conflict. All eyes are 
turned to Mahatma Gandhi in the unparalleled crisis  
which has overtaken the country....India is in many  
ways a key to the future of the human race and we 
all hope and pray that inspired by the ideals of 
Mahatma Gandhi she will play her part truly and 
well. 13  
In another way also Gandhi's efforts were yielding definite results. Here is an 
excerpt from Pyarelal's "Mahatma Gandhi:The Last Ph ase" 
At about the same time, a deputation of four U. P. 
Muslims that had gone to West Punjab on a peace 
mission, submitted a report to Gandhiji on their 
return. In it they expressed the view that Hindus 
could now return to Lahore and live there in safety . 
The Sikhs however, would have to bide their time. Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  They went on to say Members of the U. P. Peace 
Mission assure their non-Muslim brethren that they 
would accompany those who wish to return to their 
homes and help to rehabilitate them. They would 
protect them with their lives and will not leave th em 
till they feel safe. 14  
Gandhi's fast impinged more on the Muslims, whereas  vis-a-vis the Hinduists it 
proved rather counter-productive. The fundamentalis ts on both the sides, who 
were bent on having blood bath, whose hearts were f illed up with the madness 
of massacre of the fellow-beings who practised what  they called an alien 
religion, indulged in scaremongering and instigatin g the people. Misguided by 
these fanatic fundamentalists, confronted with the immediate violent scenario 
and influenced by reckless rumours, the people in b oth the countries had lost 
their sanity.  
During the last days of his life Gandhi endeavoured  ceaselessly to bring 
together the two countries to be united, at least t o imbibe the harmony of the 
mind and heart eventually to see an undivided and u nited India! According to 
him there could be no conditions or compromise in t he practice of virtues like 
love, non-violence and truth which are universal. B ut sadly the world is yet not 
ripe for it. Gandhi, however, walked alone preachin g and practising it unto the 
very end of his life, on January 30, 1948. 
 
Q: Will you please elucidate your statement that some citizens of Poona were 
at the root of the conspiracy to kill Gandhi? Pleas e also explain: Why did 
leaders like Savarkar fail to influence the people unlike him? Why could they 
not launch 'movements' such as Gandhi did?  
A:  Now that I am confronted with the question, I will  speak hesitantly though. 
We had better not compare. Nobody can ever question  Lok Manya Tilak's and 
Veer Savarkar's courage and patriotism. The other l eaders, too, had their share 
in the march of Independence. This country ought to  and will forever remain Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29  indebted to them. But there seems to be a striking difference between 
Mahatma Gandhi and the other leaders.  
The new age of non-violence and truth was around, o n the wings of science. It 
called for new approaches. For instance, Tilak Maha raj and Veer Savarkar were 
arrested on the charges of treason for whatever the y had done prompted by 
love and concern for the country. They denied the c harges and unsuccessfully 
tried to defend themselves. The Government had also  put similar charges on 
Gandhi but he faced them squarely and denied nothin g in the court of law. On 
the contrary he went as far as to say that if whate ver he had done for the 
freedom of the country was, according to them treas on he did commit it and 
added that he would do so again once he was release d. The British Judge, 
mightily impressed, called him a saint, although re luctantly sentencing him to 
six-year imprisonment. He was really sad to do so! Why?  
The reason is apparent, as it seems to me. The new age had its own 
characteristic problems. The old, hackneyed methods  would not work. The tit 
for tat policy was obsolete, irrelevant. The days w ere over when one could 
indulge in crooked ways and yet run away from the c onsequences. Moreover, 
science had struck at the very root of some sectari an and religious beliefs. A 
host of pertinent questions vis-a-vis myths and myt hology arose in the social 
consciousness. In this larger context Hinduism per se appeared to be rather 
narrow as a mere creed. And Gandhiji entered the sc ene. He was second to 
none in his faith in God and Hinduism. He had gone even to the length of 
describing himself as a 'Sanatani Hindu'. The Hindu  mind with its cosmic 
consciousness responded very well to his balanced a nd equanimous attitude to 
all religions alike and reverence for the deities t hereof. He always commenced 
all his work with a prayer, the prayer including al l major religions. The common 
man understood well and admired his love of God and  his resignation to His 
will. In England he had come across Christians and studied Christianity. He had 
also come into contact with Islam in South Africa. As a consequence, there had 
arisen in his mind some doubts that were solved by Shrimad Rajchandra. Even 
during his days In South Africa, his prayers includ ed the hymns of Hinduism, Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  Christianity, Islam, Buddhism and Zarthustra. The u niversal human religion was 
manifest in his words, deeds, and thoughts. The new  tendencies and 
approaches in tune with the new age were reflected in his life and action. 
There was no room for any narrow cult on the plane on which Gandhi stood, not 
even the constraints of Hinduism. Naturally the dog matic Hinduists were ill at 
ease with him and could not come to terms with this .  
Gandhi also advocated social change. He persevered to remove untouchability 
and the distinctions of castes and creeds, of the h igh and the low—the evils 
that had disturbed him right from his childhood. Wh en his own sister offered to 
quit the ashram in protest against the rehabilitati on of a 'Harijan' family down 
there, he let her go away. The donors at once withh eld donations; the ashram 
was on the verge of collapse. But Gandhi did not sw erve; he stood up firm 
sticking to his principles. His journals were entit led, 'Harijan'. He undertook 
Harijan pilgrimages countrywide and set up centers in the service of the tribals 
and Harijans. He brought the women out of the four walls of their homes and 
entrusted public service to them. The women in the country came up to the 
mark in public life, working shoulder to shoulder w ith men. All this did not 
please or suit the conservative Hinduist leaders, p articularly from Poona. 
Incidentally, several leaders like Savarkar from Ma harashtra were upset. They 
were all hurt.  
The country was aware of Gandhi's work in South Afr ica which helped him in his 
public life. He accompliahed three outstanding succ esses soon on his arrival. (a) 
The Government agreed to abolish the system of bond ed labour for the 
emigrants to South Africa. (b) The notorious excise post at Viramgam in Gujarat 
was closed down. (c) He succeeded quite swiftly in putting to a stop the  
atrocities that were being inflicted on the farm la bour in the indigo fields of 
Champaran.  This was an extension and accentuation of his work in South 
Africa.  
Soon afterwards he, along with his associates like Sardar Patel, had a number 
of achievements: Kheda Satyagraha, Bardoli Satyagra ha, Nagpur Zanda 
Satyagraha etc., all in quick succession.  Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31  His stout protest, countrywide, against the Jalianw ala Baug genocide, the 
resolution for total freedom adopted by the Indian National Congress, and on 
top of it all the Salt March to Dandi, like an eart hquake, shook the foundations 
of the British Empire.  
The Hindu protagonists did not find all this congen ial. So far as the 'religious' 
protagonists of Poona were concerned they had taste d power during the 
Peshwa regime. The cobra of the political and the r eligious power was beating 
its fangs in vain. Nothing could obstruct Gandhi's march. He became an eye-
sore. The only way open to them for their dominatio n was to remove Gandhi 
who had come in their way. See how Godse speaks cal culatingly and cunningly 
as well as those who cared to speak out saying that  Gandhi did not say "Hey 
Rama!" while breathing his last. Their discomfort e ven on this minor point 
exposes their mindset. How would they concede to Ga ndhi an image of a 
devout Ramabhakta, the devotee of Rama? The rub was , so long as Gandhi 
lived, it was impossible to undermine his influence  and hold of the Hindu mind. 
There was left only one way out—to eliminate him. A nd that is precisely what 
they eventually did.  
This is the complex background of what they call th e Poona conspiracy of 
Gandhi's murder. The conspiracies were hatched in t he dark nooks and corners. 
Innocent young minds were also being poisoned. All sorts of stories were 
fabricated to arouse a sense of hatred and revenge.  Gandhi’s efforts to bring 
the minorities, especially the Muslims, into the ma in stream of the nation were 
distorted, misrepresented as a gesture of appeaseme nt, as if he were out to 
humour them all. Thus a subtle strategy of lies and  hatred was steadily 
evolved. Not many were hoodwinked, but so far as th e elimination of Gandhi 
was concerned, even one was enough! All that was ne eded was a blind fanatic, 
hell bent on destroying good; and Nathuram Godse wa s one such. 
 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32   
Q: One more thing baffles us. Is it true that Gandhi c ould not speak to the 
Muslims in as harsh terms as he spoke to the Hindus ?  
A:  Gandhi was a Hindu and called himself 'Sanatani'. When he spoke to the 
Hindus he did feel he was also one of them. Ordinar ily he did not speak in a 
harsh language to anyone. Nonetheless, at times, in  a mood of unrest and 
frustration, he did have a recourse to strong terms . Please read the excerpts 
from "Mahatma Gandhi: The Last Phase":  
Some Delhi Maulanas came to Gandhiji on the 
following day. They brought with them a few rusty 
arms which they said the Muslims had surrendered in  
response to his appeal. Gandhiji told them that it 
was mere eye-wash. It betokened no change of heart 
on their part. The Maulanas said that Gandhiji's 
arrival had effected a "great change" in the outloo k 
of the local Muslims. They were sanguine that befor e 
long "complete peace would reign in the city."  
Their hyperbolical and evasive replies hurt Gandhij i "Do not deceive 
yourselves," he sternly warned them. "My stay here will avail the Muslims 
nothing if they do not thoroughly cleanse their hea rts." 15  
During the last week of December 1947, in the cours e of his prayer-talk, Gandhi 
said:  
I would, therefore, urge the Muslim minority to ris e 
superior to the poisonous atmosphere and lay down 
the thoughtless prejudice by proving by their 
exemplary conduct that the only honourable way of 
living in the Union is that they should be full cit izens 
without any mental reservations.  
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33   
He was painfully conscious of the atrocities agains t the Hindus in Pakistan. And 
he used to draw the attention of Muslims in India a nd reminded them of their 
duty in the situation:  
The talk with Shaheed was still in progress when a 
group of local Muslims came. Gandhiji repeated to 
them this advice. They must set forth their views i n a 
public statement if they felt that the minorities i n 
Pakistan were not getting a fair deal and boldly an d 
unequivocally say that this was disgrace to Pakista n 
and stigma on Islam. The Muslim friends admitted 
that Pakistan's treatment of minorities was 
oppressive, unethical and un-Islamic; they thorough ly 
disapproved of it. They further said that it was in  
Pakistan's hand to insure the safety of the Indian 
Muslims by according proper treatment to the 
minorities in Pakistan." 16  
On January 11, some nationalist Maulanas, who were determined to live in India 
and not emigrate to Pakistan but were being harasse d here, called on Gandhi 
and complained to him, adding that they had better be packed off to England 
instead. Gandhi pulled them up saying:  
....You call yourselves nationalist Muslims and spe ak 
like this? Referring to this during the evening pra yer 
he said, "In Pakistan the Muslims had gone mad and 
had driven away most of the Hindus and Sikhs. If th e 
Hindus in the Union did likewise, it would spell th eir 
own ruin.”  
On January13, before going on fast he said:   
That destruction is certain if Pakistan ensures no 
equality of status and security of life and propert y Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  for all professing the various faiths of the world,  and 
if India copies her only then Islam dies in the two  
Indias, not in the world.  
On that very day there flashed the news that the tr ain from Pakistan was 
attacked and a huge number of Hindus and Sikhs who were travelling were all 
massacred. That evening, at the end of the prayer, Gandhi spoke in a most 
agonised tone:  
How long can the Union put up with such things? How  
long can I bank upon the patience of the Hindus and  
Sikhs in spite of my fast? Pakistan has to put a st op to 
this state of affairs. 17   
Gandhi had said a lot of such things during the day s of violence that had 
enveloped India and Pakistan. Those who wish to kno w all about it in greater 
depth are requested to read “Mahatma Gandhi: The La st Phase” by Pyarelal.  
There is abundant material in the book that is apt to satisfy not only one's 
intellectual curiosity, but also unfold hard facts against the widespread 
falsehood that is being woven around Mahatma Gandhi , one of the greatest men 
of all time. Whenever one tries to measure a man of  Gandhi's stature, it is sure 
to end up in measuring oneself! How could we presum e to sit in judgement over 
Gandhi? Nevertheless if we do, let us not turn our back on truth, truth for 
which, Gandhi lived and died. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35   
EPILOGUE 
Ramesh Dave  
Gandhi's life story is an epic of great magnitude, a rare human phenomenon. 
What is revealed here is just a ripple of the waves  reaching out for the shores 
of light. The writer of this tract, every inch a Ga ndhian in his eighties, felt 
impelled to apply his mind to a sort of research in  his cottage at Sabarmati 
Ashram, the project that could be possible only at a university. The play to him 
was just a catalyst in his lifelong quest of the Ma hatma; and we have a human 
document.  
The play on Godse does not at all merit any attenti on. It deserves to be ignored 
and discarded. Truth alone prevails, not falsehood,  no matter how cunningly 
concocted. But a moment like this has one advantage : an opportunity to speak 
out the truth and save the innocent and uncritical audiences from being 
trapped into untruth. The wholesale distortion of f acts does hardly any damage 
to Gandhi. He is far above all petty squabbling. Bu t if all this goes 
unchallenged, the silent response affords an immens e, hushed scope for the lies 
to thrive; and the mist of misunderstanding might b lur our own view, leaving us 
all the poorer in human worth. The play is mere per versity, not art.  
It is our moral responsibility, hence, to acquaint ourselves and the world with 
truth and nothing but the truth. Why did we not awa ke earlier in the face of 
such a nefarious propaganda of lies? Half a century  has rolled away across 
falsehood. Should we not discharge our debt to both  truth and Gandhi by taking 
facts to the doorsteps of the people?  
In Gandhi's vision there was no place for communali sm. The people of India—
Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Sikhs—were to him all God's children and destined 
to be one nation. How stupid and merciless are the forces that tend to mar this 
irrevocable destiny! This is a moment of reckoning.  How untenable and untrue 
is the argument that Gandhi was so very pro-Muslim and anti-Hindu that he 
deserved to be sacrificed? To try to stick any labe l to the hero of humanity is Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36  patently absurd. He was far above all creeds and cu lts. His religion was 
humanity, his aim truth. And when he was confronted  with the violent scenario 
where humanity was being uprooted, what option did he have other than to 
walk alone even to the end of life in the pursuit o f humanity and truth? So far 
as his endeavour to achieve communal harmony was co ncerned, the efforts 
were also afoot to bring the Muslims into the mains tream of the nation even 
prior to his return from South Africa. The idea of partition in fact, arose out of 
the Pandora's box of narrow and self-centred politi cs fostered by the imperial 
policy: "Divide and rule". One truth, however, stan ds out like a light house to 
lead us out of ignorance. In all there were about t en attempts on the life of the 
Mahatma out of which eight took place years before any idea either of partition 
or payment of fifty-five crores of rupees to Pakist an had at all arisen.  
The game to kill Gandhi had started off while Pakis tan did not even exist in 
anyone's wildest fantasy. As for fifty-five crores of rupees, what was all the 
money worth as against the pursuit of restoring hum anity, peace, and love in a 
world fractured by widespread violence and hatred? 'Gandhivadh', Gandhi's 
sacrifice, was a myth invented to justify the ways of evil, a fabric without facts 
and substance. That Gandhi found the money trash ag ainst the value of non-
violence and truth was not an 'offence' meriting mu rder. It was a ray of light for 
us who were lost like the babes in a darkling wood.  He was ever ready to 
sacrifice everything, even his own life to maintain  integrity and unity of the 
country. The assassination of Gandhi was not an ind ividual act. It was the waste 
of good involved in the process of expulsion of unb ridled violence and evil as a 
result of mass madness. It was a great human traged y. The light that guided us 
for years was put out on the flimsy excuses devoid of all truth.  
Mankind had to wait for nearly two thousand years s ince Jesus. But when 
Gandhi came to 'lead kindly light,' he, too, was cr ucified. It is hard not to re-
echo Saint Joan's words: "O God, that made this bea utiful earth, when will it be 
fit to receive thy saints? How long, O Lord, how lo ng?"  
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37   
APPENDIX 1  
GANDHIJI'S SPEECH AT THE PRAYER MEETING 
New Delhi,  
January 12, 1948  
One fasts for health's sake under laws governing he alth or fasts as a penance for 
a wrong done and felt as such. In these fasts, the fasting one need not believe 
in Ahimsa. There is, however, a fast which a votary  of non-violence sometimes 
feels impelled to undertake by way of protest again st some wrong done by 
society and this he does when he, as a votary of Ah imsa, has no other remedy 
left.  
Such an occasion has come my way. When on September  9, I returned to Delhi 
from Calcutta, I was to proceed to West Punjab. But  that was not to be. Delhi 
looked a city of the dead. As I alighted from the t rain I observed gloom on 
every face. I saw that even the Sardar, whom humour  and the joy that humour 
gives never desert, was no exception this time.  
The cause of it I did not know. He was on the platf orm to receive me. He lost 
no time in giving me the sad news of the disturbanc es that had taken place in 
the metropolis of the Union. At once I saw that I h ad to be in Delhi and do or 
die.  
There is apparent calm brought about by prompt mili tary and police action. But 
there is storm within the breast. It may burst fort h any day. This I count as no 
fulfillment of the vow to "do" which alone can keep  me from death, the 
incomparable friend. I yearn for hearty friendship between Hindus, Sikhs and 
Muslims. It subsisted between them the other day. T oday it is non-existent. It is 
a state that no Indian patriot worthy of the name c an contemplate with 
equanimity.  
Though the voice within has been beckoning for a lo ng time, I have been 
shutting my ears to it lest it might be the voice o f Satan, otherwise called my Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  weakness. I never like to feel resourceless; a saty agrahi never should. Fasting is 
his last resort in the place of the sword—his or ot hers.  
I have no answer to return to the Muslim friends wh o see me from day to day as 
to what they should do. My impotence has been gnawi ng at me of late. It will 
go immediately the fast is undertaken. I have been brooding over it for the last 
three days. The final conclusion has flashed upon m e and it makes me happy. 
No man, if he is pure, has anything more precious t o give than his life. I hope 
and pray that I have that purity in me to justify t he step. I ask you all to bless 
the effort and to pray for me and with me.  
The fast begins from the first meal tomorrow (Tuesd ay). The period is 
indefinite and I may drink water with or without sa lts and sour limes. It will end 
when and if I am satisfied that there is a reunion of hearts of all communities 
brought about without any outside pressure but from  an awakened sense of 
duty.  
The reward will be the regaining of India's dwindli ng prestige and her fast-
fading sovereignty over the heart of Asia and there  through the world. I flatter 
myself with the belief that the loss of her soul by  India will mean the loss of 
the hope of the aching, storm-tossed and hungry wor ld. Let no friend or foe, if 
there be one, be angry with me. There are friends w ho do not believe in the 
method of the fast for reclamation of the human min d. They will bear with me 
and extend to me the same liberty of action that th ey claim for themselves.  
With God as my supreme and sole counselor, I felt t hat I must take the decision 
without any other advise. If I have made a mistake and discover it, I shall have 
no hesitation in proclaiming it from the house-top and retracing my faulty step. 
There is little chance of my making such a discover y. If there is a clear 
indication, as I claim there is, of the Inner Voice , it will not be gainsaid. I plead 
for all absence of argument and inevitable endorsem ent of the step. If the 
whole of India responds or at least Delhi does, the  fast might be soon ended.  
But whether it ends soon or late or never, let ther e be no softness in dealing 
with what may be termed as a crisis. Critics have r egarded some of my previous Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39  fasts as coercive and held that on merits the verdi ct would have gone against 
my stand but for the pressure exercised by the fast s.  
What value can an adverse verdict have when the pur pose is demonstrably 
sound? A pure fast, like duty, is its own reward. I  do not embark upon it for the 
sake of the result it may bring. I do so because I must. Hence I urge everybody 
dispassionately to examine the purpose and let me d ie, if I must, in peace 
which I hope is ensured. Death for me would be a gl orious deliverance rather 
than that I should be a helpless witness of the des truction of India, Hinduism, 
Sikhism and Islam. That destruction is certain if P akistan does not ensure 
equality of status and security of life and propert y for all professing the various 
faiths of the world and if India copies her. Only t hen Islam dies in the two 
Indias, not in the world. But Hinduism and Sikhism have no world outside India. 
Those who differ from me will be honoured by me for  their resistance however 
implacable. Let my fast quicken conscience, not dea den it.  
Just contemplate the rot that has set in in beloved  India and you will rejoice to 
think that there is a humble son of hers who is str ong enough and possibly pure 
enough to take the happy step. If he is neither, he  is a burden on earth. The 
sooner he disappears and clears the Indian atmosphe re of the burden, the 
better for him and all concerned.  
I would beg of all friends not to rush to Birla Hou se nor try to dissuade me or be 
anxious for me. I am in God's hands. Rather they sh ould turn the searchlight 
inwards, for this is essentially a testing-time for  all of us. Those who remain at 
their posts of duty and perform it diligently and w ell, now more so than 
hitherto, will help me and the cause in every way. The fast is a process of self-
purification.  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. 90 Page 408  
 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40   
APPENDIX 2  
GANDHIJI'S SPEECH AT THE PRAYER MEETING 
New Delhi,  
January 13, 1948  
BROTHERS AND SISTERS,  
Today I may not finish my speech in 15 minutes as u sual, as I have much to say.  
Today I have come to the prayer meeting because for  the first twenty-four 
hours after beginning a fast, the body does not fee l it or should not feel it. I 
began eating at half past nine this morning. People  kept coming and talking to 
me. I finished eating a little before eleven. So I have been able to come to the 
meeting and this is not surprising. Today I can wal k about and sit up and I have 
also done some work. From tomorrow there will be so me change. Rather than 
coming here and not speaking, I might as well sit i n my room and think. If I 
have to utter the name of God, I can do it there. I  therefore feel that I shall 
not be coming to the prayer meeting from tomorrow. But if you do wish to join 
in the prayer you may come if you feel like it. The  girls will come and sing the 
prayer. At least one of them will come. I have told  you my programme in case 
you should feel disappointed at my not coming.  
I had written down yesterday's speech and it has be en published in the 
newspapers. Now that I have started my fast many pe ople cannot understand 
what I am doing. Who are the offenders—Hindus or Si khs or Muslims? How long 
will the fast last? I say I do not blame anyone. Wh o am I to accuse others? I 
have said that we have all sinned. That does not me an that any one particular 
man has sinned. Hindus in trying to drive out the M uslims are not following 
Hinduism. And today it is both Hindus and Sikhs who  are trying to do so. But I 
do not accuse all the Hindus and Sikhs because not all of them are doing it. 
People should understand this. If they do not, my p urpose will not be realized 
and the fast too will not be terminated. If I do no t survive the fast, no one is to 
be blamed. If I am proved unworthy, God will take m e away. People ask me if 
my fast is intended for the cause of the Muslims. I  admit that that is so. Why? Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41  Because Muslims here today have lost everything in the world. Formerly they 
could depend on the Government. There was also the Muslim League. Today 
the Muslim League is no longer there. The League go t the country partitioned 
and even after the partition there are large number s of Muslims here. I have 
always held that those who have been left behind in  India should be given all 
help. It is only humanity.  
Mine is a fast of self-purification. Everyone shoul d purify himself. If not, the 
situation cannot be saved. If everyone is to purify  himself, Muslims will also 
purify themselves. Everyone should cleanse his hear t. No one should find fault 
with the Muslims whatever they may do. If I confess  before someone that I have 
done wrong, then it is a kind of atonement.  
I do not say this in order to appease the Muslims o r anyone else. I want to 
appease myself which means that I want to appease G od. I do not want to be a 
sinner against God. Muslims also must become pure a nd live peacefully in India. 
What happened was that for election purposes Hindus  and Sikhs recognized the 
Muslim League. I shall not go into that history. Th en followed the partition. But 
before partition became a fact the hearts had alrea dy become divided. Muslims 
were also at fault here, though we cannot say that they alone were at fault. 
Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims, all are to blame. Now al l of them have to become 
friends again. Let them look to God, not to Satan. Among the Muslims too there 
are many who worship Satan. Among the Hindus and th e Sikhs many worship not 
Nanak and other Gurus, but Satan. In the name of re ligion we have become 
irreligious.   
Since I have undertaken the fast for the cause of t he Muslims, a great 
responsibility has come to devolve on them. They mu st understand that if they 
are to live with the Hindus as brothers they must b e loyal to the Indian Union, 
not to Pakistan. I shall not ask them whether they are loyal of not. I shall judge 
them by their conduct.  
Then the name of the Sardar is being mentioned. The  Muslims say that I am 
good, but the Sardar is not and he must be removed.  They say that Jawaharlal 
too is good. They say if I join the Government it w ill be a good thing. They Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42  object only to the Sardar. I must tell the Muslims that their argument serves no 
purpose, because the Government is the whole Cabine t, neither the Sardar nor 
Jawahar by himself. They are your servants. You can  remove them. Yes, 
Muslims alone cannot remove them. But at least they  can bring to the Sardar's 
notice any mistakes which in their opinion he commi ts. It will not do merely to 
criticize him by quoting some statement or other he  might have made. You 
must say what he has done. You must tell me. I meet  him often and I shall bring 
it to his notice. Jawaharlal can dismiss him and if  he does not, there must be 
some reason. He praises the Sardar. Then the Govern ment is responsible for 
whatever the Sardar does. You too are responsible f or he is your 
representative. That is how things go in a democrac y. Therefore I shall say that 
the Muslims must become brave and fearless. They sh ould also become God-
fearing. They must think that for them there is no League, no Congress, no 
Gandhi, no Jawaharlal but only God; that they are h ere in the name of God. Let 
them not take offence at whatever Hindus and Sikhs may do. I am with them, I 
want to live and die with them. If I cannot keep yo u united, my life is 
worthless. The Muslims thus carry a great responsib ility. They must not forget 
this.  
The Sardar is blunt of speech. What he says sometim es sounds bitter. The fault 
is in his tongue. I can testify that his heart is n ot like his tongue. He has said in 
Lucknow and in Calcutta that all Muslims should liv e here and can live here. He 
also told me that he could not trust those Muslims who till the other day 
followed the League and considered themselves enemi es of Hindus and Sikhs 
and who could not have changed overnight and sudden ly become friends. If the 
League is still there who will they obey, Pakistan or our Government? The 
League's persistence in its old attitude makes him suspect it, and rightly so. He 
says that he no longer has faith in the bona fides of the League Muslims and he 
cannot trust them. Let them prove that they can be trusted. Then I have the 
right to tell the Hindus and Sikhs what they should  do.  
The song these girls sang was composed by Gurudev. We sang it during our tours 
in Noakhali. A man walking alone calls others to co me and join him. But if no Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43  one comes and it is dark, the Poet says, the man sh ould walk alone because 
God is already with him. I asked the girls especial ly to sing this song which is in 
Bengali. Otherwise they would have sung only Hindus tani songs. The Hindus and 
Sikhs should cultivate this attitude if they are tr ue to their religions. They 
should not generate an atmosphere in which the Musl ims should be compelled 
to flee to Pakistan. Hindus and Sikhs should become  brave and show that even 
if all the Hindus and Sikhs in Pakistan were to be killed there would be no 
retaliation in India. I do not want to live to see our people copy Pakistan. If I 
am to live I shall ask every Hindu and every Sikh n ot to touch a single Muslim. It 
is cowardice to kill Muslims and we must become bra ve and not cowards.  
I shall terminate the fast only when peace has retu rned to Delhi. If peace is 
restored to Delhi it will have effect not only on t he whole of India but also on 
Pakistan and when that happens, a Muslim can walk a round in the city all by 
himself. I shall then terminate the fast. Delhi is the capital of India. It has 
always been the capital of India. So long as things  do not return to normal in 
Delhi, they will not be normal either in India or i n Pakistan. Today I cannot 
bring Suhrawardy here because I fear someone may in sult him. Today he cannot 
walk about in the streets of Delhi. If he did he wo uld be assaulted. What I want 
is that he should be able to move about here even i n the dark. It is true that he 
made efforts in Calcutta only when Muslims became i nvolved. Still, he could 
have made the situation worse, if he had wanted, bu t he did not want to make 
things worse. He made the Muslims evacuate the plac es they had forcibly 
occupied and said that he being the Premier could d o so. Although the places 
occupied by the Muslims belonged to Hindus and Sikh s he did his duty. Even if it 
takes a whole month to have real peace established in Delhi it does not matter. 
People should not do anything merely to have me ter minate the fast.  
So my wish is that Hindus, Sikhs, Parsis, Christian s, and Muslims who are in 
India should continue to live in India and India sh ould become a country where 
everyone's life and property are safe. Only then wi ll India progress.  
Speech at the Prayer Meeting, New Delhi, January 13 , 1948,  
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi Vol-90, P. 413 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44   
APPENDIX 3 
....My fast, as I have stated in plain language, is  undoubtedly on behalf of the 
Muslim minority in the Union and, therefore, it is necessarily against the Hindus 
and Sikhs of the Union and the Muslims of Pakistan.   
It is also on behalf of the minorities in Pakistan as in the case of the Muslim 
minority in the Union.  
Excerpt from the Speech at Prayer Meeting, New Delh i, January 15, 1948, 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi Vol-90, P. 428-42 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45   
APPENDIX 4 
On the third day of Gandhiji's fast, the Government  of India in a communique 
announced that it had decided to pay Pakistan immed iately the sum of rupees 
55 crores. While justifying “on legal and other gro unds" the position they had 
taken up before, they challenged the arguments adva nced by the Pakistan 
Government as being contrary to facts. The communiq ue went on to say:  
The Government have shared the world-wide anxiety o ver the fast undertaken 
by....the Father of the Nation. In common with him they have anxiously 
searched for ways and means to bury the hatchet of ill-will, prejudice and 
suspicion, which has poisoned the relations of Indi a and Pakistan. Impelled by 
earnest desire to help in every way open to them in  the object which Gandhiji 
has at heart, the Government have sought for some t angible and striking 
contribution to the movement for ending the physica l suffering of the Nation's 
soul and to turn the nation's mind from the present  distemper, bitterness and 
suspicion to constructive and creative effort. The Government is anxious to 
remove as far as possible, without detriment to the  national good, every cause 
which leads to friction between India and Pakistan.   
Mahatma Gandhi: The Last Phase by Pyarelal Vol-II, p 718 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46   
APPENDIX 5 
The peace Committee again met on the morning of the  18th January. The 
absentees of the previous night were present. The r epresentatives of all the 
important groups and organisations in the city were  there, including 
representatives of the refugees from Karol Bagh, Sa bzimandi and Paharganj, 
the three worst-affected parts of the city. They al l accepted the conditions laid 
down by Gandhiji and gave their signatures to the f ollowing pledge:  
We wish to announce that it is our heartfelt desire  that Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs 
and members of other communities should once again live in Delhi like brothers 
and in perfect amity. We take the pledge that we sh all protect the life, 
property and faith of the Muslims and that the inci dents which have taken place 
in Delhi will not happen again.  
1. We want to assure Gandhiji that the annual fair at Khwaja Qutabuddin's 
mausoleum will be held this year as in previous yea rs.   
2. The Muslims will be able to move about in Sabzimand i, Karol Bagh, 
Paharganj and other localities just as they could i n the past.   
3. The mosques which have been left by the Muslims and  which are now in 
the possession of Hindus and Sikhs will be returned . The areas which have 
been set apart for the Muslims will not be forcibly  occupied.   
4. We shall not object to the return to Delhi of the M uslims who have 
migrated from here if they choose to come back, and  the Muslims shall be 
able to carry on their business as before. We give the assurance that all 
these things will be done by our personal efforts a nd not with the help of 
the police or the military.  
We request Mahatmaji to believe us and give up his fast and continue to lead us 
as he has done hitherto.  
While the signatures were being collected, news cam e over the phone from 
Birla House that Gandhiji's condition had suddenly worsened. Dr. Rajendra 
Prasad, with some members of the Committee, thereup on hurried to Birla Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47  House to explain to Gandhiji in advance the conditi ons agreed to by the 
members of the Peace Committee. It would have taken  some time for all the 
members to assemble there and every minute counted.   
When all the members had arrived in Birla House, Ga ndhiji’s room was packed 
to capacity. The gathering included Pandit Nehru an d Maulana Azad, Zahid 
Husain, the High Commissioner for Pakistan, and rep resentatives of the Delhi 
Muslims, the R.S.S., the Hindu Mahasabha and variou s Sikh organizations. The 
Delhi Administration was represented by the Chief C ommissioner and the 
Deputy Commissioner of Delhi.  
Dr. Rajendra Prasad narrated how they had on the pr evious night after full 
discussion decided to sign the declaration then and  there. But as 
representatives of some organisations were not pres ent in that meeting they 
felt they should wait till the remaining signatures  were obtained. This had since 
been done. In the morning meeting even those who ha d some lingering doubts 
on the previous night were confident that they coul d now, with a full sense of 
their responsibility, ask Gandhiji to break the fas t. It had been decided to set 
up a number of committees to implement the pledge. In view of the guarantees 
that had jointly and severally been given. Dr. Raje ndra Prasad proceeded, they 
all hoped that Gandhiji would now break his fast. A  member described how a 
procession of 150 Muslims had been taken that morni ng to Sabzimandi, where 
they were greeted with fruits and refreshment by th e Hindus.   
Replying, Gandhiji said that they had given him all  that he had asked for, but if 
their words meant that they held themselves respons ible for communal peace 
in Delhi only and what happened in other places was  no concern of theirs, then 
their guarantee was nothing worth and he would feel , and they too would one 
day realise, that it was a big blunder on his part to have given up his fast. They 
should clearly realise the implications of their pl edge. What they had achieved 
in Delhi had to be realised in the whole of India. If things in Delhi were set 
right, it would set things right in Pakistan, too.   
Mahatma Gandhi: The Last Phase, by Pyarelal, Vol-II , pp, 728-29-30. 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48   
REFERENCES 
1. Bipin Chandra et al., Bharat Ka Swatantrata Sanghar sha, 14 th reprint 1997, p. 120.   
2. Samagra Savarkar Wangmaya: Writings of Swatantrya V eer Savarkar Vol. VI, p. 296, 
Maharastra Prantiya Hindu Mahasabha, Poona.   
3. Indian Annual Register 1943, Vol. II, p. 10.   
4. Tara Chand, History of the Freedom Movement in Indi a, Vol. IV Publication Division, 
Government of India.   
5. Pyarelal, "Mahatma Gandhi - The Last Phase," Vol. I I, p. 75   
6. Ibid.  
7. Ibid. p. 244   
8. Ibid. p. 712  
9. Ibid. p. 713   
10. Ibid. p. 714  
11. Ibid. p. 714   
12. Ibid. p. 714  
13. Ibid. p 458   
14. Ibid. p. 526  
15. Ibid. p. 452   
16. Ibid. p. 526   
17. Pyarelal, "Mahatma Gandhi: The Last Phase", Vol. II , p. 710  
 
 
 
 
 
 Spitting at the Sun 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49   
CHARGE-SHEET 
The Hinduists indulge in the various strategies of deception. They try to 
convince that Swami Vivekanand, Subhash Babu, Bhaga t Singh, Chandrashekhar 
Azad and the other martyrs were also Hinduists. But  not one of them was a 
Hinduist or a fundamentalist. But there has been a ceaseless and subtle 
propaganda to inhibit the people's mind that way. A nother such lie is to depict 
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel as a partisan Hinduist. He re are two excerpts from 
Sardar Patel's correspondence:  
"As regards the RSS and the Hindu Mahasabha, the ca se relating to Gandhiji's 
murder is subjudice and I should not like to say an ything about the participation 
of the two organisations, but our reports do confir m that as result of the 
activities of these two bodies, particularly the fo rmer, an atmosphere was 
created in the country in which such a ghastly trag edy became possible. There 
is no doubt in my mind the extreme section of the H indu Mahasbha was 
involved in this conspiracy. The activities of the RSS constituted a clear threat 
to the existence of the Government and the State."  
18.7.48 
Vallabhbhai Patel  
 
(From the letter addressed to Dr. Shyama Prasad Muk herjee. Sardar Patel's 
correspondence; Vol. VI, p. 323, Navjivan-1973)  
Sardar Patel in his letter dated 11 th September 1948, addressed to Sarsangh 
Chalak of the R.S.S. wrote:  
"The speeches of the Sangh leaders are poisonous. I t is as a result of this venom 
that Mahatma Gandhi has been assassinated. The foll owers of the Sangh have 
celebrated Gandhiji's assassination by distributing  sweets. "  
"R.S.S. Kaal, Aaj, Udyaa" 1983, Pub. RSS, p. 71 