 
Talks on the Gita 
 
 
Written by: Vinoba Bhave 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 70/- 
 
 
 
 
"Talks on the Gita" is the story of my life, and it  is also my message. 
- Vinoba 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by: 
Dr. Parag Cholkar 
Paramdham Prakashan, (Gram-seva Mandal), 
Pavnar, Wardha - 442 111, India. 
  
Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
INTRODUCTION  
Jayaprakash Narayan  
The Bhagavad-Gita is no stranger to the West. Nor i s Vinoba Bhave, the author 
of these talks on the 'Song Celestial'. Since the d eath of Gandhi, one name that 
has sent, if not a wave, a ripple of hope throughou t this frightened world is 
that of Vinoba. 
During Gandhi's life Vinoba's name was not much kno wn even in India. Today, 
however, the remotest villages resound with the wor ds 'Vinoba' and Bhoodan . 
Even outside India, well-informed circles have sat up to take notice of the 
'walking saint' and his land-gift mission. Many thi nkers in the West have seen in 
Vinoba's message a solvent for that war of ideologi es that has become the 
despair of the human race. 
Vinoba was born in a Brahmin  family of Maharashtra (India) in September 1895. 
From his childhood he showed a remarkable lack of i nterest in worldly affairs. A 
brilliant undergraduate, he gave up college because  that sort of education was 
not what his soul craved for. The idea of utilizing  his education in order to 
make money never entered his head. So, he went to B anaras (Varanasi—India's 
holiest city and acknowledged as the premier seat o f Sanskrit scholarship) to 
study Sanskrit and Philosophy and to live a life of  contemplation and 
brahmacharya (self-discipline in the most comprehensive sense). 
Through he gave up college, Vinoba has remained a s tudent all his life. Unlike 
Gandhi, he is an erudite pundit of Sanskrit, Philosophy and the religious 
literature of the world. He has studied the Koran i n Arabic, which language he 
learnt only to be able to read that holy book in th e original. He knows the Bible 
and Christian religious literature as well perhaps as a Doctor of Divinity. 
I shall not forget the occasion when the Rev. Dr. M artin Luther King, the leader 
of the Montgomery, Alabama movement of non-violent resistance to racial 
segregation, met Vinoba with his wife. Jim Bristol of the Quaker Centre, Delhi, 
it was, I think, who in introducing Mrs. King spoke  of her proficiency in music Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3  and suggested that she might sing some hymns and Ne gro spirituals for Vinoba. 
Everyone was delighted at the suggestion. I looked at Vinoba and wondered 
loudly if he knew what the Negro spirituals were. W e were all startled, most of 
all the Americans, when Vinoba, as if in answer, ra ised his ever-downcast eyes 
towards Mrs. King and intoned softly, 'Were you the re, Were you there, When 
they crucified my Lord?' When Mrs. King sang that s piritual, it had an added 
poignancy for us. 
Vinoba is a linguist. Besides Sanskrit, Pali and Ar abic, he knows English well; 
reads French; was recently learning German; knows a ll the major Indian 
languages. He loves Mathematics. His quest for know ledge is insatiable. But it is 
not knowledge as ordinarily understood. Most knowle dge he regards as 
superficial and is interested in seeking after the fundamental truths of life. He 
has an uncanny capacity for separating the chaff fr om the grain and going to 
the root of a question. I have not met another pers on with as keen, razor-like a 
mind as Vinoba's. 
'Vinoba literature', i.e. the collection of his wri tings and speeches, is already a 
voluminous affair and is ever-growing. It deals mos tly with Philosophy and the 
theory and practice of non-violence. 
To go back to his early days again. There were from  the beginning two urges, or 
rather two tributaries of a single stream of urge, that impelled Vinoba onward. 
The one came from his identification with his fello w-creatures and impelled 
him, naturally, to work for the freedom of his coun try. Due to this urge he felt 
strongly attracted by the courage, dedication, sinc erity and spirit of self-
immolation of the revolutionaries of Bengal (whom t he British unjustly called 
'terrorists'). 
The other urge pulled him towards the Himalayas—the  traditional home of 
spiritual seekers—for a life of meditation and spir itual fulfillment. While torn 
between these urges (whose essential unity was not yet clear to him), Vinoba 
came in touch with Gandhi, who seemed to synthesize  beautifully the two urges 
in his own life. Therefore, he threw in his lot wit h that newcomer from South 
Africa who was saying strange things and doing what  was even stranger. That Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  was way back in 1916. Vinoba was among the first to  join Gandhi's Sabarmati 
Ashram, near the textile city of Ahmedabad. It was from there that Gandhi 
directed the freedom movement till the beginning of  the famous salt 
satyagraha  of 1930. 
From that first day of contact Vinoba remained stea dfast in his loyalty and 
devotion to his chosen master, though it would be d oing an injustice to him to 
regard him as a disciple in any narrow sense of the  term. It was clear to those 
who came to know him even during Gandhi's lifetime that he possessed a mind 
and character, an originality, and above all, a spi ritual quality, that were 
destined to take him beyond the limits of a mere fo llower—no matter how 
brilliant—and make him a master in his own right. T hose who have followed 
closely Vinoba's work and thought, know how great h ave been his own 
'experiments with truth' and how significant his co ntribution to human thought. 
Particularly significant has been his development o f the theory and practice of 
satyagraha  beyond the stage where Gandhi left them. 
When Gandhi was assassinated at the beginning of 19 48, he was about to launch 
upon an even greater undertaking than the winning o f India's freedom. Gandhi 
had his own vision of the future India and, as he u sed to say jokingly, he 
wanted to live till the age of 125 years in order t o make that vision a reality. 
That vision was of a new social order—different fro m the capitalist, socialist, 
communist orders of society; a non-violent society,  a society based on love and 
human values, a decentralized, self-governing, non- exploitative, co-operative 
society. Gandhi gave that society the name of Sarvodaya —literally, the rise of 
all, i.e. a society in which the good of all is ach ieved. 
To bring about this grand social revolution, Gandhi  had conceived of different 
means from those followed in history—the means of l ove. He had used the same 
means in his struggle against the British. But Gand hi did not live to put his 
concept into practice. Nothing was more natural tha n that the task should have 
devolved upon Vinoba. 
This is not the place to write about the Bhoodan  movement. But this much must 
be said, that it is the first attempt in history to  bring about a social revolution Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5  and reconstruction by the means of love. Vinoba is doing a path-finding job in 
this field. The results of his experiment may have a far-reaching impact on a 
world that is so torn with hatred and charged with violence. 
One final word about Vinoba is essential so that he  may be truly understood. 
Vinoba is not a politician, not a social reformer, nor a revolutionary. He is first 
and last a man of God. Service of man is to him not hing but an effort to unite 
with God. He endeavours every second to blot himsel f out, to make himself 
empty so that God may fill him up and make him His instrument. 
The talks of such a man of self-realization on one of the profoundest spiritual 
works of all times should be of inestimable value t o all—irrespective of race, 
creed or nationality.  
 
Specially written for the foreign edition of the 'Talks on the Gita'  published by George 
Allen and Unwin Ltd., London  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6   
NOTE FROM THE PUBLISHER  
Vinoba’s ‘Gita Pravachane’  or ‘Talks on the Gita’ is a work unique and 
wonderful in many respects. It not only interprets the Gita in a novel and 
refreshingly different way and brings out the quint essential message of that 
great spiritual classic in a language that is simpl e, lucid and intelligible even to 
ordinary readers, but also lays bare the essence of  true spirituality that 
includes whatever is the best and the most enduring  in the religious traditions 
of the world and still transcends all of them. Need less to say, its power to 
purify the hearts and the lives of the readers has few parallels. That it has been 
translated in 24 languages and around 2.5 million c opies have been sold is a 
testimony to its popularity and potency.  
The work had been translated in English as well and  this is the seventeenth 
edition of the English translation. An edition had also been published by George 
Allen and Unwin Ltd., London.  
The work had earlier been translated by Shri K. Swa minathan. It has now been 
almost re-translated by Dr. Parag Cholkar, although  he has liberally drawn on 
the earlier translation as well as the relevant por tion in ‘The Intimate and The 
Ultimate’ edited by Satish Kumar. Several persons h ave gone through the new 
version and made suggestions which have been taken care of. Labours taken by 
Shri Sarvanarayandas and Shri Vasant Palshikar dese rve special mention. It has 
also received the blessings of Ms. Vimla Thakar, on e of the tallest living 
spiritual guides. Several footnotes on important ph ilosophical terms as well as 
individuals and incidents from Indian mythology and  epics have also been 
added. 
These talks were delivered in 1932 in the Dhule jai l where Vinoba had been 
incarcerated by the British for his participation i n the freedom movement. 
There were hundreds of political prisoners lodged i n that jail. How Vinoba 
transformed jail life and the jailor, a strict disc iplinarian, who later became his 
admirer is a fascinating story, but one must avoid the temptation to recount 
that story for paucity of space. Prison inmates exp ressed a desire that Vinoba Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  should speak on the Gita. Vinoba agreed to give a t alk every Sunday and 
delivered 18 talks on the 18 Chapters. P.S. Sane al ias Sane Guruji, a great 
writer and freedom-fighter, wrote them down in long  hand. There was no 
question of their being taped and their publication  was also not thought of. In 
fact, Vinoba had given talks on the Gita many times  in the past, but none of 
them had been published. However, Sane Guruji prese rved the notebooks and 
the talks were published first in his weekly newspa per, and then in the form of 
a book in 1940 when Vinoba was in jail even before he could find time to go 
through them for necessary editing. It was only the reafter that Vinoba edited 
the talks. He also divided them into 108 sub-divisi ons and 432 paragraphs and 
wrote aphorisms (totaling 540) on each of them in S anskrit so that the contents 
could be reflected upon and understood with ease. T he collection of those 
aphorisms, named ‘Samyasutra-vritti’ has been appended to most of the 
editions in Indian languages.   
As has already been mentioned, these talks were wri tten down from the notes 
taken by Sane Guruji, whose literary style is evide nt to any discerning reader. 
The spirit, of course, has been kept intact, and th at is perhaps why Vinoba put 
his seal of approval on their publication. That the se talks were taken down by a 
man of rare purity like Sane Guruji had a special s ignificance for Vinoba.  
Few liberties have been taken with the text while t ranslating and the stress is 
on the communication of the content even at the cos t of the flow and lucidity 
of the language, if necessary. Only a few words or a sentence or two have been 
deleted or added. It may be added that the talks ar e replete with analogies and 
examples and sometimes they may appear a bit out of  place to the modern 
rational mind, which may also fail to grasp some of  them because of their 
milieu. This is inevitable in the translation of an y work in a foreign language. In 
fact, Vinoba had doubts whether English readers cou ld appreciate these talks. 
That the English translation has also been well rec eived is clear from the fact 
that it had already run into sixteen editions total ing 80,000 copies. What is, 
after all, important is the spirit and the essence.  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8  It is not an academic treatise on the Gita. These a re the talks given before 
ordinary individuals from different walks of life. It was Vinoba’s firm conviction 
that the Gita is meant to spiritualize human life; to transform and make it 
divine. That is exactly what these talks too are me ant to bring about. Their 
success in doing so in good measure has been amply testified. That is why 
Vinoba considered this work as a vehicle for the pr opagation of the Bhoodan 
(Land-gift) movement; in fact, for the revolutionar y transformation of the 
individual and social life.   
The readers are requested to convey their comments and suggestions so that 
necessary changes could be made in the next edition , and the translation made 
as authentic as possible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9   
VINOBA ON THE ‘TALKS ON THE GITA’  
It was a period of intense agitation of 1932. Many patriots and saintly men were 
gathered together in the Dhule jail. The jail life is marked with excitement and 
uncertainty. Nobody would have thought then that th ese talks delivered in the 
jail would reach the whole nation through all of it s languages. But, ultimately, 
what happens is what the Lord wills. I or Sane Guru ji, who wrote down these 
talks could have been shifted to another jail, as s ome of the inmates were. But 
this did not happen, and the talks could be through . 
‘Talks on the Gita’ should be carefully read and as similated. Its style is not that 
of the scriptures; it is for the general public. Th ere are instances of repetition 
also. Like a singer I have harped again and again o n the tune that I like most. In 
fact, I had no idea that these talks could ever be published. Had a man of pure 
heart like Sane Guruji who could do ‘short-hand’ wr iting in long hand were not 
there, these talks could have remained confined to the speaker and the 
listeners. And for me, that was enough. It was for my own sake that I delivered 
these talks; for me, it was like reciting the sacre d Name of the Lord. What 
actually happened was beyond imagination. That is w hy one feels that it was 
His will.  
Bhagavad-Gita was told in the battlefield; and that  is why it is something 
different and no other treatise can match her. The Lord Himself told the Gita 
again, which is known as the Anugita. But it is a p ale shadow of the original. My 
writings and talks on the Gita elsewhere would not have the magic touch that 
these ‘Talks’ have, as these were delivered in jail , which, for us, was a 
battlefield, before the soldiers in the freedom str uggle. Those who heard these 
talks can never forget those moments. The atmospher e of the jail at that time 
was charged with a spiritual élan. 
It is a matter of satisfaction for me that, by the grace of God, these talks on 
the Gita are proving to be of great use to social w orkers and spiritual seekers in 
purifying their minds. There are individuals who ha ve read them hundreds of 
times. When selfless workers derive inspiration fro m these talks, that enhances Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  their potency. Thousands have thus derived strength  from these talks and have, 
in turn, contributed to the enhancement of their po tency. 
As this book became a vehicle for the Bhoodan (land-gift) movement, it was 
translated into all the Indian languages and thousa nds of its copies reached the 
people. This book has brought about revolutionary c hanges. Wherever it has 
reached, it has been instrumental in removing the v eil of ignorance and 
delusions. 
I cannot describe in words the state of my being wh ile delivering these talks. If 
it could be assumed that God does speak at times th rough human beings, then 
these are such words. While delivering these talks,  I had no awareness that ‘I 
am talking’ and the listeners too did not feel that  it was Vinoba who was 
talking. The individual delivering the talks was me rely instrumental. Both the 
speaker and the listeners felt that some different power was speaking through 
his lips. 
It was God’s grace that I could have an opportunity  to offer this humble service 
to the Gita. The place of the Gita in my life is un ique. She is always there to 
help me in need. I have strived in these talks to e xplain the meaning of the 
Gita as I have understood it. 
Here, I have not concerned myself with the literal meaning of the verses; 
rather, there is reflection on the essence of every  Chapter. The use of 
scientific terminology has been kept to the minimum  even while retaining the 
scientific approach. You will not find herein any a cademic discourse unrelated 
to life. I am confident that even ordinary labourer s could find solace and peace 
herein. 
Wherever these talks have reached, they have motiva ted people to purify their 
minds and transform their lives. I would like to se e them being read, heard and 
reflected upon in every home. 
The ‘Talks on the Gita’ is the story of my life, an d it is also my message.  
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11   
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION: ARJUNA'S DESPONDENCY  
1. At The Heart Of The Mahabharata  
1. Dear brothers, from today I shall be talking to you  about Shrimad Bhagavad-
Gita. The bond between the Gita and me transcends r eason. I have received 
more nourishment from the Gita than my body has fro m my mother’s milk. 
There is little place for ratiocination in a relati onship of loving tenderness. 
Moving beyond the intellect, I therefore soar high in the vast expanse of the 
Gita on the twin wings of faith and experimentation . Most of the times I live in 
the ambience of the Gita. The Gita is my life-breat h. I am as if afloat on the 
surface of this ocean of nectar when I am talking a bout the Gita with others, 
and when alone, I dive deep into this ocean and res t there. Henceforth, every 
Sunday, I shall be giving a talk on the teaching of  the Gita, who is verily our 
mother.  
2. The Gita has been set in the Mahabharata. Standing in the middle of the 
great epic like a lighthouse, it illuminates the wh ole of the epic. Placed 
between six parvas  (sections of the text) of the epic on one side and  twelve on 
the other, its message is being unfolded in the mid dle of the battlefield with 
seven divisions of the Pandava army on one side and  eleven divisions of the 
Kaurava army on the other. 
3. The Mahabharata and the Ramayana are our national e pics. The characters 
depicted therein have become an inseparable part of  our lives. Since time 
immemorial, life in India has remained under the sp ell of the characters like 
Rama, Sita, Dharmaraj, Draupadi, Bhishma, Hanuman e tc. The characters in 
other epics of the world have not become one with t he lives of the people in 
this way. The Mahabharata and the Ramayana are thus  undoubtedly unique and 
wonderful works. The Ramayana is an endearing and e nchanting ethical poem, 
while the Mahabharata is a comprehensive treatise o n the working of society. In 
the Mahabharata Vyasa has, in one hundred thousand verses, sketched the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12  lives, personalities and characters of innumerable individuals with consummate 
skill. The Mahabharata vividly brings out the fact that none but God is 
completely faultless and good, and also that none c an be said to be evil 
personified. For instance, it points out faults eve n of moral giants like Bhishma 
and Dharmaraj, and virtues in the characters like K arna and Duryodhana, who 
had strayed from the path of righteousness. The Mah abharata tells us that 
human life is like a fabric woven with black and wh ite threads—threads of good 
and evil. With perfect detachment Vyasa, the great sage, graphically depicts 
before us the complex reality of the vast web of wo rldly life. Because of 
Vyasa’s great literary skill in depicting life with  detachment and high moral 
purpose the Mahabharata has become a veritable gold -mine. Everybody is free 
to explore it and take freely as much as he wants. 
4. Vyasa wrote such a great epic, but did he have some thing of his own to tell?  
Has he told his special message somewhere? Which is  the place in the epic where we 
find him in a state of samadhi 1? One comes across in the Mahabharata a vast 
number of dense thickets of philosophies and preach ings, but has Vyasa given 
anywhere the essence of all those and presented the  central message of the 
whole epic? Yes, he has. Vyasa has presented it in the form of the Gita. The 
Gita is his principal message and the repository of  his wisdom. It is because of 
the Gita that the Lord has extolled him as the sage  among the sages, as His own  
manifestation among the sages2. The Gita has been accorded the status of an 
Upanishad since ancient times. It is, in fact, the supreme Upanishad. Lord 
Krishna has as if distilled the essence of all the Upanishads and offered it in the 
form of the Gita to the whole world. Arjuna’s despo ndency provided only an 
occasion. Almost every idea and thought necessary f or the blossoming of life 
can be found in the Gita. That is why the wise have  rightly called it the 
encyclopedia of dharma .3 The Gita, although small in size, is the principal  text 
of Hinduism. 
5. It is well-known that the Gita was told by Lord Kri shna. Arjuna, the devotee 
who listened to this great teaching, became one wit h it, so much so that he too 
came to be called ‘Krishna’. Vyasa's empathy while narrating it earned him too Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13  the epithet ‘Krishna’. Total identity was thus esta blished between Krishna the 
teacher, Krishna the listener and Krishna the narra tor. One who wants to go 
deep into the Gita should also have concentration o f this kind and degree. 
 
2. Arjuna’s Standpoint and Its Relation with the Ge nesis of the Gita  
6. Many people feel that the Gita should be taken to b egin with the Second 
Chapter. The actual teaching starts from the eleven th verse of the Second 
Chapter; so why not take it as the real beginning? A gentleman once argued 
that the Lord had called ' अ' (first letter of the Nagari alphabet) as His vibh uti 
(manifestation) among the letters of the alphabet4 and the eleventh verse 
begins with it; therefore, it should be taken as th e beginning. That apart, it 
would be right in more than one sense to take this as the real beginning of the 
Gita. Nonetheless, the preceding introductory porti on has a value of its own. 
Without it we would not have properly understood Ar juna’s standpoint and the 
genesis of the Gita. 
7. Many contend that Arjuna had reduced himself to the  state of a eunuch and 
the Gita was preached to restore him to manhood and  induce him to fight. In 
their view the Gita preaches not only karmayoga  (the philosophy of action) but 
also yuddhayoga  (the philosophy of war). But a little thinking wil l show the 
error in this view. Eighteen divisions of army were  ready for battle. Can we say 
that the Lord, by making Arjuna  listen to the Gita , made him worthy to face 
that army in battle?  It was Arjuna who quailed; no t the army. Was then the 
army braver than Arjuna? It is just inconceivable. It was not out of fear that 
Arjuna was shying away from the battle. He was a gr eat warrior who had fought 
hundreds of battles. He had single-handedly routed Bhishma, Drona and Karna 
when they had invaded Virat’s kingdom. He was, in f act, known as one who 
knew no defeat; a man among men. Valour was in ever y drop of his blood. 
Krishna, in fact, did try to needle him by attribut ing impotence to him; but it 
proved to be off the mark. He had then to go deep i nto different aspects of the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14  spiritual knowledge. It is thus clear that it is to o simplistic to think that the aim 
of the Gita is to remove unmanliness. 
8. It is also said that the Gita is meant to make Arju na willing to fight by 
removing his inclination towards non-violence. In m y opinion this view also is 
not right. To understand this point, we have to exa mine Arjuna’s standpoint. 
The First Chapter and its extension in the Second a re useful in this context.  
Arjuna had come to the battlefield with a firm reso lve and a sense of duty. 
Being a kshatriya  (member of the warrior varna 5), fighting was in his blood. 
Every attempt to avoid war had failed. Even though the Pandavas had pitched 
their claims at the minimum and Krishna Himself had  tried to mediate, all that 
had been in vain and war had become inevitable. In these circumstances, 
Arjuna had brought together many kings, made Krishn a his charioteer, and is 
now on the battle-field. He asks Krishna with heroi c ardour, “Place my chariot 
between the two armies, so that I can have a look a t the people who have 
assembled here to fight with me.”  Krishna complies . Arjuna looks around.  And 
what does he see?  He finds his kith and kin, his n ear and dear ones arrayed on 
both the sides. He finds four generations of his ow n people intent on fighting to 
the finish. It is not that Arjuna had no idea of wh at he was going to see. But the 
actual sight, as is always the case, had a devastat ing impact. Seeing his 
kinsmen on the battlefield, Arjuna lost his nerve a nd deep anguish assailed his 
heart. In the past, he had slain innumerable warrio rs in many a battle, but he 
had never before felt so despondent, never had his bow Gandiva slipped from 
his hands, never had he trembled so, never had tear s welled up in his eyes! 
Then, why all this was happening now? Was he coming  to abhor violence like 
King Ashoka 6?  Certainly not. It was nothing but attachment to his kith and kin. 
If those in front of him had not been his kinsmen, he would even now have felt 
no qualms in severing their heads and merrily tossi ng them around. But 
attachment to his kith and kin clouded his sense of  duty, and then he started 
philosophising. When a man with a sense of duty is caught in delusion, he 
cannot face his naked lapse from duty. He tries to justify it by citing lofty 
principles. The same thing happened with Arjuna. He  now started putting Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  before Krishna, to convince him, the spacious argum ent that war in itself was 
sinful, that it would destroy the clan, eclipse dharma and lead to moral 
anarchy, scarcity and devastation, and bring many o ther disasters upon the 
society. 
9. I am reminded here of the story of a judge. He had sentenced to death 
hundreds of criminals. But one day, his own son was  produced before him, 
accused of murder. His guilt was proved and the tim e came for the judge to 
pronounce the sentence. It is then that the judge h esitated, and started 
arguing, “The death sentence is inhuman. It does no t behove a man to inflict 
such a punishment. It destroys all hopes of reformi ng the guilty. One commits 
murder in a fit of passion. The moment of bloodthir sty madness then passes off. 
Still we coolly take him to the gallows and hang hi m to death. It is disgraceful 
to humanity.” Such were the judge’s arguments. But,  had his son not been 
there, he would have gone on sentencing people to d eath. His arguments 
lacked inner conviction; they were born out of atta chment to his son. 
10. Arjuna’s condition was like that of the judge in th is story. His arguments 
were not unsound. The world has witnessed precisely  the same consequences of 
the First World War. But the point is that Arjuna w as not voicing his own 
authentic conviction. His arguments were words seem ingly wise, but not really 
so. Krishna realised this. He, therefore, paid no a ttention to Arjuna’s 
arguments and straightaway proceeded to dispel his delusion. Had Arjuna really 
become a votary of non-violence, he would not have been satisfied until his 
arguments had been convincingly answered. But the G ita nowhere deals with 
them, and yet, Arjuna was ultimately satisfied. Thi s means that Arjuna had not 
really become a votary of non-violence. The intrins ic propensity to fight was 
still very much a part of his nature. War was for h im his natural and 
inescapable duty. But he was trying to evade this d uty under the spell of 
delusion. And it is this delusion that the Gita att acks most pointedly. 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16  3. The Purpose Of The Gita: To Dispel Anti- Swadharma 7 Delusion  
11. Arjuna was not only speaking the language of non-vi olence, he was also 
talking of sannyasa  (renunciation of the world). He was saying that sannyasa  
was preferable to the blood-stained kshatradharma  (duty of the Kshatriya ). But 
was this his swadharma ?  Was this in keeping with his nature?  He could e asily 
have donned the garb of a recluse, but how could he  have acquired the 
mentality of a recluse?  Had he gone to the forest to live the life of a recluse  he 
would have started killing the deer there. The Lord  tells him plainly, “O Arjuna! 
You are saying that you would not fight. This is an  illusion. Your nature, which 
has been formed through all these years, will compe l you to fight.” 
Arjuna is finding his swadharma devoid of merit. Bu t even if it is so perceived, 
one has to find fulfillment through its practice on ly. There can be no pride 
attached to any particular swadharma. This is the m axim of development. 
Swadharma is not something that is to be adopted be cause it is perceived to be 
great or noble; nor is it to be cast off because it  appears base. Swadharma is 
neither great nor small; it is equal to our measure . It is that which fits us the 
best.  ᮰ेयान् ᭭वधमᲃ िवगुणः   (‘One’s own dharma , even if it is devoid of merit is 
the best for oneself.’),8 the Gita says. The word dharma  here does not mean a 
religion like Hinduism, Islam or Christianity. Ever y individual, in fact, has his 
own distinct dharma . Two hundred individuals sitting in front of me he re have 
two hundred different dharmas . Even my own dharma  today is not what it was 
ten years ago, and it will not be the same in ten y ears’ time. As one’s mind 
grows and develops through reflection and experienc e, the old dharma  gets 
shed and one acquires new dharma . One should not do anything in this matter 
obstinately. 
12. It is not good for me to adopt another’s dharma, ho wever superior it may 
appear to be. I like sunlight. It helps my growth. I worship the sun. But my 
rightful place is here on this earth. If I leave th e earth and try to get close to 
the sun, I would be burnt to ashes. Compared to the  sun, the earth may appear 
worthless; it may not be self-luminous, still I sho uld strive for self-development 
by staying on the earth, which is my rightful place , so long as I lack the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17  capacity to stand the sun’s powerful blaze. If some one were to say to a fish, 
“Milk is more luxurious than water. Come and swim i n the milk”, will it accept?  
It can survive in water only; in milk it will die. 
13. Another’s dharma  is not to be adopted even if it appears easier. Qu ite 
often, the apparent easiness is deceptive. If someo ne is unable to look after his 
family properly and gets fed up, renounces the worl d and becomes a sannyasi , 
it would be sheer hypocrisy and such renunciation w ould also prove to be 
burdensome. His passions will reassert themselves a t the slightest opportunity. 
Even if he goes to the forest, he would build a hut  for himself, then he would 
put up a fence to protect it; and in the course of time, his involvement in 
worldly affairs will increase with a vengeance. On the other hand, there is 
nothing difficult in sannyasa  if one’s mind is truly detached. Indeed, there are  
many sayings in the Smritis9 to this effect. It is the disposition of one’s mind  
that matters. It is that which decides one’s dharma . The question is not 
whether it is high or low, easy or difficult; what is important is that the inner 
growth must be real and fulfillment genuine. 
14. But the devout ask, “If sannyasa  is always unquestionably superior to the 
way of fighting, then why did the Lord not make Arj una a true sannyasi ?  Was 
this impossible for Him?”  Certainly not. But, woul d it have done any credit to 
Arjuna?  It would have offered no scope for Arjuna to exert himself and excel in 
his efforts. The Lord gives us freedom. Let everybo dy make efforts in his own 
way. Therein lies the charm. A child enjoys sketchi ng figures with his own 
hands; he does not like anybody else holding his ha nds for this purpose. If a 
teacher just goes on rapidly solving all the mathem atical problems himself for 
the students, how would their intellect develop?  T he teachers and the parents 
should only guide them. God guides us from within. He does nothing more than 
that. There is no charm in God shaping us like a po tter. We are not earthen 
wares; we are beings full of consciousness. 
15. From all this discussion, you must have grasped tha t the purpose of the 
Gita is to remove the delusion that stands between us and our swadharma.   
Arjuna was confused about his dharma. He was grippe d by a delusion Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  concerning his swadharma . He himself admits it when Krishna castigates him.  
The Gita’s main task is to remove that delusion, th at attachment. The Lord 
asked Arjuna at the end of the Gita, “O Arjuna!  Ha s your delusion gone now?”  
And Arjuna replied, “Yes, Lord. The delusion has go ne. I have realised what my  
swadharma is.” Thus, taking into consideration both the begin ning and the end 
of the Gita, it is clear that the removal of delusi on is its central message. This 
is the purpose of the Gita, as well as of the whole  of the Mahabharata. Vyasa 
had said, right at the beginning of the Mahabharata , that he was lighting this 
lamp of history to dispel delusions in the minds of  the people. 
 
4. Honesty And Straightforwardness Make One Worthy Of The Gita's Message  
16. This introduction to Arjuna’s condition helps us gr eatly in understanding 
the rest of the Gita. We should be grateful for thi s. It also helps us in another 
way. It reveals Arjuna’s straightforwardness and ho nesty. The word ‘Arjuna’, in 
fact, means one who is honest and straightforward i n nature. He candidly told 
Krishna all that he felt and thought, hid nothing f rom Him and ultimately 
surrendered to Him totally. In fact, he was already  His devotee. When he made 
Krishna his charioteer and entrusted to Him the rei ns of his horses, he had got 
ready to give into His hands the reins of his mind also. Let us do likewise. Let us 
not think that, unlike Arjuna, we do not have Krish na to guide us. Let us not 
get caught in the fallacy that Krishna was a histor ical person. Everybody has 
Krishna residing in his heart as the indwelling Sel f. He is nearer to us than the 
nearest. Let us bare our heart, with all its impuri ties and weaknesses, before 
Him and say, “O Lord! I take refuge in you. You are  my sole guide, my master. 
Show me the right path and I shall follow it.”  If we do so,  Arjuna’s charioteer 
will be our charioteer too. We shall hear the Gita from His own lips and He will 
lead us to victory.  
(21.2.32)  
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19   
References :  
1. Samadhi  here means a state in which the mind is intensely concentrated and is in 
tune with the divine consciousness.  This is the se nse in which the term has been 
used in Chap. 2.15 as well.  The word is used in a different sense in Chap. 9.2 
2. 'Of the sages, I am Vyasa'—Gita, 10.37 
3. Dharma  is normally translated as 'religion', but is a muc h wider concept.  Dharma  is 
that which holds and supports everything in the wor ld.  Its meaning includes right 
conduct and duties that become obligatory to a man because of his nature and 
station. 
4. Gita, 10.33 
5. According to the Hindu scriptures, society is divid ed into four divisions or varnas : 
Brahmin  (teachers, priests, intellectuals), Kshatriya  (warriors, kings), Vaishyas  
(those engaged in trading, farming, animal husbandr y) and Shudras  (artisans and 
those doing menial work). 
6. King Ashoka turned away from violence, disgusted by  the ghastly sights in the 
successful war against the kingdom of Kalinga.  He then embraced Buddhism, the 
religion of nonviolence, and spent his remaining li fe in propagating it.   
7. 'Swadharma ' can be translated as one's natural duty dictated by one's natural state of 
being, one's true self and one's station in life. 
8. Gita, 3.35 
9. Smritis are compendiums of rules about individual a nd social behaviour and social 
relationships. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20   
CHAPTER 2 
THE TEACHING IN BRIEF: SELF-KNOWLEDGE AND EQUANIMIT Y  
5. The Gita’s Terminology  
1. Brothers, last week we discussed Arjuna’s state of despondency ( vishad).  
Whenever there is Arjuna-like honesty, straightforw ardness and total surrender 
to God, even a state of despondency attains the cha racter of yoga. 1  It is the 
churning of heart which brings this about. The Firs t Chapter of the Gita has 
been called Arjuna-vishad-yoga . I prefer to call it simply Vishad-yoga , as Arjuna 
provided only an occasion for the discourse. The Lo rd did not take the form of 
Pandurang for the sake of Pundalik 2 alone. Pundalik provided only a pretext for 
His descent on earth. We see that the Lord is stand ing for thousands of years at 
Pandharpur to redeem us all, ignorant creatures as we are, held captive by the 
bonds of this-worldliness. Similarly, although Arju na provided an immediate 
cause for the overflowing of the Lord’s compassion in the form of the Gita, it is 
really intended for all of us. That is why the gene ral term vishad-yoga  is more 
befitting for the Gita’s First Chapter. Beginning f rom this vishad-yoga the Gita’s 
teaching keeps on growing like a magnificent tree, finally bearing the fruit of 
prasad-yoga (God’s grace) in the concluding Chapter. God willin g, we too would 
reach that destination during the term of our impri sonment. 
2. The Gita’s teaching begins from the Second Chapter.  At the very outset, 
the Lord enunciates the cardinal principles of life . The idea is that once the 
fundamental principles, which are to form the found ation of life, are well-
grasped, the way ahead would be clear. In my view, the term sankhya-
buddhi 3 in the Second Chapter stands for the basic principl es of life. We have 
now to take up the consideration of these principle s. But before that, it is 
better to have a clear understanding of the Gita's terminology. 
The Gita has a penchant for using old philosophical  terms in new senses. 
Grafting new meanings on to old terms is a non-viol ent process of bringing 
about revolution in thinking. Vyasa is adept in thi s process. This is the secret of Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21  the great potency and strength of the language of t he Gita and its ever-
freshness and vitality. Different thinkers could th erefore read different 
meanings in the terms used by it in the light of th eir experiences and according 
to their needs. In my view, all those interpretatio ns could be taken as valid 
from their respective standpoints and yet we can ha ve a different 
interpretation of our own without ruling out any of  them. 
3. There is a beautiful story in an Upanishad which is  worth recounting here. 
Once gods, demons and human beings went to Prajapat i (the Creator) for 
advice. Prajapati gave all of them only one word of  advice: the single syllable 
‘द’ (da). The gods said, “We are given to passions an d sensual pleasures. So, 
Prajapati has advised us ‘ daman ’ (दमन ) (subduing and conquering them).” The 
demons said, ‘‘We are given to anger and cruelty. S o, Prajapati has advised us 
to cultivate ‘ daya ’ (दया ) (compassion).” The human beings said, “We are gre edy 
and are always hankering after possessions. So, Pra japati has advised us to 
practise ‘dan’  (दान ) (charity and sharing).” 4  Prajapati approved all these 
interpretations, as all of them had arrived at thei r interpretations through their 
own experiences. We should bear in mind this story while interpreting the 
Gita’s terminology.  
 
6. Performance Of Swadharma Through The Body  
4. Three cardinal principles have been enunciated in t he Second Chapter—  
        (i) The atman  (the Self) is deathless and indivisible. 
        (ii) The body is insignificant and transien t. 
        (iii) S wadharma must be followed. 
Out of these, Swadharma  is in the nature of duty to be performed while the  
other two principles are those that need to be unde rstood. 
I have already said something about swadharma. For each of us, swadharma is 
‘given.’ It comes to us naturally; we do not have t o go out looking for it. We Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22  did not drop from the sky but were born into a stre am of existence. Society, 
parents, neighbours, all existed before we were bor n. To serve the parents who 
gave me life, to serve the society that succored me  is my natural dharma . Our 
swadharma  thus takes birth along with us; it can even be sai d that it is already 
there for us before our birth. In fact, fulfillment  of swadharma is the very 
purpose behind our birth. Some people say that swadharma  is like one’s wife 
and say that the bond of swadharma  is as inviolable and indissoluble as the 
bond of marriage.5  But I do not think that this simile is quite appo site. I would 
rather say that swadharma, like one’s mother, is not chosen but pre-
determined. No matter what sort of person she is, t here is no denying her 
motherhood. This is precisely the case with swadharma . In this world we have 
nothing else to rely on. To disown one’s swadharma is to disown oneself, to 
commit suicide. Only in harmony with it can we move  forward. That is why we 
should never lose sight of it. 
5. Swadharma  should, in fact, come easily and naturally. But be cause of 
several temptations and delusions this does not hap pen or becomes extremely 
difficult. Even if it is practised, the practice ge ts vitiated. The temptations and 
delusions which strew with thorns the path of swadharma  have various forms. 
However, on analysis, we find only one thing at the  bottom of it all: a 
restricted and shallow identification of oneself wi th one’s body. I, and those 
related to me through the body, set the limits of m y expansion. Those outside 
the circle are strangers or enemies. Besides, the a ttachment is restricted to 
only the physical bodies of the ‘I and mine’. Caugh t in this double trap, we 
start putting up all sorts of little walls. Almost everyone does this. One man’s 
enclosure may be larger than another’s but all surr ound themselves with a wall. 
It is no thicker than their skin. One man’s enclosu re is the family, another’s the 
nation. One wall divides the so-called upper and lo wer castes, another divides 
the people on the basis of religions. Wherever you turn you see nothing but 
walls. Even in this jail, we differentiate between ordinary convicts and political 
prisoners. It is as if we cannot live without such walls. But what does this result 
into? This has only one result—multiplication of th e germs of mean and vicious 
thoughts and destruction of the healthy state of swadharma . Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23   
7. Awareness Of The Self That Transcends The Body  
6. In this situation, commitment to swadharma is not enough. Constant 
awareness of two other principles is necessary. One  of them is: ‘I am not this 
feeble and mortal physical body; the body is only t he outer covering.’ The 
other is: ‘I am the Self that is imperishable, indi visible and all-pervading.’ 
These two together constitute a whole philosophy of  life. 
The Gita values this philosophy so much that it enu nciates it at the very outset 
and only thereafter brings in the concept of swadharma.  Some people wonder 
why such abstruse philosophical theorems are there at the very beginning. But I 
think that if there are any verses in the Gita whos e place cannot at all be 
changed, then these are such verse s. 
If this philosophy is imprinted on the mind, the pr actice of swadharma  will not 
appear difficult. In fact, it will be difficult not  to practise it. It is not difficult 
to comprehend that the Self is eternal and indivisi ble and the body is worthless 
and transient, as these are the truths. But we shou ld reflect over them, 
ruminate constantly over them. We should train ours elves to belittle the body 
and exalt the Self. 
7. Look! This body is for ever changing, caught in the  cycle of childhood, 
youth and old age. Modern scientists say that every  seven years it is renewed 
and not a drop of old blood remains. Our ancestors believed that this takes 
twelve years. That is why they prescribed a period of twelve years for study, 
penance, atonement of sins or wrongdoings etc. We o ften hear that mothers 
failed to recognise their own sons after years of s eparation. The body changes 
every moment, dies every moment. Is this body you? Twenty four hours a day 
its sewers operate, and despite indefatigable scave nging it remains unclean. Is 
this body you?  No, the body is dirty; it is you wh o wash it. It gets ill; it is you 
who treat it with medicine. It fills three and a ha lf cubits of space; you are free 
to roam in the whole of the cosmos. It changes endl essly; you observe those 
changes. It is open to death; you accept it. When t he distinction between your 
body and yourself is so clear, why do you say that only that which relates to the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  body belongs to you?  And why do you grieve for the  death of the body?  The 
Lord asks: “Is the destruction of the body a cause for grief?” 
8. The body is, in fact, like a garment we wear. We ca n put on a new 
garment as the old one fortunately gets worn out. H ad one and the same body 
stuck to the Self for ever, the Self would really h ave been in a sad plight. That 
would have stopped all growth, extinguished all joy  and dimmed the 
illuminating power of knowledge and wisdom. Hence, perishing of the body is 
not a thing to grieve over. Had the Self been peris hable, that would indeed 
have been a cause for grief. But the Self is imperi shable. The eternal Self 
clothes itself in a succession of bodies. That is w hy it is utterly wrong to get 
attached to a particular body and its relations and  grieve over their loss; and it 
is also wrong to consider some as kin and others as  aliens. The universe is a 
beautifully woven whole. Were we to cut up the undi vided Self, immanent in 
the whole universe, into bits of separate selves us ing the body as a pair of 
scissors like a child who willfully cuts a whole pi ece of cloth with a pair of 
scissors, would it not be the height of childish fo lly, and moreover, an act of 
extreme violence?  
It is really a pity that India, the land where Brahmavidya  (the science of 
realising the Brahman 6) was born, is now teeming with innumerable 
incongruent groups and castes. We are so much afrai d of death that one 
wonders whether such fear has any parallel anywhere  else in the world. No 
doubt, it is a consequence of a long period of subj ection; but then one must not 
forget that it is also one of the causes of that su bjection. 
9. We hate the word ‘death’. It is considered inauspic ious. Jnanadeva had to 
write regretfully: ‘ अगा मर हा बोल न साहती । आिण मेिलया तरी रडती ।। ’ (‘They cannot 
bear the word ‘death’ and cry over death.’) If some one dies, what tears!  What 
wailing!  Why, we think all this is our duty!  Peop le go to the extent of hiring 
professional mourners!7 Even when death is imminent, we do not tell the 
patient. He is kept in the dark even when a doctor has told us that the patient 
cannot live. Even doctors do not speak plainly to t he patients and go on pouring 
medicines down their throats till the last moment. If, instead, the doctor were Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25  to tell the patient the truth, give him courage and  direct his thoughts towards 
God, what a help that would be!  But it is feared t hat this little pot might crack 
of shock before its time. But can death ever come b efore the right moment?  
Besides, even if it comes a little earlier, what do es it matter?  We should 
certainly not be loveless and hard-hearted; but att achment to the body is not 
love. On the contrary, unless attachment to the bod y is overcome, true love 
does not emerge.  
When we are freed of that attachment, we would real ise that the body is an 
instrument for service; and then the body would gai n its true dignity. But today 
we regard pampering of the body as the sole purpose  of our lives. We have 
totally forgotten that life is to be lived for the fulfillment of swadharma  and to 
do this one has to look after the body. It should b e given proper nourishment; 
but there is no need to indulge the palate. It is a ll the same to a ladle whether 
you use it to serve shrikhand  (a sweet dessert) or plain curry; it feels neither  
happy nor unhappy. The same should be the case with  our tongue. It should, of 
course, be able to distinguish between different ta stes, but should not feel any 
pleasure or repulsion. The body is to be paid its d ue hire, and nothing more. A 
spinning wheel has to be oiled regularly to keep it  in working condition; in the 
same way we should provide fuel to the body so that  we can take work from it. 
If that is our approach, the body, although having little intrinsic worth, would 
become worthy and valuable and gain true dignity. 
10. But, instead of using the body as an instrument, we  lose ourselves in it and 
stunt our spirit whereby the body, which has little  intrinsic worth, is made of 
less worth. That is why the saints vehemently say, ‘देह आिण देहसंबंधᱶ ᳲनदावी।  इतरᱶ 
वंदावी ᳡ानसूकरᱶ। ’ (‘One should censure the narrow confinement to th e body and 
the blood-relations and venerate others, even the p igs and the dogs!’) Do not, 
therefore, worship the body and its ties all the ti me. Learn to relate to others 
as well. The saints are thus exhorting us to broade n our horizon. Do we ever 
open our hearts to others outside our narrow circle  of friends and relatives?  Do 
we ever try to identify ourselves with others?  Do we let our swan-Self—the bird 
of the spirit—escape from the cage of the body and breathe freedom?  Does it Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26  ever occur to us that we should widen the circle of  our friends continually so as 
to ultimately encompass the whole world and feel th at the whole world is ours 
and that we belong to the whole world?  We write le tters to our relatives from 
the jail. What is special about it?  But would you write to a thief convict—not a 
political prisoner—whom you have befriended here, a fter his release? 
11. The Self is ever restless to reach out to others. I t longs to embrace the 
whole world.  But we shut it up in a cell. We have imprisoned the soul and are 
not even conscious of it.  From morning till evenin g, we are busy minding the 
body. Day and night we worry about how fat or thin we are. One would think 
that there was no other joy in the world. But even beasts experience the 
pleasures of the senses. Will you not like to taste  the joy of giving, the joy of 
controlling the palate?  What joy there is in givin g away your full plate of food 
though you too suffer from hunger?  A mother, when she works hard for the 
sake of her child, knows something of this joy. In fact, even when one draws a 
small circle around the ‘I and the mine’, one is un consciously striving to 
experience the joy in the enlargement of the self. Thereby the self, otherwise 
encased in the body, is released to a limited exten t and for a little while.  But 
what sort of a release is this?  It is like a priso ner coming out of his cell into the 
prison courtyard. This hardly satisfies the self’s aspirations. It wants the joy of 
unbounded freedom.  
12. In short, (i) a seeker after truth should avoid the  by-lanes of adharma  (un-
righteousness) and paradharma  (the dharma  which is not his own) and take to 
the natural and straight path of swadharma . He should follow it steadfastly. (ii) 
Bearing in mind that the body is transient, it shou ld be used for the sake of the 
performance of swadharma  and should be given up for its sake when the need 
arises (iii) Remaining ever aware of the eternal an d all-pervading nature of the 
Self, the distinction of ‘mine’ and ‘thine’ should be removed from the mind. 
The Lord has expounded these three principles of li fe. One who follows them 
would undoubtedly have, some day or the other, the experience of ‘ नरदेहाचेिन 
साधनᱶ, सिᲬदानंदपदिव घेणᱶ। ’  (using the human body as an instrument, one can 
reach the exalted state of sat-chit-ananda .8). Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27   
8. The Way To Harmonise The Two Principles: Renunci ation Of The Fruit Of 
Actions  
13. The Lord has no doubt enunciated the principles of life. But this, in itself, 
does not serve the purpose. These principles were a lready there in the 
Upanishads and the Smritis. To restate them is not the Gita’s unique 
contribution; that lies in its explaining how these  principles are to be translated 
into practice. It is in solving this great problem that the ingenuity of the Gita 
lies. 
Yoga  means nothing but the art of translating the princ iples of life into 
practice. The word ‘ sankhya ’ means principles or science while ‘yoga’  means 
art of translating it into practice. Jnanadeva’s sa ying, ‘ योिगयां साधली जीवनकळा। ’ 
(‘The yogis  have mastered the art of living’), proclaims this as an experiential 
fact. The Gita includes both sankhya  and yoga,  the science and art 
respectively; and has thus achieved completeness an d perfection. When science 
and art unite, the beauty of life blossoms into its  fullness. Science, by itself, 
remains on an abstract level. One may know the theo ry of music, but only when 
one has mastered the art of singing, the many-splen doured beauty of nad-
brahma  (the Supreme Truth revealed in the sound of music)  comes to life. That 
is why the Lord has taught not only the principles,  but also the art of applying 
them to life. What then is this art—the art of prac tising swadharma  and 
realising  that the body is of little worth and that the Self is imperishable and 
indivisible? 
Behind a man’s action there are generally two types  of attitude. One of them 
is: ‘If I do something, I shall definitely enjoy th e fruit of my actions; I am 
entitled to it.’ The second attitude is: ‘I shall n ot act at all if I am not going to 
enjoy the fruit of my actions.’ The Gita prescribes  an altogether different 
attitude. It says: ‘You must, of course, act; but d o not have any claim over the 
fruit of your actions’. One who acts is certainly e ntitled to enjoy the fruit of 
one’s actions, but one should voluntarily give up t hat right. Rajas 9 says, “I shall 
act only if I am going to enjoy the fruit of my act ions.” Tamas  says, “If I am not Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  going to enjoy the fruit, I shall not act at all.” These attitudes are like two 
sides of the same coin; there is nothing to choose between them. One should go 
beyond both of them and adopt pure sattva ; one should act and then relinquish 
the fruits of actions; and act without any claim ov er them. The desire for the 
fruit should never be there, either before or after  the action.  
14. The Gita, while asking us not to have any desire fo r the fruit of actions, 
insists that the work must, however, be perfect. Th e work of a desireless doer 
can rightfully be expected to be better than that o f one driven by desire for the 
fruit. The reason is that, because of attachment to  the fruit, the latter is bound 
to waste at least some time and energy in day-dream ing about it. On the other 
hand, every moment of the desireless doer’s life an d every bit of his energy 
would be spent in the work in hand. A river knows n o respite; wind takes no 
rest; the sun shines for ever. Likewise, a desirele ss doer is ever engaged in 
unremitting service. Who else can then achieve perf ection in work, if not he?  
Secondly, mental poise, the equanimity of mind is a  great quality; and the 
desireless doer has this quality in his own right. When equanimity of mind is 
combined with the skill of the hands, even an ordin ary work of an artisan is 
bound to be better and more beautiful. Moreover, th e difference between the 
outlook of a desireless doer and of one with attach ment to desires is also 
conducive in making the former’s work better. A man  having an eye on securing 
the fruits looks at the work from a selfish point o f view. In his view, the action 
as well as its fruits are exclusively his own. Ther efore, he does not feel that 
any negligence in the work is a moral lapse. For hi m, it may, at the most, cause 
the output to be defective. But a desireless doer h as a moral sense of duty 
towards his work. He is, therefore, extremely alert  to avoid any shortcomings 
therein. Hence his work is bound to be more flawles s. Thus, from whatever 
angle one may see, falatyaga  (renunciation of the fruits of actions) proves to 
be a sound and effective principle. That is why it could be called a sort of yoga  
or the art of living. 
15. Leaving aside the matter of desireless action, ther e is in the action itself a 
joy which you cannot find in the fruit. Total absor ption in one’s own work is an Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29  everlasting spring of joy. Were you to offer any am ount of money to an artist 
for refraining from painting, would he agree?  Cert ainly not. If you tell a farmer 
not go to the field, not to graze the cattle or dra w water from the well, and 
offer him as much grains as he wants, he would cert ainly not agree to it if he 
were a true farmer. A farmer goes to the field in t he early morning. There the 
Sun-god welcomes him. Birds sing for him. Cattle ga ther around him. He 
caresses them with affection, casts a loving glance  at the plants. There is a 
sattvik, sublime joy in all this. This joy, in fact, is the true and main reward of 
his work. Compared to it, the material fruit of act ion is secondary.  
When the Gita takes a man’s attention away from the  fruit of his actions, it 
increases hundredfold his concentration in his work  through this ingenuity. 
When the doer’s mind is free from the desire for th e fruit, his absorption in his 
work attains the character of samadhi.  Hence his joy is also hundred times 
more than that of others. Looked at from this angle , it is clear that the 
desireless action is itself a great reward. Jnanade va has rightly asked, “The 
tree bears fruits, but what fruit could the fruit b ear?” When the body is used 
for the desireless pursuit of swadharma , such pursuit itself is the beautiful fruit 
that the body bears. Why then look for any other fr uit?  Why should a farmer 
who has sown wheat, sell it and eat a bread of mill ets?  Why should one not eat 
what he grows?  But the ways of the world are stran ge.  The Gita asks us to 
refrain from such behaviour. It asks us to relish w ork, to rejoice in it, to be 
fully absorbed in it and draw life-blood from it. T o act itself is everything. A 
child plays for the joy of playing. He does get the  benefit of exercise thereby, 
but he does not think of this benefit. His joy is i n playing only. 
 
9. Renunciation of The Fruit Of Action: Two Example s  
16. The saints have demonstrated this in their lives. S hivaji, the king, had 
great respect for saint Tukaram because of the latt er’s exemplary devotion to 
the Lord. Once he thought of honouring him and sent  a palanquin to fetch him. 
But Tukaram was deeply distressed by the arrangemen ts made to honour him. 
He thought to himself, “Is this the reward for my d evotion to the Lord?  Is it for Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  this that I worship Him?”  He felt that the Lord, b y placing this fruit of the 
worldly honour in his hands, was pushing him away f rom Him, and said,  
“जाणोिन अंतर । टािळसील करकर । 
तुज लागली हे खोडी । पांडुरंगा बᱟ क ु डी ।। ” 
‘O, Lord! This prank on your part is not good. You may be trying to push me 
away from you by offering this little bribe. You ma y be thinking of getting rid of 
me this way. But I am not so naive as to be taken i n by this. I shall cling firmly 
to your feet.’ 
Devotion ( Bhakti ) is the swadharma  of the devotee ( Bhakta ). His ‘art of living’ 
lies in ensuring that the devotion does not get dis tracted by the lure of other 
worldly gains. 
17. The life of Pundalik shows us an even more profound  ideal of renunciation 
of the fruit of actions. Pundalik was devoted to th e service of his parents. 
Pleased with this, Lord Pandurang rushed to meet hi m. Pundalik refused to give 
up his duty to welcome the Lord. The service of the  parents was, for him, a 
form of worship of the Lord. He was not taken in ev en by the great temptation 
offered by the Lord. Someone may rob others to prov ide comforts to his 
parents; or a patriot may seek the prosperity and g lory of his own country at 
the cost of other countries. Such ‘worship’ of one’ s parents or one’s country is 
nothing but selfish attachment; it is not true wors hip. Pundalik was not trapped 
in such attachment. It was indeed true that the Lor d Himself was standing in 
front of him; but was that His only form?  Was the whole creation lifeless like a 
corpse before He appeared in that form?  Pundalik t old the Lord, “O, Lord! I 
fully understand that you have come to bless me. Bu t I believe in the doctrine 
of ‘this also.’ I do not think that you alone are G od. You certainly are God; but 
my parents too are God to me. And since I am engage d in their service, I am 
not in a position to pay attention to you. Please, therefore, forgive me.” Saying 
this, he pushed a brick for the Lord to stand on, a nd again became engrossed in 
his work. Saint Tukaram refers to this with loving admiration in a lighter vein—  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31  ‘कां रे ᮧेमᱶ मातलासी । उभᱶ क े लᱶ िवᲸलासी ।  
ऐसा क ै सा रे तूं धीट । मागᱶ िभरकािवली वीट ।। ’ 
(‘Why have you become so presumptuous in Love?  You  made Lord Pandurang 
stand at your door! How have you become so audaciou s as to throw a brick to 
Him to stand on!’) 
18. The doctrine of ‘this also’ which Pundalik applied is a part of the ingenuity 
in the renunciation of the fruit of actions. A man who renounces the fruits of 
actions is totally absorbed in his work and his out look is broad, tolerant and 
balanced. He does not, therefore, get entangled in the web of abstruse 
academic arguments and remains firm on his own stan dpoint. He does not argue 
that ‘not that, this alone is true.’ He holds, humb ly but firmly, that ‘this also is 
and that also is, but for me, this alone is’—that h e should stick to his own 
swadharma . 
A householder once went to a sage and asked him, “M ust one leave his home—
that is, give up one’s worldly duties and responsib ilities as a householder—in 
order to attain moksha  ?”  The sage said, “Certainly not. King Janaka att ained 
moksha while living in the palace, fulfilling his duties a s a king; then where is 
the need for you to leave your home?”  Later, anoth er man went to the sage 
and asked him, “Sir, can one attain moksha  without leaving the home?”  The 
sage replied, “Who says so?  Had it been possible, were persons like Shuka 10  
fools to renounce their homes—that is, this-worldly  attachments—for the sake 
of moksha ?”  Later, they met each other and a dispute arose.  While one 
asserted that the sage was in favour of leaving the  home, the other said that 
the sage had advised him against it. They again cam e to the sage. He 
explained, “Both the advices are correct. What is i mportant is to become 
detached. Then one can follow different ways in acc ordance with one’s 
disposition. The answer depends on the way the ques tion is posed. It is true 
that one need not leave the home for moksha  and it is equally true that one has 
to leave one’s home for attaining it.” This is what  the doctrine of ‘this also’ 
means.  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32  19. Pundalik’s example shows the extent to which one ca n renounce the fruits 
of actions. The temptation that the Lord offered to  Pundalik was certainly 
much more alluring than that offered to Tukaram. St ill, Pundalik was not 
carried away by that. Had he succumbed to that temp tation, it would have 
spelled his ruin. Once a certain path (for God-real isation) is chosen for oneself 
after due deliberation, then it must be pursued til l the end. Even if the Lord 
Himself appears before you, you should not be tempt ed to leave that path. As 
long as one is in a body, it is one’s duty to follo w the chosen path. Seeing the 
Lord face to face is then in one’s hands; His visio n is always there for the 
asking. Why should then one bother about it? □‘सवाᭅ᭜मकपण माझᱶ िहरोिन नेतो कोण ?’ 
(‘Who can deprive me of my oneness with the whole c reation?’) मनᱭ भᲦᳱची 
आवडी  (‘The heart longs for the Lord.’). The very purpos e of this birth is to 
fulfill that longing. When the Gita says, मा ते संगोऽ᭭᭜वकमᭅिण  (Let there not be any 
attachment to akarma 11 ) the meaning of this extends thus far that while d oing 
desireless work, one must not have desire even for the ultimate freedom from 
action, i.e., moksha. Moksha  means nothing but freedom from all desires. Why 
should there be desire for it?  When the renunciati on of the fruit of actions 
reaches this point, the art of living attains perfe ction like the full moon.  
 
10. The Ideal Teacher  
20. Thus the science and the art have been explained. S till the whole picture 
does not stand clearly before our eyes. Science is nirguna  (attributeless). Art is 
saguna  (one with attributes). But even saguna cannot become manifest until it 
assumes concrete form. Formless saguna  can be as abstract and elusive as 
nirguna . The remedy is to see somebody who is the personif ication of a 
particular quality. That is why Arjuna says, “O, Lo rd!  You have told me the 
basic principles of life and explained the art of t ranslating them into practice. 
Still the picture is not clear to me. Please, there fore, tell me the 
characteristics of one whose intellect and mind are  fully anchored in the basic 
principles of life and who has fully assimilated th e yoga  of renunciation of the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  fruit of actions. Tell me about such a person who d emonstrates the limit upto 
which the fruit of actions could be renounced, who is steadfast in the 
contemplation of the Lord while working and who is firm like a rock in his 
settled conviction—a person who can be called a sthitaprajna .12   How does he 
speak, how does he sit, how does he walk?  In short , how does he live his daily 
worldly life, and how can one recognise him?” 
21. In response to this entreaty the Lord has portrayed , in eighteen verses at 
the end of the Second Chapter, the noble and exalte d character of the 
sthitaprajna . These eighteen verses can be said to contain the essence of the 
eighteen Chapters of the Gita. Sthitaprajna  is the ideal that the Gita puts 
before us. In fact, it is the Gita which has coined  the word sthitaprajna . Later 
the Gita describes the jivanmukta  (the liberated one) in the Fifth Chapter, the 
bhakta  (the devotee) in the twelfth, the gunateeta (one who has transcended 
the three gunas ) in the Fourteenth and the jnananishtha  (one steadfastly 
committed to knowledge) in the Eighteenth Chapter, but the description of the 
sthitaprajna  is much more elaborate and lucid than theirs. This  description 
highlights the characteristics of both the siddha  (a realised soul, one who has 
attained liberation) and the sadhaka  (the spiritual seeker). Thousands of 
satyagrahi 13  men and women regularly recite these verses during  their evening 
prayers. If these verses could be taken to every ho me in every village, what a 
happy thing it would be! But then, they would sprea d of their own accord if 
they are first imprinted on our own minds. If the d aily recitation becomes 
mechanical, it would not get imprinted on the mind;  it could rather have an 
opposite effect. But it would not be the fault of r egular recitation; it is the lack 
of accompanying reflection over them that is to be blamed for this. Regular 
recitation must be accompanied with constant reflec tion and soul-searching. 
22. Sthitaprajna,  as the term itself tells, means one having steadfa st wisdom. 
But how could there be steadfast wisdom without sub duing the senses?  Hence 
the  sthitaprajna  has been described as  the embodiment of restraint. Restraint 
implies that the intellect is anchored in the Self and the mind and the organs 
are under the control of the intellect. The Sthitaprajna  reins in all his organs Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  and uses them in desireless and selfless action. Ju st as a farmer uses bullocks 
for ploughing, the sthitaprajna  uses his organs for the desireless pursuit of 
swadharma.  His every breath is used in the highest pursuit—th e spiritual quest. 
23. Reining in the organs is certainly not easy. It is,  in a way, easier to stop 
using them altogether. Things like fasting, observi ng silence etc. are not really 
very difficult. On the other hand, as is quite evid ent, is not everybody giving 
free rein to his organs?  But it is most difficult to practise restraint like a 
tortoise. It draws in its limbs completely in its s hell whenever it senses danger 
and uses them whenever it is safe to do so. Likewis e, one should refrain from 
using the organs for sensual pleasures and make pro per use of them in the 
spiritual pursuit. This is extremely difficult and requires herculean efforts, and 
also wisdom. Even then, one may not always succeed.  Are we then to despair?  
Certainly not. A spiritual seeker should never lose  hope. He should try 
everything in his capacity, use all his ingenuity; and when he reaches the end 
of his tether, he should seek the love of the Lord— supplement his efforts with 
devotion. This is the valuable advice the Lord has given while describing the 
attributes of sthitaprajna . This advice is given in just a few words, but the se 
few words are far more valuable than volumes of ser mons; for, the element of 
devotion has been introduced precisely where it is needed. We shall not here 
go into a detailed discussion of the attributes of the sthitaprajna . My intention 
is to draw your attention to the exact place of dev otion in the spiritual pursuit 
lest we should forget it. God alone knows who could  reach the ideal of the 
perfect sthitaprajna;  but the figure of Pundalik is ever in my mind as a n 
example of the sthitaprajna who is completely dedicated to service. 
24. The Second Chapter ends with the description of the  sthitaprajna’s  
qualities.  
We can summarise this by the formula— Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35   
It is bound to lead to brahmanirvana,  or moksha,  i.e. liberation of the Self and 
its union with the Brahman . What else could be the final result? 
(28.2.32)  
 
References:  
1. Yoga means union or integration.  It entails detach ment from suffering and perverse 
propensities and, in fact, from all outside interes ts and integration with the Divine.  
Different types of yoga are different means or proc esses to achieve such integration 
or, in other words, spiritual liberation.  Yoga can  also be defined as the art of 
practising the fundamental truths of life for this purpose.  
2. The story of Pundalik has been described in detail in 9.17 of this Chapter. 
3. It means the wisdom in accordance with the Sankhya.   Sankhya is one of the six 
systems of the Indian philosophy.  (Please also see  Chap. 2.13 and the footnote in 
Chap. 7.2).  However, the Gita uses the term here i n a different sense. 
4. The words daman ( दमन ), daya ( दया ) and dan (दान), all begin with the Nagari syllable 
द. 
5. In the Hindu tradition, marriage is not considered a mere civil contract that could be 
annulled at will.  It is rather a sacred obligation . 
6. Brahman  is the Absolute—the Supreme Truth, the Ultimate re ality.  The concept is, 
in fact, too grand for conceptualization and descri ption.  the Upanishad had, 
therefore, to speak of the Brahman  in negative terms:  'The Real is not this, the Rea l 
is not that.'  Brahman  is the Supreme Principle that is the root cause of  the 
generation, evolution and extinction of the world.  It pervades everything and 
transcends everything.  It is the Supreme Self.  Th e lower self is a part of the 
Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36  Brahman  and the consummation of its development and evolut ion lies in merging 
with it, that is, attaining spiritual liberation. 
7. This is a custom prevalent in some communities in I ndia, particularly in Rajasthan. 
8. The Supreme Truth or the Brahman, is said to have t hree aspects— sat , chit  and 
ananda .  Sat  means being, that which really exists.  It also me ans abiding, actual, 
right, self-existent essence.  Chit  means perception, knowledge or consciousness, 
while ananda  means bliss. 
9. Gunas , according to the Sankhya  philosophy, mean basic elements.  Prakriti , or the 
Nature, is constituted of three gunas , which can be called essential qualities or 
modes:  Sattva  is the principle of equilibrium and harmony; rajas  is the principle of 
passion, restlessness, endeavour and initiation; an d tamas  is the principle of 
ignorance and inertia.  Human nature and action is determined by the proportion of 
these gunas  therein and their interaction. 
10. Shukha, son of sage Vyasa, is said to have left his  home immediately after his birth to 
attain moksha .  (Moksha means the liberation of Self from bondag e, from the cycle 
of births and deaths, whereby the Self unites with the Brahman, the Supreme Self.  It 
is believed to be the ultimate goal of human life f or which everybody should aspire 
and strive for.  It is often translated in English as 'salvation'. 
11. Please refer Chapter 4.4 to 9 
12. Sthitaprajna means one who has attained 'steadfast wisdom', whos e intellect is 
settled in a state of union with the Divine as a re sult of assimilating the fundamental 
principles of life and mastering the art of living in accordance with them.  Vinoba 
was particularly fond of the eighteen verses in the  Gita describing the ideal of the 
sthitaprajna and gave discourses on them during his incarceratio n in 1944.  They 
have been published in the form of a book titled ' Sthitaprajna-darshan' (The 
Steadfast Wisdom). 
13. Participants in the satyagraha  campaigns led by Mahatma Gandhi against the Britis h 
imperialism.  Satyagraha  means holding steadfastly to the truth one has per ceived. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37   
CHAPTER 3 
KARMAYOGA  (YOGA  OF SELFLESS AND DESIRELESS ACTION)  
11. Renunciation of the Fruit Leads To Infinite Gai ns  
1. Brothers, in the Second Chapter we viewed the whole  of the science of 
life. The Third Chapter provides further elaboratio n of that science. We had a 
look at the principles; now we shall look into the details. In the last Chapter, 
we dealt with karmayoga . Renunciation of the fruit of actions is the thing  of 
distinctive importance in karmayoga. The question then is, does any gain 
accrue to a karmayogi or not?  The Third Chapter tells us that renunciati on of 
the fruit results in infinite gains for a karmayogi . 
Here I am reminded of the story of Lakshmi’s swayamvara. 1 A whole lot of gods 
and demons had gathered at her swayamvara with the hope of marrying her. 
Lakshmi had not announced any test that they had to  pass. Coming to the 
pandal where they were seated, she declared that sh e would marry one who 
was not coveting her. But all of those assembled th ere were desirous of 
marrying her; so all of them were naturally ruled o ut. Lakshmi then set forth in 
search of one having no desire for her. She finally  found Lord Vishnu lying 
serenely on Shesha, the cobra. She put the garland around His neck 2 and has 
been sitting at His feet ever since. As the poet pu ts it, ‘ न मागे तयाची रमा होय 
दासी। ’3 — ‘Lakshmi serves one who does not covet her.’ Thi s is the beauty of it. 
2. The ordinary man closely guards the fruit of his ac tions so that none else 
could have it. But thereby he loses infinite gains that could otherwise have 
been his. The man attached to worldly affairs toils  a lot, but gets little in 
return. On the other hand, a karmayogi receives infinite gains with little effort. 
The difference in their mental attitudes makes all the difference. Tolstoy says, 
‘‘People talk a lot about Jesus’ sacrifice, but the  ordinary people toil much 
more than Jesus, carry much more burden, suffer muc h more. Were they to put 
in half the labour for the Lord, they would become greater than Jesus!’’ Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  3. Worldly people put in arduous labour; but in the pu rsuit of petty gains. We 
reap what we sow; as is the desire, so is the fruit . The world will not pay more 
for our goods than the price that we ourselves mark  on them. Sudama went to 
Lord Krishna with the offering of a handful of parc hed rice. It might not have 
been worth a farthing, but to Sudama, it was pricel ess. It had the stamp of his 
love and devotion on them 4 which, as it were, had charged them with magical 
potency. A small, insignificant thing gains in valu e and potency when it is so 
charged. What, after all, is a currency note? It is  just a little piece of paper. If 
burnt, it would not warm up even a drop of water. B ut it has the stamp of the 
government on it, and that gives it value.  
This is the whole beauty of karmayoga.  Action is like the currency note. 
Stamped with bhavana —sentiments and genuine feelings—it acquires value.  In a 
sense, I am revealing here the secret of idol-worsh ip. The idea of idol-worship 
is extremely charming. To begin with, an idol is ju st a piece of stone. I put life 
into it, I pour my devotion into it. These feelings  cannot be broken. A stone can 
be broken into pieces, but not the sentiments. The moment I withdraw my 
devotion from the idol, it once again gets reduced to a mere stone which can 
easily be broken into pieces. 
4. Action is like a stone, or a piece of paper. My mot her scribbled just three 
or four lines on a piece of paper and sent it to me ; another gentleman sent me 
a bundle of fifty pages. Now, which one has more va lue?  The feelings 
expressed in the few lines from my mother are price less, they are sacred. The 
other stuff cannot stand comparison with it. Action  must be imbued with the 
warmth of feelings. We assess a labourer’s work and  pay him wages 
accordingly; but dakshina 5 is not given like that. Water is sprinkled on it b efore 
it is given. The amount of dakshina is not important; it is the sentiment of 
reverence behind it that is important. The touch of  water is symbolic of the 
feelings in the heart of the host. There is a remar kable saying in Manusmriti. In 
those days, students used to stay with the guru  (master) for twelve years. The 
master would teach them and make them human beings in the true sense. Now, 
what should a student offer to the master?  In thos e days, fees were not Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39  collected in advance. The student, after completion  of his studies, was 
supposed to offer what he felt like giving and thou ght proper. Manu says, “Give 
the master a flower, a fan, a pair of sandals, or a  pitcher of water.” Is this a 
joke?  No; the point is that, whatever is offered s hould be offered as a sign of 
reverence. A flower in itself has little value, but  charged with devotion, its 
value becomes immeasurable. The poet has sung the p raise of Rukmini. She put 
in the scale a single leaf of Tulsi which equaled t he weight of Lord Krishna 
while heaps of gold ornaments put by Satyabhama pro ved to be insufficient to 
weigh Him, because the Tulsi leaf put by Rukmini wa s full of devotion. It was 
no longer an ordinary leaf; it was a charged one.6This is true of the actions of a 
karmayogi  too. 
5. Suppose two persons have gone to bathe in the river  Ganga. One of them 
says, “What, after all, is this Ganga that people t alk so much about?  Combine 
two parts hydrogen and one part oxygen, and you wil l have Ganga.” The other 
one says, “This great river emerged from the holy l otus-feet of Lord Vishnu, she 
dwelt in the matted hair of Lord Shiva. Thousands o f seers—both ascetic and 
kingly—have done penance near her. Countless holy a cts have been performed 
by her side. Such is this sacred Mother Ganga.” He takes a bath with these 
feelings in mind. The other fellow, for whom Ganga’ s water is just a compound 
of hydrogen and oxygen, also bathes in the river. B oth get the benefit of 
physical cleansing; but it is a petty benefit. Even  a bullock can get this benefit. 
Dirt of the body will go. But how to wash the mind of its taint?  One got the 
petty benefit of physical cleanliness; the other, i n addition, gained the 
invaluable fruit of inward purity.  
A man doing surya-namaskars 7 after bathing will certainly get the benefit of 
physical exercise; but if he is not doing them for the sake of health only, but as 
a form of worship, he will also have a sharp and ra diant intellect in addition to 
a healthy body. He will get from the Sun-God vigour  and creative energy. 
6. The act may be the same outwardly; but the differen ce in the inward 
feelings makes a world of difference. Action by a s piritually motivated selfless 
person elevates him morally and spiritually whereas  the same action by a Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40  worldly person serves to bind him. A karmayogi  farmer will look upon farming 
as his swadharma.  It will, of course, fill his stomach; but he is no t farming for 
that purpose. He will eat only to enable him to per form the  swadharma  of 
farming. Swadharma  is the end for him, and food a means therefor. But  to 
another farmer, food will be the end and farming a means therefor. These two 
attitudes are the reverse of each other.  
This has been figuratively described in the Second Chapter. It is stated therein 
that a karmayogi  is asleep when others are awake whereas he is awak e when 
others are asleep. What does this mean?  We are eve r mindful about filling our 
stomachs, while a karmayogi  is keen about spending every moment in work and 
does not waste a single moment. While ordinary worl dly persons live in order to 
eat, he eats only because something has to be fed t o the body to survive to 
perform selfless service. While ordinary worldly pe rsons enjoy eating, for a yogi  
it is a burdensome task. He would not therefore eat  with relish; he would have 
control over his palate. The attitudes are thus dia metrically opposite to each 
other. What gives pleasure to one is burdensome to the other. This has been 
metaphorically described as ‘the night for the one is a day for the other, and 
the day for one is the night for the other.’ The ac tions look alike, but what is 
important is that a karmoyogi  enjoys work leaving aside any attachment to the 
fruit of his actions. He will eat and sleep like ot hers, but his attitude towards 
everything will be different. To impress this point , the ideal of the sthitaprajna  
has been put forth at the outset itself in the Gita , although sixteen Chapters 
are still ahead. 
The similarity and difference between the actions o f a worldly man and those 
of a karmayogi  are immediately clear. For example, if a karmayogi  is engaged 
in the care of the cows, he will do the work with t he idea of serving the society 
by providing it with plenty of milk; and at the sam e time he will look to it as an 
opportunity to have a relationship of love with all  the lower orders of beings 
through the service of the cows. He will certainly get his wages, but that is not 
his motivation. Real joy lies in the divine feeling s informing the actions. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41  7. Every act of a karmayogi  unites him with the whole universe. We are 
supposed to take meals only after watering the Tuls i plant in the courtyard. 
This is for creating a bond of love with the whole world of plants. How can I 
eat, keeping the Tulsi plant starved?  Beginning wi th the identification with the 
cow and the Tulsi plant we are to progress till we are one with the whole 
creation. In the Mahabharata war, fighting used to stop at sunset and 
everybody would then go for performing religious ri tes etc. But Lord Krishna 
would rejoice in actions like unyoking the horses f rom the chariot, giving them 
water, gently massaging their bodies and nursing th eir wounds. What a joy the 
Lord found in such service! The poet is never tired  of describing all this. Bring 
before your mind’s eye the picture of the divine ch arioteer carrying the feed of 
the horses in the folds of His lower garment and fe eding the horses with His 
own hands and realise how joyful karmayoga is. In karmayoga , all actions attain 
the highest spiritual character. Take khadi 8 work. A khadi  worker hawking 
khadi  from door to door carrying its load on his head ne ver feels tired, for he 
knows that millions of his brothers and sisters are  famished and is inspired by 
the idea of providing a few morsels to them. His wo rk of selling a few yards of 
khadi is linked to daridranarayan —God in the form of the poor.  
 
12. Various Gains from Karmayoga  
8. There is extraordinary power in the selfless and de sireless karmayoga . It 
richly blesses both the individual and the society.  A karmayogi , who follows his 
swadharma , does get his daily bread. Besides, his industriou sness makes his 
body healthy and pure. His work also contributes to  the well-being and 
prosperity of the society in which he lives. A karmayogi  farmer will not 
cultivate opium or tobacco to earn more money. He l inks his work to the 
welfare of the society. Actions done in the pursuit  of swadharma  will confer 
nothing but benefit on the community. A trader who believes in working for the 
good of the people will not sell foreign cloth. His  business will therefore be 
beneficial to the society. A society which has in i ts midst such karmoyogis  who Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42  have identified themselves with those around them, forgetting their selfish 
interests, will have prosperity, order and harmony.  
9. Work of a karmayogi  helps sustain him. It keeps his body healthy and 
intellect radiant. It results in the welfare of the  society as well. It also confers 
on the karmayogi  a great gift in the form of the purity of his mind . It is said 
that work is a means for the purification of the mi nd—‘ कमᭅणा शुि᭟द :’. But this is 
true only of the work done by a karmayogi , as it is charged with the spirit of 
selfless service, and not of the work ordinarily do ne by the people. In the 
Mahabharata, there is a story of the trader named T uladhar. Jajali, a Brahmin 
goes to him seeking true knowledge.9 Tuladhar tells him, “My dear fellow, what 
is really required is that the scales must always b e held even.” The outward 
action of weighing had made Tuladhar’s mind straigh tforward and perfectly 
balanced. Whosoever came to the shop, Tuladhar’s ba lance was always true. 
Work does have effect on one’s mind. A karmayogi’s  work is like japa 10 —a form 
of prayer. It purifies the mind and it is only the clean and pure mind which 
receives true knowledge. A karmayogi ’s work ultimately leads to  the 
attainment of wisdom. Tuladhar learnt equanimity of  mind from the weighing 
balance. Sena was a barber who cut the hair and cle ansed the heads of his 
customers. While doing this work, a realisation daw ned on him. He thought, “I 
have been cleansing others’ heads, but have I clean sed my own head, my own 
mind?”  Such words of spiritual wisdom came to his lips while working. While 
removing weeds from the field, it occurs to a karmayogi  that the weeds of base 
desires and passions should also be removed from th e mind. Gora Kumbhar, the 
potter, realised, while shaping and baking earthen pots, that his own life 
should also be properly moulded and baked in the fi re of desireless action. He 
eventually attained such an exalted status by virtu e of his wisdom that he 
earned the authority to judge the degree of spiritu al development of 
others.11  Karmayogis gained true knowledge through the terms used in the ir 
respective vocations. To them, their vocations were  like schools of the spirit. 
Their work was imbued with the spirit of worship an d service. Although it 
appeared worldly, it was spiritual in essence. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43  10. Another great gain that flows from the actions of a  karmayogi  is that a 
model is placed before the society. In the society,  there are persons belonging 
to different generations. It is the duty of the old er generation to set an 
example to the younger generation. It is the duty o f an elder brother to his 
younger brother, of parents to their children, of l eaders to their followers, of 
masters to their pupils, to set an example through their actions; and who else 
but a karmayogi  is fit to set an example?  
As a karmayogi  finds joy in the work itself, he is ever-absorbed in his work. 
Hypocrisy does not, therefore, gain ground in the s ociety. A karmayogi  is happy 
and content with fulfillment; still he continues to  work. Saint Tukaram says, 
“Should I give up singing bhajans 12 , now that I have realized God through 
them?  Singing bhajans  has now become my nature.” 
‘आधᱭ होता संतसंग । तुका झाला पांडुरंग  
᭜याचᱶ भजन राहीना ।  मूळ᭭वभाव जाईना ’ 
(‘Earlier, Tukaram used to keep company with the sa ints. Eventually he became 
one with Lord Pandurang. Still he cannot help singi ng bhajans . One’s original 
nature does not, after all, change.’) 
The karmayogi  reaches the summit of spiritual liberation using t he ladder of 
work. He does not kick off that ladder even thereaf ter. He just cannot do so. 
Doing work becomes his nature. He thus continues to  impress on the society the 
importance of service in the form of work enjoined by swadharma.  
Removal of hypocrisy from the society is extremely important. Hypocrisy spells 
doom for the society. If a jnani 13  stops working, others will follow suit. The 
jnani , being ever-content within himself, may sit still in a state of bliss, but 
others will become inactive even though inwardly un happy and disgruntled. 
One is at rest because he is happy at heart; the ot her is merely passive but 
unhappy. This is a horrible situation. It will enco urage hypocrisy. That is why all 
the saints continued to hold on steadfastly to the means even after reaching 
the end, the pinnacle of fulfillment. They kept on working till the last breath. 
A mother actively participates in the children’s pl ay with the dolls even though Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44  she knows that it is all make-believe. If she takes  no part in the play, the 
children will not enjoy it. Likewise if a karmayogi  stops working because of 
contentment, others will follow suit despite being discontented; but inwardly 
they will continue to be dissatisfied and joyless. 
Therefore, a karmayogi  continues to work like an ordinary man. He does no t 
think that he is in any way an exceptional person. He exerts himself infinitely 
more than others. It is not necessary to put a stam p on any action and mark it 
as spiritual; no action should be publicised as suc h. If you are a perfect 
brahmachari 14  your work should look hundred times more zestful t han that of 
others. You should work much more even if you get l ess to consume. Your 
service to the society should be greater. Let your brahmacharya  be reflected in 
your actions. Let its fragrance, like sandalwood, s pread far and wide. This is 
what should be true for the truly spiritual work. 
In short, a karmayogi,  by renouncing desire for the fruit of his actions,  will 
receive infinite rewards. His body will be sustaine d and both his body and mind 
will remain healthy and radiant. The society to whi ch he belongs will also be 
happy and contented. His mind will be purified and he will attain wisdom. The 
spread of hypocrisy in the society will be preclude d, and the sacred ideal will 
become clear to all. Such is the glory of karmayoga , which is testified by 
experience. 
 
13. Obstacles In The Way Of Karmayoga  
11. A karmayogi ’s work is much better than that of others. For him , work is 
worship. We perform pooja 15  and receive prasad  thereafter. But is the prasad a 
reward for the pooja ?  If one performs pooja  for the sake of prasad , one will, of 
course, get it. But a karmayogi seeks to see God face to face through 
performance of pooja . He does not think that the value of his pooja  is so trivial 
that the prasad  is its only reward. He is not prepared to underest imate the 
value of his work. He does not measure the value of  his work in gross terms. 
The fruits of actions depend on the outlook behind them. A person with a gross 
outlook and gross aim will receive reward in gross terms. There is a saying Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45  among the farmers: ‘Sow deep, but sow in a moist so il.’ It is not enough to sow 
deep; there should also be moisture in the soil. Th en only the yield will be 
high. There should thus be depth, that is, thorough ness and excellence in the 
work and there should also be the moisture, that is , devotion and surrender to 
God, dedication to God. A karmayogi  has depth in his work and he then 
dedicates that work to God.  
We have developed some absurd ideas about spiritual ity. People feel that a 
spiritual seeker need not do any work. They wonder how a farmer or a weaver 
could be a spiritual seeker. But they do not raise the question how one who 
feeds his body could be a spiritual seeker!  But th e Lord of the karmayogis —
Lord Krishna—massaged horses, mopped the floor afte r people had their meals 
at the time of Pandava’s Rajsooya Yajna , grazed the cattle. The ruler of 
Dwarka (Lord Krishna) would play flute and graze th e cattle whenever he 
visited Gokul, his childhood abode. The saints have  sketched the picture of 
such a karmayogi  God; and the saints themselves have attained liber ation while 
working as a tailor, or a weaver, or a gardener, or  a potter, or a grocer, or a 
barber, or a tanner. 
12. A person slips from the observance of such a divine  karmayoga  on account 
of two reasons. We should keep in mind the peculiar  nature of our senses. They 
are always caught up in the duality of likes and di slikes. We are attached to or 
fond of what we want and are averse to what we do n ot want. Love and hate, 
desire and anger pounce upon a man and prey on him.  How beautiful and 
infinitely rewarding karmayoga  is!  But desire and anger are always after us, 
driving us to hanker after something and reject som ething. The Lord is warning 
us, at the end of this Chapter, to shun them. A karmayogi  should also become 
an embodiment of self-restraint like the sthitaprajna . 
(6.3.32)  
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46   
References:  
1. In ancient India, princesses used to choose their s pouses.  The custom was called 
swayamvara .  All those princes wishing to marry the princess used to be invited to 
the ceremony at which the princess would publicly c hoose a bridegroom for herself.  
Often, the princes were made to perform some very d ifficult task.  For example, 
princes gathered at the swayamvara of Sita were asked to lift the bow of Lord Shiva, 
which nobody except Rama could succeed in doing. 
2. The act signifies acceptance of the person as a spo use. 
3. Lakshmi is the goddess of prosperity.  So the verse  also means that one gets riches 
when one does not hanker after them. 
4. Sudama, a childhood friend of Lord Krishna, was a p oor Brahmin .  His wife once 
coaxed him to meet Krishna, who was now the ruler o f Dwarka and who could releive 
them of their penury.  Sudama visited Krishna with an offering of parched rice as he 
could afford nothing else.  The Lord sensed the fee ling of love behind this offering 
and gave him countless riches. 
5. It means money or other things offered to the pries t with reverence for the services 
rendered as a religious obligation. 
6. Satyabhama and Rukmini, both queens of Lord Krishna , once had a dispute over who 
loves Him the most.  They thereupon decided to weig h him.  Krishna sat on one of 
the pans of the balance and Satyabhama put heaps of  gold ornaments on the other 
pan, but they could not equal the Lord's weight.  R ukmini then weighed the Lord 
against a Tulsi leaf, but the leaf equaled the Lord 's weight. 
7. A form of worshipping the Sun-God, it is also a wel l-known yogic exercise wherein 
body goes through different motions, thereby gettin g all-round physical exercise. 
8. Handspun, hand woven cotton cloth, popularised by M ahatma Gandhi.  For him, it 
was a symbol of self-reliance and identification wi th the poor. 
9. In ancient India, teaching was the vocation of the Brahmins .  But here a Brahmin is 
shown going to a Vaishya  (trader) for knowledge. 
10. Japa means repeated recitation/chanting of God's Name or  a sacred verse.  It also 
implies unremitting mental contemplation of the Brahman . 
11. Saint Namdeva, when he was still a seeker, once tho ught that he was quite close to 
Lord Pandurang, and had thus gained all that he sho uld.  To remove his vain 
misconception, Lord Pandurang sent him to Gora.  Go ra was busy testing the strength 
of his pots when Namdeva approached him.  Gora then  stroked Namdeva's head with Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47  his testing implement and announced that 'the pot i s not yet fully baked', meaning 
that Namdeva had yet to attain Self-knowledge. 
12. Devotional songs. 
13. One who has attained Self-knowledge; a man of wisdo m.  The term ' Jnana ' is 
commonly used for knowledge and understanding, but it also means Self-knowledge 
or saving wisdom.  The meaning has to be understood  from the context. 
14. Brahmachari is one who practices brahmacharya .  Brahmacharya is normally 
translated as chastity or celibacy, but it is a muc h wider concept.  Etymologically, it 
means a course of conduct adopted for realization o f Brahman .  It includes control of 
all the senses. 
15. Pooja is a from of worshipping the Lord in the form of id ols.  After completion of the 
same, sweets, fruits, etc. are offered to the Lord.   It is called naivedya .  These 
eatables are then distributed to those present, as a mark of God's grace.  They are 
called prasad . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48   
CHAPTER 4 
VIKARMA 1: THE KEY TO KARMAYOGA  
14. Karma Needs Vikarma to Complement It  
1. Brothers, in the last chapter, we discussed the yoga  of desireless action. It 
is impossible to attain desirelessness if we give u p  swadharma and embrace the 
dharma  which is not ours. It is a trader’s swadharma  to sell indigenous goods. 
But when he gives it up and starts selling foreign goods imported from distant 
lands, his motive is nothing but to earn more profi t. How can such work be free 
from desire?  Pursuit of swadharma  is therefore indispensable for desireless 
work. But swadharma could also be pursued with an eye on the gains. Tak e the 
case of non-violence. Violence is taboo for a votar y of non-violence; but he 
could be outwardly nonviolent while being steeped i n violence inwardly. For, 
violence is an attribute of the mind. The mind woul d not be non-violent merely 
by giving up outward violence.  A sword in hand is a sure sign of a violent mind; 
but one does not become non-violent merely by throw ing the sword away. The 
same is true about swadharma  also. To have desirelessness, one must definitely 
avoid dharma which is not one’s own; but that is only the first step towards 
desirelessness. It is not sufficient for attainment  of that goal. 
Desirelessness is a state of the mind. Pursuit of swadharma  is necessary but not 
sufficient for acquiring that state. Other means mu st also be used towards this 
end. To light a lamp, oil and wick are necessary bu t not sufficient. It is also 
necessary to have a flame. Darkness disappears only  when we light a flame. 
How to light a flame?  For this one must purify one ’s mind. The mind should be 
thoroughly cleansed through intense self-examinatio n. The Lord has given this 
important advice at the end of the Third Chapter. T he Fourth Chapter has its 
genesis in this advice. 
2. The Gita uses the word ‘karma’ (action) in the sens e of swadharma . We 
eat, drink, sleep; these are all actions. But these  are not the actions that the 
Gita refers to when it talks of karma . Karma refers to the performance of Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49  swadharma. But in order to attain desirelessness through such karma , an 
important aid is necessary. One must overcome desir e, attachment and anger. 
One cannot have desirelessness unless and until the  mind has become pure and 
calm like the waters of the Ganga. The actions nece ssary for the purification of 
mind are called ‘ vikarma ’ by the Gita. Karma , vikarma  and akarma —these 
three terms are important in the Fourth Chapter. Karma  means the outward 
actions done in the pursuit of swadharma. Vikarma  means total involvement of 
the mind therein. We may bow to somebody, but that outward action is 
meaningless without inner humility in the mind. The re should be unity between 
the inner and the outer. I may worship the image of  the Lord; but that act is 
worthless if it is not accompanied with devotion. I n the absence of devotion, 
the idol will just be a piece of stone and so shall  I; and the worship will only 
mean that a stone is facing a stone!  Desireless, s elfless karmayoga  is attained 
only when outward actions are complemented with the  inward action of the 
purification of mind. 
3. In the term ‘desireless action’, the adjective ‘des ireless’ is more 
important than the word ‘action’, just as in the ph rase ‘non-violent non-
cooperation’, the adjective ‘non-violent’ is more i mportant than the word 
‘non-cooperation’. Non-cooperation without non-viol ence could be a terrible 
thing. In the same way, it could be dangerous if pe rformance of swadharma is 
not complemented with vikarma  of the mind. 
Those engaged in social service today are certainly  pursuing their swadharma . 
When people are poor and destitute, it is a natural  duty to serve them and 
make them happy. But all social workers cannot, the refore, be called 
karmayogis . Social service without pure motives in the heart of the workers 
could have disastrous results. Such a social servic e can generate in equal 
measure the vanity, hatred, envy and selfishness th at we generate when we 
serve our families exclusively. This is clearly evi dent in the world of social work 
today. 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50  15. Karma  + Vikarma  = Akarma 2 
4. The mind should be fully in tune with and involved in work. ‘Vikarma’  is 
the word that the Gita uses for this involvement an d application of the mind in 
work . ‘Vikarma’  means the special karma  which varies with the needs of each 
individual mind. Many kinds of vikarma have been illustratively mentioned in 
the Fourth Chapter. They have been further elaborat ed from the Sixth Chapter 
onwards. Only when we perform this special karma , only when the mind is in 
tune with the outward action, will the flame of des irelessness be lighted. 
Desirelessness is gradually developed when karma and  vikarma come together. 
The body and the mind are distinct entities; so the  means to be  employed for 
their growth are bound to be different. The goal is  reached when they are in 
tune with each other. To achieve harmony between th em, the authors of the 
scriptures have prescribed a two-fold path. In bhaktiyoga  (the yoga  of 
devotion) they have prescribed penance and austerit ies without and japa  
within. If the japa within does not accompany outer forms of penance li ke 
fasting, the latter would be in vain. One should al ways reflect on why one is 
doing penance; the motive, the spirit should always  be alive in the mind like a 
burning flame. The word ‘upavas’  (fasting) etymologically means ‘to dwell 
close to God’. In order that our mind and heart may  dwell close to God, sensual 
pleasures are to be abjured. But if we give up such  pleasures and do not think 
of God, of what value is the physical act of fastin g?  If, instead of thinking of 
God, we think of things to eat and drink while fast ing, that ‘fast’ would be 
worse than a feast!  In fact, there is nothing more  dangerous than thinking 
about sensual pleasures. Tantra  (technique, means) must be accompanied by 
mantra  (pondering over, meditation). Tantra  in itself is not important; and 
mantra  without action has no value. Only when the hands a re engaged in 
service and there is spirit of service in the heart  can true service be rendered. 
5. Performance of swadharma  will be a dreary affair without the warmth of 
feelings in the heart. It would not then blossom fo rth and bear the fruit of 
desirelessness. Suppose we undertake the work of nu rsing the sick. If there is 
no compassion in the heart, it would be a burdensom e drudgery for us. The Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51  patients too will find the service to be a burdenso me obligation. If the mind is 
not absorbed in it, such service will boost the ego . Expectations will then arise 
in the mind:  “I am helping them today; tomorrow th ey should help me. They 
should praise me. People should admire me.”  Or els e, we may get fed up and 
complain that the patient is peevish and irritable even though we are taking so 
much care of him. Sick men are usually in a depress ed and irritable mood. If 
the spirit of service is lacking, we would get tire d of nursing them. 
6. If the mind is in tune with the work, the work is t ransformed into 
something unique. When vikarma  joins karma,  desirelessness comes into being. 
When a spark touches the gunpowder, it explodes. Karma  is like the 
gunpowder. It works wonders when the flame of vikarma  ignites it. Karma  in 
itself is inert and lifeless; it is the spark of vikarma that makes it indescribably 
powerful. We may keep a packet of gunpowder in our pockets or handle it with 
impunity; but when ignited, it would blow up the bo dy into pieces. The infinite 
power in swadharma  is likewise dormant. Combine it with vikarma,  and then 
see what transformation it can bring about! The res ultant explosion would 
reduce to ashes ego, desires, passions and anger, a nd then supreme wisdom 
will be attained. 
7. Action is in the nature of kindling, burning of whi ch results into knowledge 
When you ignite a log of wood, it turns into burnin g coal. How different is the 
fire from the log!  But it is, after all, the log w hich has undergone this 
transformation. When vikarma is united with karma , karma  attains a divine 
radiance. A mother’s action of caressing her child is apparently insignificant; 
but who can describe the upsurge of emotions it giv es rise to in the hearts of 
both the mother and the child?  It would be utterly  nonsensical if one were to 
say that such emotions would result if a hand of su ch weight and such softness 
is moved up and down such a back. Yes, the action i s insignificant; but the 
mother has put her whole heart into it, and it is t his vikarma that causes 
unprecedented joy. There is an incident described i n the Ramcharitmanas (the 
Ramayana written by saint Tulsidas). The vanaras 3 had come wounded and 
bleeding after a battle with the demons.  They were  in great pains. Lord Rama Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52  just looked at them with love, and all their pain v anished. It would be 
ridiculous if someone else were to try to bring abo ut such a result by looking at 
them in an outwardly similar way. 
8. When  Vikarma , combined with karma , results in a powerful explosion of 
energy, and then akarma  is produced. A big log of wood, when burnt, turns into 
just a handful of harmless ash. In the same way karma , ignited by vikarma , 
ends up in producing akarma . Is there any relation between the properties of 
wood and that of the ash?  Absolutely none. You can  collect the ash in your 
hands and merrily smear it all over your body witho ut harm. But there is no 
doubt that the ash has come out of the burning of t hat log of wood. 
9. When vikarma  is united with karma , akarma  results. What does it mean?  It 
means that one does not then have the feeling of ha ving done anything. Action 
does not weigh on the mind of the actor. We act, bu t still we are not the doers. 
As the Gita says, you are not the slayer even if yo u slay somebody. A mother 
may give a thrashing to her child, but the child wi ll still turn to her for solace. 
He would not do so if you thrash him. It is so beca use the mother’s heart is 
pure. Her action is totally devoid of any self-inte rest. Vikarma,  or the purity of 
mind, erases the ‘action-ness’ of the action. Infus ed with the inner vikarma, 
Lord Rama’s action of looking at the vanaras  became a sheer outpouring of love 
that acted as a balm on their wounds. But it did no t tire Rama a bit. Action 
performed with pure heart is free from any attachme nt. There is, therefore, no 
question of any sin nor merit remaining as a residu e after that action is over.  
Otherwise, an action puts great burden and pressure  on the mind and the 
heart. Suppose, news breaks out now that all the po litical prisoners are going 
to be released tomorrow. Imagine the resulting comm otion!  We are always 
agitated and strained with anxiety by the thought o f the goodness or badness of 
our actions. Action engulfs us from all sides. It c atches us by the scruff of our 
neck. Just as the sea-waves dash against the shore and make channels into it, 
the forceful waves of karma  enter the mind and agitate it. Dualities of pleasu re 
and pain are created. Peace of the mind is lost. Ev en after the action is over, 
its momentum remains. It takes hold of the mind and  makes it restless. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53  But if karma  is coupled with vikarma , any amount of action does not tire. The 
mind remains calm, peaceful and radiant. When vikarma is poured into  karma , 
it becomes akarma . It is as if karma  is erased after it is over. 
 
16. Art Of Akarma  Should Be Learnt From The Saints  
10. How does karma  become akarma ?  From whom can we learn this art?  From 
the saints, of course. The Lord says at the end of this Chapter, “Go to the 
saints and learn from them.”  Language fails in des cribing how karma  is 
transformed into akarma . To gain an understanding of this, one has to sit at the 
feet of the saints. The Lord is described as ‘ शांताकारं भुजगशयनम् ’—He is fully at 
peace even though He is lying on the thousand-hoode d cobra (Shesha). The 
saints too do hundreds of actions, but do not allow  even a little ripple of 
commotion to arise in the still waters of their min ds. This remarkable thing can 
never be understood unless the lives of saints are observed from close quarters. 
11. Nowadays, books have become quite cheap. There is n o dearth of 
teachers. Education is widespread and cheap. Univer sities are liberally doling 
out knowledge. But nobody seems to have assimilated  it. In fact, the more one 
looks at the heaps of books, the more one realises how necessary it is to sit at 
the feet of the saints. Knowledge encased within th e thick covers of the books 
does not come out of those covers. I am always remi nded of an abhang  
(devotional poem) in this context: ‘ काम ᮓोध आड पिडले पवᭅत, रािहला अनंत पैलीकडे ।। ’ 
(‘The high mountains of desires, passions and anger  bar the way to the Lord.’) 
Similarly, the way to knowledge is barred by the he aps of books. Although 
libraries are everywhere, man still seems to be a m onkey—ignorant and 
uncouth. There is a big library at Baroda. Once a g entleman was carrying a 
thick volume with a lot of pictures, thinking it to  be an English book.  When I 
browsed through it, I found it to be a French book!   The gentleman must have 
thought that as the book was in the Roman script, h ad nice pictures and good 
binding, it must be full of knowledge! Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54  12. Every year, tens of thousands of books are publishe d in English. This is so 
in other languages too. With such spread of knowled ge, how is it that man 
behaves so stupidly?  Some say that the power of th e memory has weakened, 
some say that concentration is becoming difficult, some say that whatever a 
man reads, appears true to him. Some say that there  is no time left for 
thinking! The Lord says to Arjuna, “ Yoga  will be far away so long as your 
intellect, confused by listening to different thing s, remains unsteady. So stop 
reading books and listening to others and surrender  yourself to the saints. 
There you would read the book of life. Your doubts will get dissolved by the 
silent, wordless sermons there. You would know how to remain perfectly serene 
even while constantly performing acts of service, h ow the heart could be tuned 
to produce music without a break even as the storm of action rages outside.”  
(13.3.32)  
 
References:  
1. Vikarma  is normally translated as wrong or forbidden actio n.  Vinoba is perhaps the 
only one who has given the term a different meaning , which has been explained in 
the following paragraphs.  It can be considered a m ajor contribution to the 
interpretation of the Gita. 
2. Commentators have usually translated it as inaction , but Vinoba's interpretation is 
refreshingly different. 
3. Vanara  (commonly believed to be monkeys) was probably an aboriginal community 
living in the forests of south India.  They formed Lord Rama's army which vanquished 
the forces of Ravan, the demon king of Lanka.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55   
CHAPTER 5 
TWO-FOLD STATE OF AKARMA : YOGA  AND SANNYASA  
17. Outward Action: A Mirror of the Mind  
1. Samsara 1 is something very terrible. It is often compared t o an ocean. If 
you are in the midst of an ocean, you see water whe rever you look. Same is the 
case with samsara. It has surrounded us from all the sides. Even if a man leaves 
his home and devotes himself to public service, samsara  does not leave his 
mind. It is there even if one retires to a cave to lead a hermit’s life. He may 
have got only a few possessions there, but they bec ome the centre of his 
attachment and samsara engulfs him there too. Just as a single currency no te 
can hold one thousand rupees, a loin-cloth too can hold unlimited attachment. 
There is, therefore, no attenuation of samsara  simply through reduction in the 
involvement in worldly business and/or reduction in  one’s possessions. Whether 
you say 10/25 or 2/5, it means the same. We may be in the midst of our family 
or alone in a forest, the mind remains attached to samsara . Two yogis  may go 
to the Himalayan caves for doing penance, but even there they may burn with 
envy if they happen to hear each other’s praise. Th e same thing happens in the 
realm of social service. 
2. Samsara has thus engulfed us and is ever tormenting us. It does not leave 
us even if we decide to remain within the bounds of  swadharma . Even if we 
curtail our activities, engagements and affairs, at tachment to ‘I and mine’ 
remains the same. It is said that the demons could become small or big at will. 
Samsara too is like a demon. And a demon remains a demon, w hatever be its 
size. You may live in a palace or in a hut, samsara is equally inescapable. Even 
if we limit samsara by choosing to remain within the bounds of swadharma , 
there would still be conflicts and you will feel, ‘ Enough of it!’ Therein too you 
will have to deal with a whole lot of individuals a nd institutions and that will 
exasperate you; you would become disgusted. But the n that is the time of trial 
for your mind. Detachment does not automatically re sult from the performance 
of swadharma . To curtail activities is not the same thing as ge tting detached.  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56  3. How can then one attain detachment?  For this, the mind must cooperate 
fully. Nothing can be achieved without the cooperat ion of the mind. Parents 
sometimes keep their wards in a residential school.  There the boy leads a 
disciplined life. He wakes up early, takes exercise s regularly and is generally 
away from bad habits. But as soon as he comes home,  he abandons all the good 
habits. A man is not like a lump of wet clay to whi ch you can give any form you 
like. He has a mind of his own, which must be recep tive to assume that form. If 
there is no cooperation on the part of his mind, al l efforts to educate him 
would be in vain. Cooperation of the mind is, there fore, extremely necessary 
irrespective of the means adopted. 
4. Outward performance of swadharma  and the inward mental vikarma —both 
are necessary. Outward work is, of course, necessar y. The mind cannot 
otherwise be tested. In the stillness of early morn ing, we feel that our minds 
have become calm. But the moment a child cries, we lose our calm and it 
becomes clear that the peace of mind is illusory. T here is, therefore, no point 
in avoiding outward work. The true nature of our mi nds, the real quality of our 
minds is revealed through outward work. Water in a pond appears clear, but 
throw a stone in it and the dirt settled at the bot tom will immediately rise up. 
That happens with our minds too. There are heaps of  dirt at the bottom of the 
mind’s lake. They come to the surface when disturbe d by an external agent. 
When a man gets angry, it is not that the anger com es from without; it was 
already there within him. Otherwise it could never have shown itself.  
People say that coloured cloth does not get dirty; white cloth does. But 
coloured cloth too gets dirty, although it does not  appear to be so. White cloth 
says, “I have become dirty; wash me please.” People  do not like such ‘talking’ 
cloth. Our action too talks. It proclaims whether w e are given to selfishness or 
to anger or something else. Action is the mirror th at reflects our true form. We 
should, therefore, be grateful to it. If the mirror  shows that our face is 
unclean, would we smash the mirror?  No. We would r ather thank it and wash 
our face. Likewise, should we avoid action because it reveals the dirt in our 
minds—our defects and weaknesses?  Is the mind goin g to be pure simply by Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57  avoiding action?  In fact, we should continue to ac t while trying continually for 
the purification of mind. 
5. A man living alone in a mountain cave, cut off from  all human contact, 
may imagine that he has attained perfect peace of m ind. But let him leave the 
cave and go for meals to somebody’s house and let a  child playfully rattle the 
bolt of the door there. The innocent child may be a bsorbed in the music of that 
sound, but the recluse will find it jarring and cur se the child in his mind. His 
stay in the isolated cave has made his mind too wea k and over-sensitive to 
stand even the slightest disturbance. His peace of the mind may get disturbed 
by just a little rattling noise. It is not good tha t one’s mind should be in such a 
weak state.  
6. To sum up, karma  is very much needed to enable us to understand the  
state of our minds. We can remove our defects only when we become aware of 
them. If we are not aware of them, all efforts for progress and growth will 
come to naught. It is while doing work that we beco me aware of our defects. 
Vikarma  is then to be employed to get rid of those defects . With ceaseless 
application of vikarma inwardly, we will gradually come to know how to rem ain 
detached while performing swadharma, how to remain beyond desires and 
passions, anger, greed, temptations and delusions. When there is a constant 
endeavour to purify karma , pure karma  will follow naturally and effortlessly. 
When detached and passionless action begins to take  place frequently and 
effortlessly, we would not even be aware of its occ urence. When karma 
becomes effortless and burdenless, it is transforme d into akarma . Akarma , as 
we have seen in the Fourth Chapter, means effortles s, burdenless, natural 
karma . The Lord has also told at the end of the Fourth C hapter that one could 
learn how karma is transformed into akarma at the feet of the saints. This state 
of akarma  cannot be described in words.  
 
18. The Nature Of The State Of Akarma  
7. Let us take a familiar example to understand the na turalness of an action. 
When a child first learns to walk, how much effort he puts into it!  We Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58  encourage him, appreciate his efforts. ‘Hey, he has  learnt to walk!’, we say 
with pride. But later, walking becomes natural; the  child can then walk and 
talk at the same time. It is the same with eating. When a child is given solid 
food for the first time, we celebrate the occasion,  as if the act of eating is 
something great.2 But in the course of time, it becomes quite natura l. How 
hard it is to learn swimming!  In the beginning, on e finds it tiring; but later one 
goes for swimming to relax, to shake off fatigue. S wimming is then no longer a 
tiring activity; the body floats over water effortl essly. The mind is in the habit 
of getting tired; it gets tired when it is consciou sly engaged in work. But when 
actions flow naturally, no strain is felt. Karma  then becomes akarma . It is then 
a matter of joy.  
8. Such transformation of karma  into akarma is what we want to achieve. It 
is for this purpose that we should perform karma  in accordance with our 
swadharma . In doing so, our defects will come to light. To r emove them, we 
should take recourse to vikarma . If all this is constantly practised, the mind 
reaches a stage where it is no longer perturbed by actions. It remains calm and 
clear even though we are doing thousands of actions . If we ask the sky whether 
it gets scorched by the sun and drenched in the rai n and shivers with the cold in 
winter, what reply will we get?  Will it not say, “ You can settle what happens 
to me; I know nothing.”  ‘ िपसं नेसलᱶ कᳵ नागवᱶ लोकᳵ येऊन जाणावᱶ । ’—It is for others to 
see whether a mad man is naked or clad; he is total ly unaware of it.  
In short, when we go on performing actions in the p ursuit of swadharma with 
the help of vikarma , they gradually become detached and purified, and 
eventually become natural and effortless. Such acti ons then become second 
nature. Even the most trying situations are not the n felt to be daunting. This is 
the key to karmayoga . Our hands will simply get bruised in trying to fo rce open 
a lock without a key; with the key we can open in n o time. The key to 
karmayoga  makes all the actions light and of no bother. This  key can be 
secured by conquering the mind. There should, there fore, be continuous efforts 
to subdue desires and passions in the mind. Wheneve r we become aware of any 
impurities in the mind in the course of action, we should try to cleanse the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59  mind. Outward actions then cease to be troublesome.  The egoistic feeling that 
‘I am the doer’ vanishes. The powerful forces of de sires, passions and anger 
subside. There is then no feeling of anguish. Even the awareness of performing 
an action is no longer there. 
9. Once a gentleman wrote to me, “We have decided to r ecite Ramanama  
(Lord Rama’s Name) a certain number of times. Pleas e join us and inform us 
how much japa  you are going to do daily.” The gentleman was acti ng according 
to his lights. I do not mean to disparage him. But should we count how many 
times we have taken the name of the Lord?  Ramanama is not a thing to be 
counted. A mother cares for her child. Does she pub lish a report on it?  Were 
she to do so, we could just say, ‘Thank you’, and b e free from our obligations 
to her. But a mother does not submit any report. Sh e rather says, “What have I 
done?  I have done nothing. Is this a burden to me? ” Karma  ceases to be karma  
when one does it with full dedication and with the aid of vikarma . Karma  then 
becomes akarma. There is then no question of any strain or tensio n to anything 
untoward. 
10. It is impossible to describe this state. One can at  best give a rough idea. 
The sun rises daily. But does it rise to remove dar kness, urge the birds to fly 
and set men working?  It just rises and that is all . Its very existence makes all 
the world go round. But it is not aware of it. If y ou thank him for dispelling 
darkness, he would be at a loss to understand what you are saying. He will say, 
“Have I really done so?  Please bring a little dark ness. If I could dispel it, then 
only I would claim any credit for doing so.”  Can w e carry darkness to the sun?  
The existence of the sun dispels darkness and bring s light. Some may read good 
books in that light and some may read bad ones; som e may harm others while 
some may help others; the sun is not in any way res ponsible for the merits or 
sins committed in his light. He will say, “Light is  my nature. What else but light 
could there be in me?  I am not conscious of giving  light. For me, to be means 
to shine. I do not feel any strain in giving light.  I do not feel that I am doing 
anything.”  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60  Giving light is natural to the sun. Same is the cas e with the saints also. Their 
very existence is enlightening. If you praise a man  of wisdom for his 
truthfulness, he would say, “If I adhere to the tru th, what is so special about 
it?  What else can I do?”  Untruth just cannot exis t in such a man. 
11. This is what akarma  means. Actions become so much a part of one’s bein g 
and nature that one is not even aware of their happ ening. The sense-organs are 
then naturally disposed to what they should be doin g; right action flows from 
them on its own accord. ‘ सहज बोलणᱶ िहतउपदेश ’—Counsel of wisdom flows out 
without any self-conscious deliberation and effort.  When this happens, karma 
becomes akarma . For a man of wisdom, performance of good actions becomes 
as natural and effortless as singing is to the bird s. Just as a child thinks of his 
mother naturally, the saints think of God. Another example of such a natural 
action is the crowing of a cock in the early mornin g. Panini3 has given this 
example while explaining swaras  (musical notes). The cocks have always been 
crowing every morning. But has anybody presented th em scrolls of honour?  
Crowing is a cock’s natural action. Similarly, it i s natural for a sage to speak 
the truth, to have compassion for all the living be ings, not to find fault in 
others, to serve everybody. He cannot, in fact, liv e without this karma . Do we 
honour anybody for having taken his food?  Just as eating, drinking, sleeping are 
normal and natural actions for worldly persons, ser ving others is natural to a 
man of wisdom. Helping others is his second nature.  Even if he were to decide 
not to help others, it is impossible for him to do so. Karma of such a sage can 
be said to have become akarma . Such a state has also been given the sacred 
term ‘ Sannyasa ’.  Sannyasa is nothing but the blessed state of akarma. It can 
also be called karmayoga . It is karmayoga  since the man of wisdom goes on 
acting; and it is sannyasa  since there is no feeling of doing anything even w hile 
actions are done. The man of wisdom  acts with such ingenuity that the actions 
do not bind; hence it is yoga ; and as nothing is done even after doing 
everything, it is sannyasa .  
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61  19. Yoga : One Aspect Of Akarma  
12. What does sannyasa  mean, ultimately?  Does it mean renunciation of so me 
actions, while doing others?  No. Sannyasa has, in fact, been defined as 
renunciation of all actions, freeing oneself absolu tely from all actions. But what 
does ‘not acting’ mean?  How can we give up all act ion?  Action is a queer 
thing. It has pervaded all life. Even sitting is an  action: ‘To sit’ is a verb. Sitting 
is not only an action in a grammatical sense, but a lso in physical sense. If one 
sits for quite a long time, the legs begin to ache.  There is strain in sitting also. 
When such is the case, how can there be renunciatio n of all actions?  The Lord 
showed ‘vishwaroop’ 4 to Arjuna. That all-encompassing vision terrified Arjuna 
and he closed his eyes. But even then the vision di d not disappear; the 
vishwaroop appeared before his mind’s eye. How can one escape from a thing 
which continues to be visible even after closing on e’s eyes?  How can one avoid 
action when it takes place even when we are doing n othing?  
13. There is a story of a man who had a lot of precious  gold ornaments. He 
wanted to keep them safely locked up in a box. His servant got a big iron box 
made for them. He looked at it and said, “You idiot !  Don’t you have a sense of 
beauty?  Should these valuable ornaments be kept in  this ugly iron box?  Go and 
get a good gold box.” The servant did as he was tol d. The master then ordered, 
“Now bring a gold lock. Only a gold lock would suit  the gold box.”  The fellow 
wanted to hide his gold from other’s eyes. But what  was the result?  There was 
then no need for the thieves to search for the gold ; just taking away the box 
would have been enough. When not doing is also a fo rm of doing, how to 
renounce action which is so all-pervasive? 
14. The way lies in continuing to do all actions in suc h an ingenuous way that 
they are shed as soon as you complete them. Only th en sannyasa can be 
attained. How to do an action without letting it st ick to you?  Look at the sun. 
It is working continually; even during the night it  is working in the other 
hemisphere. Still one can say that it does not act at all. That is why the Lord 
says in the Fourth Chapter, “I taught this yoga  first to the Sun, and from him Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62  the thoughtful and contemplative Manu learnt it.” T he sun does no work even 
while working all the time. This is truly a wonderf ul state. 
 
20. Sannyasa : The Other Aspect Of Akarma  
15. But this is only one form of sannyasa .  To act, and still not be the doer, is 
one aspect; while the other aspect is to make the w hole world act without 
doing anything oneself.  In this state there is imm ense power to impel others to 
act. This is the beauty of akarma .  It is packed with power that is capable of 
infinite work. It is like steam which, when compres sed, does enormous work. It 
can even move big trains easily. The sun also does no work outwardly, but still 
works round the clock and is not aware of doing any thing. Working day and 
night and still not doing anything outwardly is one  aspect and setting in motion 
an infinite number of actions without doing anythin g outwardly is another 
aspect. This is the two-fold splendour of sannyasa . 
Both the aspects are far from the ordinary. In one aspect, the action is 
manifest and the state of akarma  is hidden. In the other aspect, the state of 
akarma is manifest, yet endless activity is continuously g oing on. In this state, 
akarma  is packed with power, resulting in enormous work. This state of akarma  
is diametrically different from laziness. A lazy ma n easily gets tired and bored; 
but a sannyasi , in the state of akarma , concentrates his energy inside him. He 
does not work with his limbs and organs, but still he inspires work in enormous 
measure. 
16. Suppose someone gets angry with us. If it is becaus e of our fault, we go to 
pacify him.  But he refuses to talk to us. How grea t is the effect of his keeping 
mum, of this renunciation of the action of speaking !  Another man in the same 
situation may pour abuse on us. Both are angry, but  one keeps mum and the 
other speaks out. Both the reactions express anger.  Keeping mum is also an 
expression of anger and it too works. When a mother  or a father stops speaking 
to the child, its impact on the child is far more d ecisive than that of any action. 
Silence can have an effect which speaking can never  have. Such is the state of 
a jnani . His akarma , his being still, accomplishes much; it generates great Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63  power. While being in the state of akarma , he does work that no activity can 
accomplish. This is another type of sannyasa . 
In such type of sannyasa , all enterprise, all frenetic efforts cease.  Sain t 
Tukaram describes such a state : 
‘उ᳒ोगाची धांव बैसली आसनᱭ  
पिडलᱶ नारायणᱭ मोटळᱶ हᱶ ।  
सकळ िनᳲ᳟ती झाली हा भरंवसा  
नाहᱭ गभᭅवासा येणᱶ ऐसा ।  
आपुिलया सᱫे नाहᱭ आ᭥हां िजणᱶ  
अिभमान तेणᱶ नेला देवᱶ ।  
तुका ᭥हणे चळे एकािचये सᱫे  
आपुलᱶ मी ᳯरतेपणᱶ असᱶ ।। ’ 
(‘Now all enterprise, all activity has ceased. The body is lying like a little sack 
at the feet of the Lord. All care is now over; I no w feel assured that I shall not 
be born again. I have not to live now on my own str ength, as the Lord has 
emptied me of my ego. I am no more master of my lif e; it is His power that 
moves me. I have been reduced to zero.’) 
Tukaram is empty—his sense of ‘I’ has dissolved. Bu t there is tremendous power 
in that emptiness. The sun gives call to no one; ye t, when it rises, birds soar in 
the sky, lambs begin to prance around, cows head fo r grazing, shopkeepers 
open their shops, farmers start out towards their f arms. The whole world is on 
the move as it makes its appearance on the horizon.  The sun’s mere existence 
is enough; that gives rise to innumerable activitie s. Its state of akarma  has 
potentiality to stimulate those activities; it is p acked with power. Such is the 
other wonderful aspect of sannyasa . 
 
21. To Compare The Two Is Beyond The Power Of Words  
17. In the Fifth Chapter, these two forms of sannyasa  are compared with each 
other. In one form, nothing is done while doing wor k twenty four hours a day—Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64  there is inaction within—and in the other, there is  no actual action even for a 
moment, but still everything is done—it is caused t o be done. The former shows 
how one could speak while being silent within, and the latter shows how one 
could be outwardly silent and still communicate. No w, there is a comparison 
between the two. To have a look at them, think over  them, ruminate over 
them—there is sheer bliss, unprecedented joy in doi ng so. 
18. In fact, this whole matter is incomparably novel an d noble. The idea of 
sannyasa  is indeed grand and sacred. How thankful should we  be to him who 
first thought of such a sublime idea!  This idea, o ne may say, is the highest 
point reached by human imagination and reason, alth ough man has been, and 
even now, trying for higher and higher flight. As f ar as I know, it is the highest 
point reached by man’s intellect and his power of t hought. There is a rare joy 
in the very contemplation of this idea. The joy rec edes when we step into the 
domain of speech and of everyday life. We then feel  like having fallen down. I 
am never tired of talking to my friends about this idea. For years, I have been 
meditating over it. Language falters in describing it. It is clearly beyond the 
reach of words. 
19. Doing everything without acting, and doing nothing while ceaselessly 
acting—how noble, enchanting and poetic the idea is !  What more can poetry 
offer?  Compared with the joy, ardour, inspiration and exaltation embodied in 
this idea, the most highly praised poetry pales int o insignificance. The Fifth 
Chapter has thus been raised to a very high plane. Karma  and vikarma  have 
been explained upto the Fourth Chapter and then the  Fifth Chapter has soared 
sky-high. In the Fifth Chapter two forms of the sta te of akarma  have been 
directly compared with each other. Language falls s hort in this attempt. Who is 
greater: a karmayogi  or a sannyasi ?  It is impossible to say who works more. In 
fact, remaining inwardly inactive while doing every thing and doing everything 
while outwardly remaining inactive, both are forms of yoga . But for the purpose 
of comparison, one is called yoga  and the other is called sannyasa . 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65  22. Two Analogies: Geometry And Mimamsa 5 
20. How are we to compare the two?  It will have to be done with the help of 
some analogies. While doing so, one does have a fee ling of falling down from 
the high altitude of these ideas, but it cannot be helped. In fact, absolute 
karma-sannyasa  and absolute karma-yoga  are ideas too magnificent to be 
expressed in a living person. These ideals cannot b e fully realised when one is 
confined within the body. An attempt to live these ideals here in this world 
would shatter the body. Hence we have to take illus trations from the lives of 
great men who had realised these ideals to the exte nt possible. Analogies are 
never perfect, but for the time being one has to as sume that they are. 
21. It is said in geometry, ‘Let ABC be a triangle.’ Wh y is the word ‘let’ used 
here?  Because the lines forming the triangle are n ot really lines according to 
the definition of a line. A line, by definition, ha s length but no breadth. How to 
draw such a line on a blackboard?  Breadth invariab ly accompanies length 
whenever one attempts to draw a line. Hence one has  to use the word ‘let’. 
One has to assume that what has been drawn is a lin e. Is not the same thing 
applicable in bhakti-shastra —the science of bhakti  (devotion)?  There too the 
devotee says, ‘Let this tiny idol be the Lord of th e universe.’ If someone calls it 
idiocy, you may ask him, “Is there idiocy in geomet ry? We are seeing quite a 
thick line and you are asking us to assume that it has no breadth!” 
22. Just as certain postulates are made in geometry, ce rtain postulates are 
made in bhaktishastra  too. It asks us to assume that there is God in an idol. If 
one says that God is indestructible, but the idol c ould break on being hit, it 
would not be a thoughtful statement. If postulates are valid in geometry, why 
cannot they be so in bhaktishastra ?  Geometry asks us to assume a point also. 
Definition of a point is akin to that of Brahman . A point is defined as having 
neither length, nor breadth, nor thickness. It is w ithout any dimension; still we 
try to draw it on a blackboard. What we draw is pra ctically a circle, but it is 
assumed to be a point. A true triangle and a true p oint exist only in definitions. 
Yet we have to proceed on the assumption that they actually exist. In Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66  bhaktishastra  too, we have to postulate the existence of the ind estructible all-
pervading God in an idol.  
23. What the mimamsakas  (adherents of the system of Mimamsa ) have done in 
this context is striking. Vedas refer to different deities like Indra (the king of 
the deities), Agni (the god of fire) and Varun (the  god of rain and water). While 
on the subject of these deities a question is asked , ‘What does Indra look like, 
what is his nature, where does he reside?’  The mimamsakas  answer, the word 
‘Indra’ is itself the form of Indra; he resides in the word ‘Indra’. Same is true 
about Varuna, Agni etc. The words, made up of certa in syllables arranged in 
certain order, are the forms of the deities; the de ities are not apart from the 
words. This concept of the deities having the form of words is indeed 
fascinating. In fact, the concept of the deities ca nnot be contained in any form; 
it cannot be adequately described. Syllables compri sing the words may 
therefore be taken as adequate representation. What  is God like? The answer 
is, ‘It is like the word ‘God’ containing the sylla bles G, O, D.’ The most striking 
example of this is the letter ॐ (Om). ॐ means God. A term for God has thus 
been coined. It is necessary to coin such terms for  great ideas which cannot be 
contained in any concrete material form. It is man’ s strong and earnest desire 
which makes him invent symbolic forms for them.  
 
23. The Sannyasi  and the Yogi Are One Like Shuka And Janaka  
24. Sannyasa  and yoga represent the highest flights of the human spirit. 
Sannyasa  and yoga are ideals which are impossible to attain in their fullness 
here on the earth while we are confined within the body, but human thought 
can rise to such heights. A true yogi and a true sannyasi will exist only in 
definitions; the ideals will always be beyond our r each. But we have to take as 
examples persons who have approximated the ideals, and say, on the lines of 
geometry, ‘Let so and so be taken as a perfect yogi and so and so be taken as a 
perfect sannyasi .’  While talking about sannyasa , the names of Shuka and 
Yajnavalkya are usually mentioned. As examples of karmayogis , Janaka and 
Krishna have been mentioned in the Gita itself. Lok manya Tilak has listed a Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67  number of yogis  and sannyasis in his treatise ‘Gita-Rahasya.’ He has written 
that King Janaka, Lord Krishna etc. took the path o f karmayoga while  Shuka 
and Yajnavalkya took the path of sannyasa , implying that these two paths are 
mutually exclusive. But a little reflection will sh ow that they are not so. 
Yajnavalkya was a sannyasi  and Janaka was a karmayogi. Janaka, the 
karmayogi  was a disciple of Yajnavalkya, the sannyasi and Shuka, a disciple of 
Janaka took the path of sannyasa . What this means is that yogis  and sannyasis  
are parts of the same chain; yoga  and sannyasa  constitute a single order; they 
are not mutually exclusive paths. 
25. Vyasa told Shuka, his son, “Shuka, my son, you have  certainly attained 
Self-knowledge, but it lacks the seal of confirmati on from a guru 6. So, I would 
like you to go to Janaka, the King for this purpose .” Shuka thereupon 
proceeded to meet King Janaka. On the way to the pa lace, he passed through 
the capital city, observing the urban scene which w as unknown to the young 
hermit. When he reached the palace and met the King , the following 
conversation took place—  
Janaka - What brings you here, young man? 
Shuka -  To gain knowledge, sir. 
Janaka - Who has sent you? 
Shuka -  Vyasa, my father, has asked me to meet you . 
Janaka - Wherefrom have you come? 
Shuka -  From the ashram .7 
Janaka - While coming here from the ashram , what did you observe in the 
market? 
Shuka -  I observed sweetmeats made of sugar piled up everywhere. 
Janaka - What else did you see? 
Shuka -  I saw sugar-statues walking on the streets  and talking with each other. 
Janaka - What did you see next? Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68  Shuka -  I then saw the palace steps, made of sugar . 
Janaka - And what thereafter? 
Shuka -  Everywhere I found pictures made of sugar.  
Janaka - What are you seeing now? 
Shuka -  A sugar-statue is talking to another sugar -statue. 
Janaka - Well, you may go now. You have indeed atta ined Self-knowledge.8 
Thus Shuka got what he wanted: a certificate from J anaka that he has attained 
Self-knowledge. The point is that Janaka, the karmayogi , accepted Shuka, the 
sannyasi as his disciple. 
There is another interesting story about Shuka. Kin g Parikshit had been cursed 
that he would die after seven days. He wanted to pr epare himself for the 
impending death; he wished to be instructed by a guru as to how to be so 
prepared. He sent for Shuka. Shuka came and sat in cross-legged position, 
narrating the Bhagawata 9 to him continuously for full seven days. He never 
changed his sitting position. What was remarkable i s that he felt no strain 
although he was made to exert himself so much. Thou gh he was constantly 
working, it was as if he was not doing anything. Th ere was no feeling of 
fatigue. Thus it is clear that yoga  and sannyasa  are not mutually exclusive. 
26. That is why the Lord says, ‘ एक ं  सां᭎यं च योगं च, यः प᭫यित  स प᭫यित ’ (‘He truly 
sees who sees both sankhya  and yoga , that is, knowledge and selfless action as 
one’). He who realises that yoga  and sankhya  are one understands the true 
secret. Let a true sannyasi , with mind completely pure and still, dwelling in the 
divine consciousness, stay amongst us for just a fe w days. Imagine how much he 
will illuminate and inspire our lives!  His mere si ght, mere presence will 
achieve what good works accumulated over years cann ot. Even a look at a 
photograph can cleanse the mind, pictures of dead p ersons can arouse devotion 
and love in the heart and purify it. Imagine then t he inspiration one can derive 
from being in the presence of a living sannyasi !  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69  27. Both the sannyasi  and the yogi  do loksangraha. 10  In the case of sannyasi  
action appears to have been renounced, but the appa rent inaction is full of 
action. It is packed with infinite inspiration. A jnani sannyasi  and a jnani 
karmayogi are on the same plane. Terms differ, but meaning is  the same. Yoga  
and sannyasa  are two modes of the same reality. A wheel in rapi d motion seems 
at rest. This is the case with a sannyasi . Mahavira, Buddha, Nivrittinath 11  were 
such realised souls. Although all the activity of s uch a sannyasi  appears to have 
come to a standstill, he is doing immense work. Thu s, a yogi  is a sannyasi  and a 
sannyasi  is a yogi . These terms are synonymous and interchangeable.  
 
24. But Still Yoga  Is Better Than Sannyasa  
28. Nevertheless, the Lord has given a little more weig ht to yoga . He says that 
karmayoga  is superior to sannyasa.  Why does He say so when there is no 
difference between them?  What does it mean?  When the Lord says so, it is 
from the standpoint of a seeker. Doing everything w ithout being active oneself 
is possible for a realised soul, not for a seeker. But it is possible for a seeker, at 
least to some extent, to follow the way of doing ev erything without getting 
attached to work, i.e. acting outwardly but remaini ng inactive within. Working 
without acting will be a riddle for a seeker; he wi ll be at a loss to understand 
it. For a seeker, karmayoga  is both the way and the goal. But sannyasa is only 
the goal; it cannot be the way. Hence, from the sta ndpoint of the seeker, 
karmayoga is superior and preferable to sannyasa . 
29. By the same reasoning the Lord has, in the Twelfth Chapter, said that 
saguna  is preferable to nirguna. 12  All the organs can be put to use in saguna  
sadhana ;13  it is not so in the nirguna sadhana where there is no work for the 
organs. This is difficult for a seeker to follow. I n saguna sadhana , eyes can 
behold the Lord’s form, ears can hear His praise, h ands can worship Him (in the 
form of an idol) and serve the people, feet can be used to go on a  pilgrimage. 
In this way, all the organs can be given some work;  putting them to such use, 
they can be gradually saturated with the divine con sciousness. This is possible 
in saguna sadhana , not in the nirguna  one where there is no use for any organ; Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70  there is, as it were, a ban on the use of all the o rgans. Such a blanket ban 
could very well frighten the seeker. How can then nirguna  get imprinted on his 
mind?  If he sits still, his mind will get filled w ith all sorts of useless and 
untoward thoughts. The nature of the sense-organs i s such that they invariably 
tend to do what they are told not to do. Do not the  advertisements exploit this 
very fact?  They start with the headline: ‘Don’t re ad this’. So the reader is 
intrigued and invariably reads what follows. That i s the very purpose of the 
advertisements—to induce the people to read their c ontents attentively. In 
nirguna sadhana , the mind will wander aimlessly, while in saguna  bhakti  it will 
be engaged in something or the other.  In saguna  bhakti , there is place for 
worship, service, compassion. The organs have somet hing to do in it. If the 
organs are so engaged, the mind will not go anywher e even if given freedom to 
do so; it will get interested in the activities and  will automatically get 
concentrated without even being aware of it. But if  you try to concentrate the 
mind forcibly, it will run away in no time. It is, therefore, better to engage the 
organs in some good work and let the mind go anywhe re; it will not do so. But 
if you try to force it to be still in one place, it  will invariably run away. 
30. Saguna  is superior to nirguna  for a man encased in the body, because it is 
easy. The ingenuity in seeing that the actions leav e no trace on the mind even 
while continuing to do them is better than doing wo rk without acting, because 
it is easier. In karmayoga  there is scope for efforts and practice. In it one  can 
control the organs and then try to withdraw the min d from all the activities 
gradually. This effort can succeed some day, even i f it is not immediately 
possible. Karmayoga is thus easier to follow. It is its special plus po int. 
Otherwise karmayoga and sannyasa are one and the same in their perfect 
states. In karmayoga,  hectic activity appears on the surface but there i s perfect 
peace within, while in sannyasa  there is power of moving the whole world 
without doing anything. Thus both are not what they  appear to be. Perfect 
karmayoga  is sannyasa  and perfect sannyasa  is karmayoga ; there is no 
difference; but karmayoga is easier for a seeker to follow. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71  31. Changdeva sent a letter to Jnanadeva. It was nothin g but a piece of blank 
paper, as he could not make up his mind on how to a ddress Jnandeva; 
Jnanadeva was much younger in years but superior in  wisdom. Should he 
address him respectfully as one addresses an elder or as one addresses a 
younger person?  Unable to decide, he sent the  bla nk letter. It first reached 
the hands of Nivrittinath. He ‘read’ it and passed it on to Jnanadeva who too 
‘read’ it and passed it on to Muktabai, their young est sister. Reading the letter, 
Muktabai exclaimed, “Hey, Changdeva, you are so old , but still you are 
blank 14 !”  Nivrittinath had read something different in th at letter. He said, 
“Yes, Changdeva is blank, which means that he is pu re and innocent, and 
therefore deserves to be taught.” So he asked Jnana deva to send a reply to this 
letter. Jnanadeva sent a letter comprising 65 small  stanzas. This letter is 
therefore called ‘Changdeva Pasashti.’15  Such is the charming story of this 
letter. It is easy to read written words, but diffi cult to read what is not 
written. There is no end to reading it. A sannyasi  appears to be empty and 
blank, but he is full of infinite work. 
32. Although sannyasa  and karmayoga  are of equal worth in their perfect 
states, karmayoga  has an additional practical value. A currency note  and a gold 
coin of the same denomination have the same value a s long as the government 
is stable; but if the government collapses, the cur rency note is reduced to a 
paper whereas the gold coin will have some worth un der all circumstances as it 
is, after all, made of a precious metal. In the per fect state,  karmayoga  (action) 
and renunciation of action have the same value as S elf-knowledge is there in 
both of them. Value of Self-knowledge is infinite. In mathematics there is a 
principle that you may add any quantity to infinity , the total remains equal to 
infinity. Karmayoga and renunciation of karma are of equal value when coupled 
with Self-knowledge, but when Self-knowledge is del eted from both the sides, 
karmayoga  is preferable for a seeker. Action through inactio n is a riddle beyond 
the understanding of the seeker.  Karmayoga , as already said, is a path as well 
as the destination while sannyasa  is only the destination. In the terminology of 
the scriptures, karmayoga  is a means as well as the nishtha  while sannyasa  is 
only the nishtha , that is, the ultimate state.  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72  (20.3.32)  
 
References:  
1. Samsara , in fact, is untranslatable in English.  It includ es the whole of man's this-
wordly life and affairs in the material world in wh ich he is totally immersed and to 
which he is attached.  The term has to be understoo d contextually. 
2. Reference is to a custom named ' ushtavan ' prevalent in Maharashtra. 
3. A great grammarian of ancient India. 
4. Chapter 11 of the Gita describes the transfiguratio n of Lord Krishna into vishwaroop , 
i.e. the supreme, divine cosmic form. 
5. One of the six systems of Indian philosophy.  It is  divided into two parts: 
Poorvamimamsa and Uttaramimamsa.  The former is usu ally referred to as 
Mimamsa.  It deals with the interpretation of the r ituals in the Veda. 
6. In the Indian tradition, having a guru  (a master) was considered a must for spiritual 
seekers to guide them. 
7. Ashram  here means a hermitage, a dwelling of ascetics. 
8. A man who has attained Self-Knowledge sees that all  things in the world are different 
forms of the same single substance.  Shuka has used  the word 'sugar' to indicate that 
substance. 
9. A great religious and spiritual epic, said to be wr itten by Vyasa. 
10. Here it means bringing the people together, holding  them together and guiding them 
along the path of virtue and righteousness. 
11. Elder brother and guru  of saint Jnandeva. 
12. 'Saguna ' means 'with attributes' while ' nirguna ' means 'without attributes'.  These are 
two aspects of Brahman , or God, who could be saguna  (Personal God with attributes) 
as well as nirguna  (Impersonal, Unmanifest and Absolute).  Saguna sadhana  or bhakti  
includes service and idol-worship.  Brahman  can also be ' sakar ' (with form) as well as 
'nirakar ' (formless).  Different religions and traditions b elieve in one or more of these 
aspects.  For example, for an idol-worshipper devot ee, God is saguna  as well as 
sakar .  In Islam, God is saguna  but nirakar . 
13. Sadhana  means spiritual pursuit, i.e. efforts for Self-Rea lisation or attainment of 
Self-Knowledge. 
14. Implying thereby that he had yet to acquire true kn owledge. 
15. Pasasht means 65.  
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73   
CHAPTER 6 
CONTROL OF THE MIND  
25. Aspiration For Redemption Of The Self  
1. In the Fifth Chapter, we could conceive and visuali ze the highest possible 
flight of the human spirit. Karma , vikarma and akarma  together complete 
sadhana . Karma  is gross in nature. There should be full cooperati on from the 
mind in the work done in the pursuit of swadharma . Vikarma is the work done 
to educate the mind for this purpose. It is a speci al kind of karma , a sort of 
subtle karma . Karma and vikarma , both are necessary. While doing them, 
ground is prepared for akarma . We have seen in the last Chapter that karma 
and sannyasa  become one in the state of akarma . It has been restated at the 
beginning of this Chapter that karmayoga and sannyasa , although their 
standpoints appear different, are one and the same.  Difference lies only in the 
way of looking at things. The Chapters that follow deal with the means to reach 
the state described in the Fifth Chapter. 
2. Many people have a misconception that spirituality and spiritual texts like 
the Gita are meant only for ascetics. I once heard a gentleman commenting 
that he was ‘not an ascetic’, which implies that as cetics belong to a particular 
species of animals like horses, lions, bears, cows etc. and spirituality is meant 
only for them; others engaged in mundane affairs be long to a different 
category with thoughts and ways of their own!  This  distinction has led to a 
hiatus between ascetics and the worldly men. Lokman ya Tilak has drawn our 
attention to this in his ‘Gita-Rahasya’. I whole he artedly endorse Tilak’s view 
that the Gita is for ordinary people engaged in wor ldly life. In fact, the Gita is 
for the whole world. All the practices and means ad opted in the course of the 
spiritual pursuit are meant to be followed by every one. Spirituality, in fact, 
teaches how daily life can be purified, leading to contentment and peace of 
mind. The Gita is meant to teach us how worldly lif e can be purified. At 
whatever level you may be engaged in the world of p ractical affairs, the Gita 
comes to you. But it does not want you to remain th ere. Holding your hand, it Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74  will take you to the ultimate destination (Self-rea lisation). There is a famous 
saying that ‘If the mountain does not come to Moham med, Mohammed will go 
to the mountain’. Mohammed is anxious to see that e ven an inert mountain 
receives his message. The mountain is inert; so Moh ammed would not keep 
waiting for it to come to him. This is also true wi th the Gita. It will come to the 
lowliest of the low, to the poor and the weak and t he ignorant, not to keep 
them in that state, but to grasp them by their hand s and lift them up. Its only 
desire is that man should purify his daily life and  reach the ultimate state, the 
final destination. In fact, this is the very aim an d object of the Gita. 
3. Therefore, never consider yourself a mundane ordina ry  being caught up in 
samsara , never raise a fence around you confining yourself  to where you are. 
Do not say with despair, ‘What can I do? This body measuring three and a half 
cubits is all that I am.’ Do not remain in the pris on of your own making and lead 
a beast-like existence. Gear up your spirit to move  ahead, to rise higher and 
higher. ‘ उ᭟दरेदा᭜मना᭜मानं ना᭜मानमवसादयेत् । ’ (‘Let a man raise himself by his 
own Self, let him not debase himself.’) Have confid ence that you would 
certainly raise yourself to great heights. Do not w eaken the power of your mind 
by thinking that you are a worthless worldly creatu re. Do not clip the wings of 
vision; let your vision be broad. Look at the skyla rk. Early in the morning, as 
the sun rises, the skylark sees the sun and boldly says, ‘I will soar high in the 
sky and reach the sun.’ That should be the spirit. Can the skylark ever reach 
the sun with its weak wings?  But its imagination c an certainly take it there. 
Our behaviour, however, is just the opposite. We cr ipple our imagination and 
erect a fence around us. We therefore do not rise e ven to the extent we can; 
not only that, we become the cause of our own downf all. By underestimating 
our strength, we lose whatever strength we have. Wh en imagination is 
crippled, we are sure to fall; what else can happen ? Therefore, we should 
always aspire to rise higher and higher. It is aspi ration that ensures man’s 
progress in life. Do not, therefore, throttle it. D o not whine, ‘One should never 
leave the beaten track of worldly life and wander h ere and there.’ Do not insult 
your Self. A seeker can persevere in his course onl y if he has vision and Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75  confidence. That is the key to liberation. Do not t hink that dharma  is only for 
the saints, and that one may go to them only to get  a certificate from them 
that ‘under the given circumstances, what you are d oing is right for you.’ Do 
not entertain such ideas and bind yourself. One can not take a single step 
forward without high aspirations. 
If you have this vision, this aspiration, this exal ted spirit, then only the 
question of appropriate means arises; otherwise eve rything will reach a dead 
end. 
We saw that vikarma  coupled with karma  leads to the divine state of akarma . 
We dealt with the divine state of akarma  and its types in the Fifth Chapter. 
From this Chapter onwards, various types of vikarma , the varieties of 
sadhana  have been outlined. Before embarking on this exerc ise, the Gita 
exhorts us to have divine aspirations, to keep the mind free and wings strong, 
so that the jiva  (the lower self) can become one with God, i.e., un ite with the 
Supreme Self. Devotion,  meditation, development of  virtues, enquiry and 
analysis, discrimination between the Self and the n ot-Self—all these are 
different types of vikarma  or spiritual discipline. This Chapter discusses th e 
yoga  of meditation. 
 
26. One-Pointedness Of Mind  
4. The yoga of meditation  consists chiefly of three important components: 
(i) One-pointedness of mind (ii) Moderation and reg ulation in life to help attain 
one-pointedness (iii) Equanimity and evenness in ou tlook. A true spiritual quest 
is not possible without these three things.  
One-pointedness of mind requires that the mind be r estrained and its fickleness 
controlled. Moderation and regulation in life impli es doing everything in a 
measured way and within proper limits. Equanimity a nd evenness in outlook 
means having a positive and constructive outlook. T hese three together make 
up the  yoga of meditation. There are two means to achieve these  three—Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76  abhyasa  (constant practice) and vairagya  (non-attachment). Let us discuss 
these five in brief. 
5. Let us first take one-pointedness of mind. It is in dispensable for any work. 
Even in worldly affairs, one needs concentration. I t is not that the qualities 
needed for worldly success are different from those  needed for spiritual 
progress. Spirituality means nothing but purificati on of worldly life. Business, 
scientific research, politics, diplomacy—in fact, t ake any activity, 
concentration of mind is the key to success. It is said of Napoleon that after 
chalking out the strategy and deploying the troops on the battlefield, he would 
lose himself in solving mathematical problems. Amid st heavy shelling and dying 
soldiers, he would sit absorbed in those problems. I am not suggesting that 
Napoleon’s concentration was of the highest degree;  one can give examples of 
even higher concentration. I just want to draw your  attention to the level of his 
concentration. The same thing is said about Caliph Omar. Even when the battle 
was in progress, he would steady his mind, kneel do wn and start praying on the 
battlefield at the appointed hour. He would then be  totally unaware of what 
was happening around. It was on account of such dev otion and one-pointedness 
of mind of the early Mahomedans that Islam spread f ar and wide. 
6. The other day, I heard a story about a Muslim ascet ic. An arrow had 
pierced and stuck into his body. The pain was unbea rable. But any attempt to 
pull out the arrow resulted only in greater pain. A nesthetic agents like 
chloroform were not available in those days. Everyb ody was perplexed. Some 
persons who knew the ascetic well said, “Forget abo ut the arrow for the time 
being. We shall pull it out when he starts his pray ers.” In the evening, at the 
appointed hour, the ascetic started his prayers. In  a moment, his mind was so 
concentrated that he did not know when the arrow wa s pulled out. What a 
wonderful degree of the concentration of mind! 
7. Thus, success is hard to come by, in temporal as we ll as in spiritual 
pursuits, without one-pointedness of mind. If you c ould make your mind one-
pointed, you will never be short of strength. Even if you are an old man of 
sixty, you will have the enthusiasm and strength of  a young man. The mind Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77  should, in fact, go on getting stronger as one gets  older. Look at a fruit. In the 
beginning it is raw, then it ripens, then decays; b ut the seed within gets harder 
and harder. The shell deteriorates and falls off; b ut that is not the essential 
part of the fruit. Its essential part is the seed. Similarly, memory should grow 
stronger and intellect should become sharper and mo re radiant as one ages. But 
this does not happen. People complain of failing me mory and attribute the 
cause to their old age. But knowledge, wisdom, memo ry are like one’s seed, 
one’s essential part. Even as the body grows older and becomes infirm, the soul 
should become stronger. One-pointedness of mind is necessary for this purpose.  
 
27. How To Attain One-Pointedness Of Mind?  
8. But how to attain it?  What should be done for it?  The Lord says, one 
should fix the mind in the Self and think of nothin g else. ‘ न ᳰकिᲱदिप िच᭠तयेत् । ’ 
But how to do this? To still the mind is extremely important. Concentration will 
always elude us if we do not forcefully stop the re volving wheels of thought. 
The ‘outer wheel’ may perhaps be stopped somehow—we  may put a stop to 
worldly activities—but the ‘inner wheel’ continues to revolve. As we go on 
employing different means for the concentration of mind, the ‘inner wheel’ 
revolves all the faster. You may sit in this or tha t posture and fix your gaze; by 
itself it will not achieve concentration of the min d. The important thing is that 
one must be able to stop the ‘inner wheel’. 
9. The mind is crowded with the thoughts of limitless samsara —affairs and 
happenings in the outside world. Concentration of t he mind is impossible until 
all those thoughts are put out. We dissipate the Se lf’s boundless potential 
power of knowing in brooding over worldly trifles. This must not happen. A man 
who has become rich, not by robbing others but thro ugh his own hard work, will 
never squander his money. We too should not waste t he Self’s power in gross 
and petty matters. This power can lead us to enligh tenment. It is our priceless 
treasure. But look, how we waste this power!  If we  find at the dining table 
that there is not enough salt in the vegetable, we grumble and complain about 
it. Is it that important?  We waste our power to kn ow on such petty matters. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78  Children are taught within the four walls of the cl ass-room. We are afraid that 
they would get distracted by the crows and the spar rows if they are taught in 
the open. Poor little children! Their minds can get  concentrated if they do not 
see a crow or a sparrow. But what about us?  We are  grown-ups! We have lost 
our innocence and have become worldly-wise, and the refore cannot 
concentrate our minds even if we are kept within a seven-walled fortress. We 
go on discussing merrily, each and every trivial ma tter in the world. We go on 
expending our power of thought, which can lead us t o the Lord, in discussing 
the taste of vegetables and pat ourselves on the ba ck for this feat! 
10. Day and night, this frightening samsara  is always surging around us, within 
and without. Even our prayers are for some material  gain. There is no longing 
to become one with the Lord, forgetting samsara at least for a moment. Our 
prayer is nothing but a show. When such is the ment al state, sitting cross-
legged and closing the eyes is bound to be in vain.  As the mind is disposed to 
get distracted all the time by the things without, a man’s strength is 
completely sapped. He loses any kind of discipline and controlling power. We 
are witnessing this state of affairs at every step in our country. Truly, India is a 
land of spirituality. It is believed that her peopl e live at the high altitude of 
spirituality. Still, how  pitiable is our condition !  It is painful to see us engaged 
in hair-splitting over trivial matters. Our minds a re always immersed in such 
matters.   
‘कथा पुराण एकतां । झोपᱶ नािडलᱶ तᱬवतां  
खाटेवरी पडतां । ᳞ापी ᳲचता तळमळ  
ऐसी गहन कमᭅगित । काय तयासी रडतᱭ ’ 
(‘While listening to the narration of epics and sto ries from mythology, sleep 
overtakes us; but when in bed, anxieties keep us aw ake. Such is the inscrutable 
way of karma —actions accumulated in the present and the earlier  lives. What is 
the use of shedding tears over it?’)  
The mind is either focused on nothing or is focused  on too many things at the 
same time, but it is never fixed on one single obje ct. Man is such a slave to the 
senses. Once a gentleman asked me, “Why is it said that the eyes should only Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 79  be half-open while meditating?”  I replied, “I give  you a simple answer. If the 
eyes are fully closed, one is likely to go to sleep  and if they are kept wide 
open, attention would be diverted and there would b e no concentration. 
Proneness to sleep when the eyes are closed is tamas and the diversion of 
attention when the eyes are open is rajas . Therefore, an intermediate state has 
been prescribed.” 
In short, there cannot be concentration of mind wit hout change in its 
disposition. The disposition of mind should be pure . This cannot be attained 
merely by sitting in particular postures. All our w orldly activities should be 
purified for this purpose. This requires a change i n the goal of those activities. 
We should not engage in them for our own personal g ains or for satisfying baser 
instincts and desires, or for any material purpose.  
11. The whole day, we are engaged in doing some or the other worldly 
activity. What is the purpose of all this toil?  ‘ याजसाठᱭ क े ला अᲵाहास । शेवटचा ᳰदस 
᭪हावा ।। ’ (‘All my persistent efforts were to make the last  moment happy.’) All 
the toil in this life is to be done to have the las t moment happy. Throughout 
life bitter poison is to be swallowed—suffering and  hardships are to be borne—
to have a calm, serene and holy end. The last momen t of the day comes in the 
evening. Had the activities throughout the day been  carried out with a pure 
heart, then the night prayer would be sweet, bringi ng a sense of contentment 
and fulfillment. If the last moment of the day is s weet, it means that the day’s 
work has been fruitful. Then the mind can easily ge t concentrated.  
Purity of life is essential for concentration. Mind  should never be preoccupied 
with worldly matters. A man’s life is not long, but  even in a short span of life 
he can experience the eternal, divine bliss. Two me n may appear to be cast in 
the same mould, but one of them becomes God-like wh ile the other sinks to the 
level of a beast. Why does it happen?  When all are  the children of God—‘ अवघी 
एकाचीच वीण ’—why is there such a difference? why does one ‘nara'1 become 
‘Narayan’ whereas the other becomes ‘vanara ’? Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 80  12. There have been men in the past who have shown what  great heights man 
can scale. Such men are there even now in our midst . This is a matter of 
experience. The saints have shown what a man can ac hieve even while 
remaining caged within the body. If some men can do  miraculous deeds while 
remaining within the body, why should it not be pos sible for me?  Why should I 
set bounds to my imagination?  I too possess the sa me human body, dwelling in 
which others have done heroic deeds. Why should the n I be in such a sad 
plight?  There must be something wrong with me. My mind is all the time 
focused on things outside. It is too preoccupied in  finding faults in others. But 
why should I judge others?  ‘ कासया गुणदेश पाहᲂ आिणकांचᱶ । मज काय ᭜यांचᱶ उणᱶ असे ।। ’  
 (‘Why should I be concerned with the virtues and v ices of others when I myself 
have them in abundance?’)  If I remain busy in obse rving and criticising the 
faults in others, how could I have concentration of  mind?  Then I am bound to 
be caught between rajas and  tamas —the mind will either wander aimlessly or it 
will go blank. 
It is true that the Lord has given suggestions abou t the sitting posture, the 
fixing of gaze etc. for attaining one-pointedness o f mind. But they could be 
useful only when one has realised the need of havin g one-pointedness of mind. 
Then one will seek and find for oneself the means t o attain it. 
 
28. Moderation And Regulation In Life  
13. One more thing that aids concentration is to set bo unds to one’s life. All 
our actions should be measured and weighed. This is  an essential characteristic 
of mathematics and it should be there in all our ac tions. As we take medicine in 
measured doses, so should be the case with our food  and sleep and, in fact, 
with everything. All the sense-organs should be und er strict vigil. We should be 
ever alert lest we should eat too much or sleep too  much, or have a roving eye. 
All our activities should thus be continuously exam ined with meticulous care. 
14. I once heard of a gentleman who, within a minute of  entering a room, 
would note what things are kept in it and where. I said to myself, “O Lord! May 
I never have such a faculty!”  Am I somebody’s pers onal secretary to keep in my Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 81  mind an inventory of his possessions, or am I a thi ef?  How does it concern me 
where he keeps his soap or his watch?  Why do I nee d such information?  We 
should prevent waywardness of our eyes; and of our ears too. Some people 
seem to feel that it would have been wonderful to h ave ears like a dog’s that 
could be turned in any direction at will. ‘God has not provided man with this 
facility,’ they rue. But no, excessive curiosity mu st not be there. The mind of a 
man is a very powerful thing. It is wayward too; it  gets distracted by the 
slightest disturbance. 
15. Therefore, there should be regulation and moderatio n in life. Let us not 
look at bad things. Let us not read bad books. Let us not listen to anybody’s 
slander or even praise. Let us turn away not only f rom bad things, but also from 
the excess of even good things. Indulgence in any f orm should be avoided. 
Things like liquor, sweetmeats or fried eatables sh ould no doubt be positively 
shunned, but even fruits should not be taken in exc ess. A fruitarian diet is 
certainly pure and healthy. But the fruits too shou ld not be taken in excessive 
quantities. The master within should never allow th e tongue to have its own 
way. The sense-organs should feel awe for the maste r within; they must ever 
be on guard and realise that if they misbehave, the y will be punished. 
Moderation and regulation in life means having a di sciplined and regulated life.  
 
29. Equanimity And Evenness In Outlook  
16. The third thing is to have equanimity and evenness in outlook. It means 
having an outlook infused with goodwill, a disposit ion to look at the positive 
side of men and matters. It implies faith in the go odness and order in the 
universe. There cannot be concentration of mind wit hout it. The lion is the 
mighty king of the forest and yet he does not take four steps forward without 
looking behind. How can the lion, that lives by vio lence, attain concentration 
of mind?  Tigers, crows and cats are always looking  here and there with 
apprehension. Such is the state of animals that are  violent. One should look at 
the world with a sense of equanimity. One should fe el that everything in the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 82  world is good, friendly and auspicious. Just as we trust ourselves, so should we 
trust the whole world. 
17. What, after all, have we to fear?  Everything is go od and sacred. ‘ िवशवं तद् 
भᮤं यदवि᭠त  देवाः ’—The universe is full of goodness, as God is looki ng after it, 
protecting it. The poet Browning has said in the si milar vein: ‘God’s in His 
heaven, all’s right with the world!’  
Nothing is really wrong with the world. If there is  wrong with something, it is 
with my vision. As is my vision, so is the world. I f I put on red-coloured glasses, 
the world is bound to appear red and aflame. 
18. When Saint Ramdas was writing the Ramayana, he used  to read it out to 
his disciples. It is said that Hanuman 2 used to come incognito to hear the same. 
Once Ramdas read out, “Hanuman went to Ashokvan 3. There he saw white 
flowers.”  Hearing this, Hanuman came forward and s aid, “I did not see white 
flowers. What I saw were red flowers. Please correc t what you have written.” 
Ramdas insisted, “No, what I have written is correc t. The flowers you saw were 
white.” Hanuman said, “I myself was there. How coul d I be wrong?”  Finally the 
dispute was taken to Lord Rama. He said, “The flowe rs were indeed white, but 
Hanuman’s eyes were red with anger; hence they appe ared red to him.”  The 
point of this charming story is that what the world  appears us to be, depends 
on the way we look at it. 
19. So long as we are not convinced that the world arou nd is good, our mind 
will not become one-pointed. As long as we think th at the world around is bad, 
we are bound to look around with suspicion. Poets e ulogise the freedom of 
birds. Let them become birds for a while; they woul d then know the worth of 
that freedom. A bird is never calm. Its neck is alw ays moving back and forth. It 
is always afraid of others. If you put a sparrow on  the seat for meditation, will 
its mind attain one-pointedness?  If I try to go ne ar a sparrow, it will 
immediately fly away, fearing that I may hurt it. H ow can those who entertain 
the frightful idea that the whole world is out to d estroy them can ever have 
peace of mind?  So long as a man thinks that he alo ne has to defend himself as 
everybody else is an enemy, he cannot attain one-po intedness of mind. An Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 83  outlook that treats everybody with equality and fai rness is the best means for 
attaining one-pointedness of mind. When you find go odness and benevolence all 
around, the mind will automatically attain peace. 
20. Take a grief-stricken man to a running stream of ri ver. The sight of clear, 
pure and peacefully flowing water will assuage his sorrow. He will forget his 
troubles. What gives the stream such healing power?   It is because of the 
manifestation of the benign power of God in that st ream. There is a beautiful 
description of the streams in the Veda: ‘ अित᳧᭠तीनाम् अिनवेशनानाम् ’—The stream 
flows without break, it has no resting place, no ho me of its own. It is like a 
sannyasi in this respect. Watching the flow of such a sacred  stream 
concentrates the mind in a moment. Should that stre am not motivate me to 
create a spring of love and wisdom within me? 
21. If the flowing water, which is part of the material  world, can bring such 
peace to my mind, imagine how much peace the mind w ould have if the stream 
of divine consciousness, devotion and wisdom begins  to flow through the valley 
of the mind. Once a friend of mine was travelling i n the Himalayas in Kashmir. 
He used to write to me about the holy mountains and  the beautiful streams 
there. I wrote to him, “Those holy mountains and th e streams and the winds 
blowing there give you immense joy. I can see and f eel all that within my 
heart. I daily view such marvellous scenes in the i nner recesses of my heart. 
Even if you invite me, I would not come there, leav ing the great and divine 
Himalaya within me. The Lord has said, ‘Among the f ixed and immovable 
things, I am the Himalaya.’4 The Himalaya is the symbol of steadfastness and 
should, in fact, be worshipped to imbibe that quali ty. What is then the point in 
forsaking the duty and rushing towards it, enamoure d by the description of its 
beauty?” 
22. So, calm the mind a bit. Look at the world with a p ositive and friendly 
eye. Then an infinite number of springs will begin to flow within your heart. 
Your inner firmament will be illuminated with the s tars of noble ideas. If 
auspicious objects made of stone or clay can bring peace to the mind, would 
not the vision of the inner world have this effect?   I had once been to 
Travancore (Kerala). One evening I was sitting on t he beach, silently listening Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 84  to the majestic roaring of the boundless sea. I was  just still, full of peace, lost 
in myself. My friend brought fruits for me. Absorbe d in another world, I felt 
distaste even for such a pure sattvik  food. The sea was as if chanting ॐ ॐ (Om, 
Om) remiding me of the Gita’s exhortation,□‘Remembe r Me and fight on.’5 That 
was what the sea was doing; it was ceaselessly doin g karma . Its waves were 
surging back and forth without a moment’s rest. Tha t sight had made me lose 
appetite for anything. What was there in that sea t o have such an effect?  If my 
heart could overflow with joy at the sight of waves  of salt-water, how 
ecstatically would I dance when the waves of wisdom  and love surge in my 
heart? Vedic seers had this experience in their hea rts. 
‘… अंतःसमुᮤे हᳰद अंतरायुिष  
….घृत᭭य धारा अिभचाकशीिम …. 
समुᮤादूᳶममᭅधुमानुदारत् ….’ 
(‘I am witnessing all around the streams of ghee 6 ... in the sea, within the 
heart, in all the living beings ... waves of sweetn ess are arising in the sea ...’) 
This divine language has non-plussed the commentato rs. What is meant by the 
streams of honey and ghee ?  But, how can there be streams of salt-water in m y 
heart?  It is bound to have waves of milk and ghee  and honey surging within it. 
 
30. A Child As Preceptor  
23. Learn to behold the surging waves of the sea within . Look up at the clear 
blue sky outside and make your mind pure and unsull ied like it. In fact, 
attaining one-pointedness of mind is a child’s play . It is the occupation of the 
mind in umpteen matters that is unnatural. Look int o the eyes of a child 
intently. He looks with a constant gaze, while you blink every few seconds. A 
child’s mind easily becomes one-pointed. If you sho w the greenery outside to a 
child, four or five months old, he will be absorbed  in observing it. Women, in 
fact, believe that such an intent observation of th e greenery causes the 
children’s stools to be green. It is as if all thei r senses come together in their 
eyes when they see. Any small thing can make a deep  impression on the minds Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 85  of children. Educationists say that what the childr en learn within the first three 
to four years is what is firmly imprinted on their minds. You may open any 
number of schools or colleges or any other institut ions to educate them; it is 
during the early years that real learning takes pla ce. I have been associated 
with education and I am getting increasingly convin ced that only the 
impressions formed in the early years prove to be i ndelible; subsequent formal 
education has little effect. That is nothing but ou ter polish. A soap can remove 
a stain; but can it wash off the black colour of sk in?  The impressions of the 
early years are likewise hard to remove.  
Why are these impressions strong and indelible and the subsequent ones weak?  
It is because a child’s mind gets concentrated effo rtlessly. Such is the 
wonderful power of the concentration of mind. Nothi ng is impossible for those 
who have achieved it. 
24. Today our whole life has become artificial. We have  lost childlike 
innocence. Life has become dull and joyless. Our be haviour lacks any rhyme or 
reason. It is not Darwin who proved that human bein gs are the descendants of 
apes; we ourselves are daily proving that through o ur actions! 
A child is trustful. He believes in everything that  the mother tells. He never 
questions the truth of even the fairy tales wherein  crows and sparrows speak 
like human beings. His mind can quickly become one- pointed because of such 
an attitude. 
 
31. Abhyasa (Constant Practice), Vairagya (Non-Attachment) And Faith  
25. In short, the yoga  of meditation  needs one-pointedness of mind, regulation 
and moderation in life and a friendly, fair and pos itive outlook. Two other aids 
have also been suggested: vairagya  (non-attachment) and abhyasa  (cultivation 
through constant practice). One is negative in natu re while the other is 
positive. Vairagya is akin to  uprooting weeds from a field. It is negative in 
nature. Abhyasa  is akin to sowing the seeds. To sow seeds is const ructive work. 
Abhyasa  is constructive. It involves rumination over pure thoughts. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 86  26. How could one imbibe vairagya ?  We say that a mango is sweet. But is 
sweetness really a quality of the mango?  No. Sweet ness is really an attribute of 
the Self, and a particular thing tastes sweet when it is infused with that 
sweetness. One should, therefore, learn to taste th e sweetness within. 
Sweetness is not in things themselves; it is in the  Self which is an ocean of 
sweetness. As this realisation sinks deep within us , vairagya will become 
ingrained in us. Sita gave Hanuman a pearl necklace . Hanuman cracked every 
pearl to see whether Lord Rama was within it. In no  pearl could he find Rama. 
So he threw away all the pearls. Rama was there in his heart. Fools would have 
gladly paid millions of rupees for that necklace. 
27. While explaining the yoga  of meditation, the Lord has made one important 
point at the very outset—one should make a firm res olve, ‘I want to redeem 
myself, I shall go ahead, I shall scale great heigh ts, I shall not remain within 
this human body for ever, I shall have the courage to make efforts to realise 
God.’ 
Listening to all this, Arjuna had a doubt. He said,  “I am no longer in the prime 
of my life and am destined to die soon. What is the n the use of spiritual 
pursuit?”  The Lord replied, “Yes, you will die. Bu t death is nothing but a long 
sleep. We sleep daily. Are we afraid of it?  On the  contrary, we are worried if 
we do not get sleep. Death is as necessary as the d aily sleep. We resume our 
daily work after waking up; likewise we resume our spiritual pursuit in the next 
birth from the very point we had reached at the tim e of death. We do not lose 
what we have already gained. No spiritual pursuit e ver goes waste.” 
28. Jnanadeva appears to be referring to his own life w hen he writes in 
‘Jnaneshwari’ on the concerned verses of the Gita e .g. ‘बालपणᱭच सवᭅ᭄ता । वरी 
तयाचे’ (‘All knowledge comes to him in childhood itself’ ),□‘सकल शाᳫᱶ ᭭वयंभᱶ । 
िनघतᱭ मुखᱶ’ (‘Words of spiritual wisdom come out of his mouth  of their own 
accord.’)  Abhyasa in the previous birth pulls you onward. That is why  some 
persons are not drawn to the objects of senses. The y are not tempted by them. 
This is because of their sadhana in the previous birth. The Lord has given an 
assurance at the end, ‘ शुभकारी क ु णी बापा दुगᭅतीस न जातसे । ’ (‘No well-doer ever Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 87  meets with a sad end.’) Good done is never wasted. One should have faith in 
this assurance. What remains incomplete in this lif e will be completed in the 
next one. Understand the essence of this teaching a nd attain fulfillment in life.  
(27.3.32)  
 
References:  
1. There is a pun on the word ' nara ' meaning man.  Narayan  means God and vanara  
means monkey. 
2. Hanuman, the devotee of Lord Rama, who helped Rama in his fight against Ravana, 
the demon-king of Lanka, is believed to be one amon g the seven immortal men.  So 
he could come there, even in the 17th Century. 
3. The ashoka-grove where Sita was confined by Ravana.  
4. Gita 10.25 
5. Gita 8.7 
6. Clarified butter, obtained after heating the butter . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 88   
CHAPTER 7 
PRAPATTI  OR SURRENDER TO GOD  
32. The Magnificent Vision Of Bhakti 
1. Brothers, Arjuna, deluded by the sense of ‘mine’ an d ‘not mine’, was 
seeking ways to evade swadharma when the situation demanded adherence to 
it. The First Chapter describes his vain delusion. The Second Chapter sets out to 
remove it. It states three basic principles: the Se lf is imperishable and has an 
all-encompassing presence, the body is transient an d mortal, and  swadharma 
should never be given up. It also spells out the id ea of renunciation of the fruit 
of actions as a key to realise these principles. Wh ile expounding this 
karmayoga , three concepts have emerged— karma , vikarma  and akarma . In the 
Fifth Chapter, we have seen two types of akarma  which result from the 
confluence of karma  and vikarma . From the Sixth Chapter onwards different 
types of vikarma are being explained. The Sixth Chapter tells about one-
pointedness of mind necessary for spiritual pursuit . 
Today, we are going to deal with the Seventh Chapte r. This Chapter opens 
before us the gallery of a magnificent new  vikarma . Moving through the broad 
expanse of a forest, the temple of the Goddess of n ature, we are enthralled by 
a great many captivating scenes. It is the same wit h the Gita. It now unfolds 
before us a new vista.  
2. Even before unfolding this vista, the Lord reveals the secret of the 
structure of this world which creates illusions. An  artist paints a variety of 
pictures on the same type of paper and with the sam e brush. A sitarist1 creates 
different ragas 2 out of the same seven notes. In literature, a vari ety of 
thoughts,  ideas and feelings are expressed through  a few letters of the 
alphabet. Same is the case with the creation. We fi nd in it innumerable objects 
and propensities. But all of them are products of o nly two things—the eternal 
Self and the eight-fold prakriti .3 The anger of the angry man, the love of the 
lover, the agony of the sufferer, the happiness of the happy one, the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 89  drowsiness of the idler, the activity of the indust rious man—all these are 
manifestations of one and the same Cosmic energy. T hese different emotions 
and urges, although they are often contrary to each  other, spring from the 
same source. As the Cosmic energy within is one and  the same in all, the outer 
bodily cover of all is also the same in nature. The  Lord is telling at the very 
outset that the conscient Self and the inconscient  prakriti are the twin sources 
from which all creation has come into being. 
3. The Self and the body, the higher and the lower prakriti  are the same 
everywhere. Why should then man be deluded?  Why sh ould he see differences 
instead of unity?  The face of someone whom we love  attracts us, whereas that 
of someone whom we dislike is found repulsive; we d esire to meet one person 
and shun the other. Why is it so?  Different pictur es drawn by the same artist 
with the same brush on the same paper evoke differe nt feelings. Therein lies 
the skill of the artist. The artist and the sitaris t have such a skill in their fingers 
that they make you laugh or cry. In their fingers l ies a magical power.  
We welcome someone while we shut the door in the ot her’s face. We embrace 
someone and push away the other. Such feelings aris e in the mind and, at 
times, deflect us from the path of duty. All this i s because of delusion. If we 
are to escape this, we should understand the secret  of the creative skill of the 
Creator’s fingers. Brihadaranyaka Upanishad gives t he analogy of a drum. A 
drum produces a variety of sounds. Some frighten us , some make us dance. If 
we are not to be swayed this way or that and remain  in full control of all such 
emotions, we must catch hold of the drummer. Then a ll the sounds of the drum 
would be under our control. The Lord declares, “Tho se who want to cross the 
river of maya  should take refuge in Me.4”  In the words of Jnanadeva— 
‘येथ एक िच लीला तरले । जे सवᭅभावᱶ मज भजले ।  
तयां ऐली िच थडी सरलᱶ । मायाजळ ’ (7.97) 
(‘Only those who worship me single-mindedly and wit h unswerving devotion can 
cross this river of maya . In fact, they need not have to cross it at all; f or them Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 90  the water of maya  dries up while they are at this bank itself—that i s, the 
mirage created by maya  disappears for them here and now.’) 
What is this maya ?  It is the Lord’s creative power, His art and His  skill. He 
created this world out of the single eternal Self a nd the eight-fold prakriti , or 
what the Jain terminology calls jiva  and ajiva . The Lord has created this 
variegated world out of these two elements; out of them He is ever creating all 
sorts of things. They evoke different sentiments an d responses. If we want to 
go beyond them and attain true inner peace, we shou ld reach out for the 
creator of them all. We should know Him. Only then can we get rid of the 
delusion that gives rise to divisions, antipathies and attachment. 
4. In this Seventh Chapter, the way of bhakti  is laid open before us to tell us 
about a singularly effective means, a great vikarma for knowing Him. To attain 
purity of mind, many vikarmas like yajna  (sacrifice), dana (sharing, charity), 
japa (prayer, repeating God’s Name), tapa  (penance), dhyana-dharana 
(meditation and concentration) are prescribed. I wo uld liken them to washing 
soda or soap, while bhakti is like water. Soap and washing soda are useful onl y 
in conjunction with water; by themselves they are o f no use. Water, on the 
other hand, can cleanse even without them, although  their aid does result in 
better cleansing. It is like adding sugar to milk. How can there be purity of 
mind if the heart and soul are not there in  yajna , mediatation, penance etc.? 
Bhakti is nothing but  such involvement of the heart and soul.  
All the vikarmas  stand in need of the aid of bhakti . It is the ultimate means. It 
is no doubt advisable that a man trained in nursing  and having knowledge of 
different remedies should be deputed to take care o f a patient; but if he lacks 
genuine empathy and compassion, he cannot render tr ue service. A bullock may 
be strong and stout, but it would not pull a cart i f it does not wish to. It will 
then refuse to step ahead and may even land the car t in a ditch. Work without 
involvement of heart and soul—without heartfelt emp athy and concern—can 
give neither satisfaction nor strength. 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 91  33. Bhakti  Results In Pure And Unalloyed Bliss  
5. If we have bhakti , we could see the art of that great artist; we cou ld see 
the brush with which He paints. Once we have reache d the source of all 
creation and have tasted the rare sweetness of wate r from the spring at the 
very source, we cannot but find all other things in sipid and worthless. A man 
who has tasted a real banana would appreciate the b eauty of a painted wooden 
banana for a moment, and then will put it aside. He  will not be much 
enamoured by it. A man who has tasted true joy woul d not be taken in by 
external pleasures in the material world.  
6. Once, some people told a philosopher, “Sir, there i s festive lighting of 
lamps in the city today. Let us go and watch it.” T he philosopher said, “What is 
it after all?  Only an arrangement of a lot of lamp s in rows, is it not?  I can 
visualize it from here itself.” In an arithmetical progression like 1+2+3...., 
figures can be written up to infinity. But there is  no need to write all the 
numbers if the difference between two succeeding nu mbers is known. Likewise 
one can visualize the arrangement of lamps in rows.  What is there to be so 
excited about it?  But man does enjoy such things. He squeezes a lemon in 
water, adds sugar, sips the drink and smacks his li ps in delight!  It is as if the 
tongue has nothing else to do than to taste differe nt things. From different 
ingredients man creates a variety of food products and finds all the pleasure in 
eating them!  When I was a child, I once went to se e a movie. I had taken a mat 
with me so that I could go to sleep whenever I want ed. I could watch the 
dazzling pictures barely for a few moments. My eyes  got tired and I went to 
sleep, asking my companion to wake me up when the s how was over. Instead of 
going out in the open and watching the moon and the  stars and enjoying the 
peace and serenity of nature, people go to congeste d theatres and excitedly 
applaud the dance of the bright moving pictures the re. I just failed to 
understand that! 
7. Why is man so devoid of joy that he seeks and finds  some sort of 
momentary and illusory joy in the dance of those li feless figures?  Evidently, 
there is no real joy in life; that is why people go  in for such artificial Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 92  amusements. Once I heard drums beating next door. O n enquiry, I learnt that it 
was to celebrate the birth of a son. Now, what is t here so special about it that 
it should be announced to the world with the beat o f drums?  People even 
dance with joy and invite singers to sing on such o ccasions. Is it not childish?  It 
is as if the world is famished of joy. Just as in t he famine people rush in a 
frenzy at the sight of a few eatables, they jump at  the slightest opportunity 
like the birth of a child or a cinema or a circus s how, because they are starved 
of joy. 
But is this true joy?  Waves of music enter the ear s and strike the brain. 
Different forms enter the eyes and strike the brain . The impact of such 
sensations is the only source of joy for the poor f ellows. Some stuff their noses 
with snuff, some smoke tobacco, and the kick they g et thereby is a source of 
tremendous joy to them. Their joy knows no bounds w hen they lay their hands 
on a cigarette butt!  Tolstoy has written that a ma n may even commit murder 
under the influence of tobacco.  It too is a kind o f intoxication. 
Why does man lose himself in such pleasures?  Not k nowing the real thing, he is 
infatuated with the shadows. His pleasures are conf ined to those derived from 
the five senses. Had he got a sense-organ less, he would have thought that 
there are only four types of pleasures. If tomorrow  a man with six sense-organs 
comes down from Mars, such people would feel deject ed at the thought that 
they can have pleasure only from five sense-organs instead of six and envying 
the man from Mars they would exclaim, “What a handi cap we human beings on 
the earth suffer from!” 
How can man, with just five senses comprehend fully  the meaning of 
creation in all its aspects?  Restricted to five se nses, he makes his choices 
within those limits and derives joy from what the s enses offer him. He 
considers the braying of a donkey inauspicious. But  is it not possible that an 
encounter with a man could be equally inauspicious for a donkey?  You think 
that its braying will spoil or harm something that you are going to do. But is it 
not true that you could also be causing harm to oth ers?  When I was a student 
at Baroda, a group of European singers once came to  our college. They were Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 93  good singers and were trying their best. But I, bei ng thoroughly bored, was 
waiting for an opportunity to slip out. I was not u sed to listening to that sort of 
music. I could not appreciate it. Singers from our country may face a similar 
response in Europe. What is sweet music to the ears  of one is just noise for the 
other. It means that the joy it gives is not real j oy; it is an illusory joy. Until we 
experience real joy, such illusory joy would enthra ll us. So long as he had not 
tasted real milk, Aswatthama 5 used to drink water mixed with grain flour, 
believing it to be milk. Once the true nature of th ings is revealed to you and 
you experience the true joy therein, everything els e will pale into 
insignificance. 
8.  Bhakti  is the best way to discover true joy. As we advanc e on this path, 
we shall discover the ingenuity of the Creator. Onc e we have grasped that 
divine vision, attraction for other fancies will re cede. Then nothing trivial will 
attract us. The whole world will then be found fill ed with one undifferentiated 
joy. There may be hundreds of sweetmeat shops, but the sweets they sell are 
of the same kind. So long as we have not tasted the  real thing, we go on 
pecking a sweetmeat here and a sweetmeat there like  restless sparrows, and 
still remain unsatisfied. Once I was reading Tulsid as’ Ramayana in the early 
morning hours. Moths had gathered near the lamp. A house-lizard came there. 
What interest it could have in the Ramayana?  It wa s happy at the sight of the 
moths. I waved it away when it was about to pounce on a moth, but its 
attention was still riveted on that moth. I asked m yself, “Would you eat a 
moth?  Does your mouth water at its sight?”  The si ght of a moth was not 
mouth-watering for me; and the house-lizard had no inkling of the great joy in 
the Ramayana. It could not taste the sweetness of t he Ramayana. Our condition 
is like that house-lizard. We are engaged in a mult itude of enjoyments; but how 
nice will it be if we could taste true joy!  The Lo rd has shown us the way of 
bhakti as the means to taste true joy.  
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 94  34. Bhakti  For Gains Too Has Value  
9. The Lord has mentioned three kinds of devotees (bhaktas) : (i) one who has 
desire for some worldly gains. (ii) one who is desi reless, but whose bhakti  has 
not blossomed fully. (iii) Jnani , or the man of wisdom, whose bhakti has 
blossomed fully. The second type consists of three sub-types: (i) one who is 
restless and impatient for God’s grace (ii) the see ker of knowledge (iii) the 
seeker of the well-being of all. These are differen t branches of the tree of  
bhakti . 
A devotee with desires in mind prays for some gains . I would not despise such 
bhakti, considering it inferior. Many people take to social  service to earn name 
and fame. What is wrong in it?  Give them honour un reservedly; there is no 
harm in it. That honour would eventually settle the m in social service. They 
would begin to find joy in their work. Why, after a ll, does a man desire 
recognition and honour?  It is because he is thereb y convinced about the utility 
and excellence of his work. One who has no inner ya rdstick to judge the worth 
of his service depends on such external yardsticks.  When a mother pats her 
child, the child gets enthused to do more work for her. This is also true for this 
type of bhakti . Such bhaktas  should straightway go to the Lord and ask Him to 
give what he wants. To make demands on God for ever ything is no ordinary 
thing; it is something rare. Jnanadeva asked Namdev a, “Will you accompany me 
on a pilgrimage?”  “But why go on a pilgrimage?”, a sked Namdeva. Jnanadeva 
replied, “We can thereby meet a number of saints an d ascetics.” Namdeva 
said, “Let me ask the Lord.” He went to the temple and stood before the Lord. 
With eyes rivetted on the Lord’s feet and tears flo wing down his cheeks, he 
asked, “O Lord! Should I go on a pilgrimage?”  Woul d you call Namdeva an 
idiot?  Not a few people are anguished by separatio n from their wives, but a 
bhakta  who weeps at the idea of going away from the Lord is out of the 
ordinary. Because of ignorance, he does not seek wh at he ideally should; but 
even then his bhakti  is not to be dismissed out of hand. 
10. Women take a number of vows with an idea of accumul ating merit so that 
they can have God’s grace after death. This may be a silly idea, but they do Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 95  undergo hardships willingly for that purpose. Great  men are born in families 
with such tradition of piety and devotion. Swami Ra mtirtha was a descendent 
of Tulsidas, the great scholar and poet. He was wel l-versed in the Persian 
language, but had no knowledge of Sanskrit. Someone  commented, “You are a 
descendent of Tulsidas; how is it that you do not k now Sanskrit?” This comment 
went straight to Ramtirtha’s heart. Reminder of anc estry had a powerful 
effect. It impelled Ramtirtha to take up the study of Sanskrit. We should not, 
therefore, make fun of the women’s ways of bhakti . Children born in families 
where tradition of bhakti  is built up have a rare brilliance. That is why th e Lord 
says, “Even if my bhakta  is desirous of some gains, I shall make his faith 
steadfast. I shall not create confusion in his mind . If he earnestly prays for the 
cure of his disease, I shall cure it, supporting hi s will to health. Whatever may 
bring him to Me, I shall lovingly encourage him.” W hen the child prince Dhruva 
was pushed aside from his father’s lap by his step- mother, his mother asked 
him to seek from the Lord a place from which nobody  could push him aside. 
Dhruva started penance in all earnestness. Pleased with his penance, the Lord 
granted him a permanent abode from which he could n ever be dislodged.6  The 
mind may not be desireless; so what?  To whom you a pproach, to whom you pray 
is important. It is important to have inclination t o beseech the Lord for 
something rather than prostrating before the world.  
11. Whatever be the ground, do enter the temple of bhakti . Your entry into it 
will mark a new beginning. Even if the desires are initially there, they will 
eventually fade away. In khadi  exhibitions the organisers urge people, “Please 
come and just have a look at the fine specimens of khadi available now.”  
People visit the exhibition, get impressed and star t thinking about wearing 
khadi . Similar is the case with bhakti . Once you enter the temple of bhakti , 
you will discover its power and beauty for yourself . 
When Dharmaraj  reached the gate of heaven, there was only a dog wi th him. 
All of his brothers—Bheema, Arjuna etc.—had fallen by the 
wayside.7 Dharmaraj was told at the entrance, “You are welco me; but not the 
dog.”  Dharmaraj said, “If my dog is not allowed to  enter, I too will not enter.” Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 96  Even a despised creature like a dog is superior to those who have inflated egos, 
if it is faithful and serves with total devotion. T he dog proved to be superior 
even to Bheema and Arjuna. Even an insect that move s towards God is greater 
than the worthies who have not turned towards Him. In the Shiva temples, 
there are images of Nandi, the bull. Everybody bows  before the Nandi also. It is 
not an ordinary bull; it is the Lord’s bull sitting  in front of Him. Hence it is 
superior to the most intelligent amongst men. Even an idiot with God in his 
heart deserves respect and adoration from the whole  world. 
12. Once I was travelling by a train. When it was passi ng over a bridge across 
the river Yamuna, a passenger, visibly charged with  emotions, threw a coin in 
the river. A rationalist sitting nearby commented, “The country is poor; still 
these people waste money in this way!”  I said, “Yo u have not understood the 
motivation of that man. Look at the feelings with w hich he threw that coin. Are 
they not worth even a farthing?  We may grant that the coin could have been 
utilized for a better purpose. But this devout man felt that God’s compassion 
itself was flowing in the form of the river and thr ew the coin as a mark of 
sacrifice. Has this feeling any place in your econo mics? Emotions welled up in 
that man’s heart at the sight of a river in the cou ntry. If you could appreciate 
this sentiment, I would rate you as a true lover of  the country.”  What, after 
all, does patriotism mean?  Does it have to do with  material betterment only?  
In fact, it is the height of patriotism to feel imp elled to offer one’s entire 
wealth to a great river in the country. What we cal l money or wealth—the 
pieces of yellow and white metal and the so-called precious stones produced 
from the secretions of the insects—is, in fact, onl y worthy of being offered to 
the river. Consider all that wealth as mere dust be fore the feet of the Lord. 
You may ask, ‘What is the relation between the rive r and the Lord’s feet?’  Has 
God a place in your scheme of things?  For you, riv er-water is nothing but the 
combination of oxygen and hydrogen; the sun is noth ing but a bigger-sized gas 
burner. You find nothing worthy of reverence therei n!  Should one then bow 
only before the bread and butter—things of narrow e conomic utility?  But what 
is a bread after all?  It is nothing but a sort of white clay. Why do you then 
relish it so much?  If divine presence is not felt in the rising sun or in a flowing Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 97  river, where else could it be felt?  The poet Words worth laments: ‘I used to 
dance at the sight of a rainbow. My heart used to o verflow with joy at that 
sight. Why does this not happen now?  Have I lost t he sweetness of my early 
life?’ 
In short, even bhakti  rooted in the desire for gains has great value. Th e feeling 
of devotion even in an ignorant man has a value of its own. That is why it can 
generate great power. No matter what sort of a pers on one is, whatever may 
be his worth, once he enters the portal of the Lord ’s mansion, he is redeemed. 
No matter what sort of wood is thrown into the fire , it burns. Bhakti  is an 
extraordinary way of sadhana . The Lord encourages bhakti even if it is 
accompanied with desires. In due course it will bec ome desireless and move 
towards perfection. 
 
35. Desireless Bhakti : Its Varieties And Fulfilment  
13. Sakaam bhakta  (a bhakta who has desire for some worldly gains) is one 
type of bhakta . Now let us have a look at the nishkaam bhakta  i.e. desireless 
bhakta . As we have seen, his bhakti  could either have blossomed fully or not. 
The latter type of bhakta  can be further categorized into three sub-types.  
The bhakta of the  first sub-type craves for the love of the Lord and cries for 
Him like Namdeva. He is restless and desperate to e mbrace the Lord and lay 
himself at His feet and have His love showered on h im. He examines every 
action of his to find out whether there is sincere yearning and love therein. 
14. The bhakta of the  second sub-type is a seeker of knowledge. Presently  
such seekers are rare in our country. Persons of th is type will risk their lives in 
trying again and again to climb Mount Everest and m ay perish in the attempt. 
Some may go on an expedition to the North Pole, not e down their observations 
and findings on a piece of paper and keep that piec e in a bottle for the 
posterity before embracing death. Some may descend into the womb of a 
volcano to learn more about it. But the Indians are  so scared of death!  Taking 
care of the family is for them the greatest achieve ment; they have nothing Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 98  better to do. The bhakta  who is a seeker of knowledge has an irrepressible and 
insatiable curiosity. He tries to know the nature a nd properties of everything. 
He too would eventually unite with the Lord. 
15. The bhakta of the  third sub-type  has been called ‘artharthi’ —one who 
seeks artha . Artha is commonly translated as money or wealth; but it r eally 
means welfare or well- being . Artharthi  bhakta judges everything in terms of 
the good of society. Whatever he writes, whatever h e speaks, whatever he 
does, he sees to it that it is for the good of the world. He dislikes useless or 
harmful activities.  He is indeed a great soul who is always concerned for the 
good of the whole world!  His joy lies solely in th e welfare of the world.  
Thus, the outlook of the first sub-type of the part ly-blossomed nishkaam bhakta  
is marked with love, that of the second sub-type wi th quest for knowledge and 
that of the third sub-type with concern for the wel l-being of all. 
16. All those belonging to these three sub-types  are no doubt desireless, but 
their approach is not holistic. They approach God e ither through work or 
through love or through knowledge . Lastly, about the fully-blossomed bhakta.  
He is a man of wisdom. Whatever he sees, he sees no thing but different forms 
of the Lord. In the handsome and the ugly, in the p rince and the pauper, in 
men and women, in birds and beasts—everywhere he ha s the sacred vision of 
God. Saint Tukaram’s prayer to the Lord was, ‘ नर नारी बाळे अवघा नारायण । ऐसᱶ माझᱶ मन 
करᱭ देवा ।। ’ (‘O Lord!  Orient my mind in such a way that I fi nd You alone in men 
and women and children.’)  
In Hinduism, there is worship of serpents, worship of an elephant-headed God 8, 
worship of even the trees. All this may appear sill y. But we find the height of 
such ‘madness’ in the fully blossomed bhakta . He sees God in everything, right 
from an insect or an ant to the sun and the moon, a nd his heart overflows with 
joy.  ‘ मग तया सुखा अंत नाहᱭ पार । आनंदᱶ सागर हेलावती । ’ (‘Then the bliss knows no 
bounds. The ocean of joy surges in the heart.’) 
You may say, if you like, that this magnificent div ine vision is an illusion; but 
such an illusion is the height of bliss and happine ss; it is a treasure of joy. In Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 99  the serenity and majesty of an ocean, the man of wi sdom sees the glory of the 
Lord. In a cow, he sees His tenderness. In earth, h e sees His forgiveness and the 
capacity to bear. He finds His purity in the clear sky, His grandeur and 
splendour in the sun and the moon and the stars, Hi s delicateness in flowers. 
Even in an evil man, he sees the Lord testing and t rying him. Thus he is 
constantly seeing Him everywhere. Doing so, one day , he ultimately merges 
into the Lord. 
(3.4.32)  
 
References:  
1. Sitar is a stringed Indian musical instrument. 
2. Modes of Indian classical music. 
3. 'Earth, water, fire, air, space, mind, reason and e go—these are the eight fold 
divisions of My Nature'—Gita 7.4.  The Sankhya  philosophy believes in two eternal 
principles: Prakriti  and Purusha .  Prakriti  is the primordial matter or material Nature 
which consists of three gunas  or constituents viz sattva , rajas  and tamas .  Purusha is 
the inactive, Pure conscience Being and it is witho ut gunas . 
4. Gita 7.14.  Maya  is the creative power of the Lord which creates il lusions.  It is maya  
which makes us forget that we are Divine.  It is th e veil that hides the Real from us. 
5. Ashwatthama was the son of Dronacharya, the teacher  of the Kauravas and Pandavas 
in the Mahabharata.  On account of acute poverty, h is mother used to give him, in 
the name of milk, grain flour mixed with water. 
6. Dhruva, according to this mythological story, becam e the pole-star which is still 
shining in the sky. 
7. Dharmaraj or Yudhishthir was the eldest among the P andavas.  After the great 
Mahabharata war, Pandavas ruled for a few years and  then proceeded to heaven.  
Lord Yama joined them on the way in the form of a d og.  During the journey, other 
Pandava brothers and queen Draupadi died on the way , as they were not fit to enter 
heaven. 
8. Ganapati, the elephant-headed God, the son of Lord Shiva, is the God of Knowledge.  
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 100   
CHAPTER 8 
SADHANA  FOR A HAPPY ENDING OF LIFE: THE YOGA  OF CONSTANCY  
36. Accumulation Of Good Samskaras 1 
1. Human life is full of various samskaras.  Innumerable actions are being 
continually done by us; there is really no end to t hem. Even if we take a 
superficial look and count the activities done duri ng twenty four hours of a 
day—eating, drinking, sitting, walking, working, wr iting, speaking, reading—
they would make a long list. Besides these, in the life there are various dreams, 
sentiments and perceptions like love and hate, hono ur and insult, joy and 
sorrow. All these make their impact on the mind and  shape a man’s personality 
and behaviour. Therefore, if somebody asks me to de fine life, I would say that 
life means an aggregate of accumulated samskaras.   
2. Samskaras  are good as well as bad, and both of them influenc e human life. 
We hardly remember our childhood days. Samskaras  from the former births are 
so completely erased that one wonders whether one h ad any previous birth at 
all. When we cannot remember even the childhood day s, why talk of previous 
births?  Let us, therefore, leave them aside and th ink only of this birth. Here 
also it is not that only those actions which we rem ember had taken place. 
Countless activities and the acquisition of informa tion and know-how of a great 
many things is continually taking place. In the end , most of them get erased 
leaving behind only a few samskaras . If we try to recollect at bed-time all that 
we did during the day, we fail to do so. Only the m ost prominent incidents 
come back before the mind’s eye. For example, if we  had a serious quarrel, we 
remember only that at night. That quarrel is the on ly thing in the day that is 
carried forward from that day in the account book o f our life. Important and 
conspicuous events leave strong impressions; the re st fade away. When we 
write a diary, we note therein only a few important  things. When we review 
the week, we note even less. While reviewing the mo nth, only the most 
important happenings during the month are remembere d. Many of those 
happenings too are omitted while reviewing the year . Thus very few things Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 101  remain in memory, and they form the samskaras . Most of the innumerable 
actions and much of what we have learnt ultimately fade away leaving only a 
small residue in the mind. Those actions and the in formation and know-how 
have done their work and disappeared. Only a few  samskaras remain, and these 
samskaras are our capital. That is our net gain from the busi ness of living. A 
trader keeps daily, monthly and annual accounts of income and expenditure 
and arrives at the figure of profit or loss. It is exactly the same with life. 
Addition and deletion of samskaras  goes on throughout the life, resulting finally 
in a small net balance. When the end of life comes near, the self begins to 
think of the gains in life. Looking back, it finds that these gains are few. This 
does not mean that all that one did and all that on e learnt have proved to be 
futile. They have certainly done their work. There could be thousands of 
transactions in a trader’s business, but a single f inal figure of either profit or 
loss is the net result. If there is a loss, his hea rt sinks. If there is a profit, he is 
happy.  
3. We too are in a similar position. If at the time of  death the mind craves for 
food, it is a clear indication of having spent the entire life in indulging the 
palate. Craving for food is then the only ‘achievem ent’ in life; it is the only 
capital that has been accumulated in this life. If a mother thinks of her child at 
the time of death, it shows that her attachment to her child is the strongest 
samskara  she has acquired in her life; whatever else she di d was secondary. In 
arithmetic there are problems of fractions where ad dition, subtraction, 
multiplication and division of big figures ultimate ly result in a small figure or 
even zero. Likewise, the entire life of man is an a rithmetical exercise wherein 
addition, subtraction, multiplication and division of numerous samskaras  goes 
on continuously and finally one strong samskara remains. That is the final 
answer of the equation of life. The thought that ar ises at the last moment in 
this life is the essence of the whole of one’s life ; it signifies what has been 
gained in this life.  
This essence should be sweet; the last moment shoul d be happy. A person 
should experience inner peace and fulfillment at th e time of death. It is for this Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 102  that one should endeavour throughout one’s life. Al l is well that ends well. We 
should fix the mind on this final answer while solv ing the problem of life. We 
should plan the life with this aim in view. In a ma thematical exercise, we have 
to keep the problem in mind and employ the appropri ate method to solve it. 
Our life should be oriented in such a way that, at the last moment we will have 
the samskara  we want.  Day and night, our whole attention shoul d be turned in 
that direction. 
 
37. Living With The Awareness Of Death  
4. The Eighth Chapter puts forward a thesis that the t hought uppermost in 
the mind at the time of death prevails over others in the next birth. When we 
start on a journey, we carry some provisions with u s to sustain us on our 
journey. The thought uppermost in the mind at the t ime of death, which is the 
essence of what has been earned in this life, is th e provision with which we 
start our journey in the next birth. We begin a new  day with the previous day’s 
gains in hand. Death is like a long sleep, after wh ich we begin a new life with 
the gains of the previous birth. End of this life i s the beginning of the next one. 
Hence one must always be aware of the inevitability  of death, while conducting 
oneself in this life. 
5. This is necessary also to enable us to face the dre ad of death and find 
ways and means to counter it. There is a story from  the life of Saint Eknath. A 
gentleman once asked him, “Sir, your life is so sim ple and pure. Why ours is not 
so?  You never lose your temper or quarrel with any body. How serene, pure and 
kind-hearted you are!”  Eknath said, “Leave me out for the time being. Let me 
tell you that I have come to know something about y ou. You are going to die 
after seven days.” Who would disbelieve Eknath?  On ly seven days of life left!  
The gentleman rushed to his home. He could think of  nothing else. He started 
entrusting his affairs to others and making prepara tions for the end. He was 
taken ill and got confined to bed. Six days passed.  On the seventh day, Eknath 
went to him and enquired, “How are you?”  The man r eplied, “Sir, I am about 
to leave this world.”  Eknath asked, “Well, how man y sins have you committed Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 103  in the last six days?  How many evil thoughts cross ed your mind?”  The 
gentleman replied, “Sir, where was the time for tha t?  Death was always there 
before my eyes.”  Eknath said, “Now you know the re ason why the lives of 
people like me are sinless.” How can the mind enter tain evil thoughts when 
death is standing before you, ready to pounce on yo u like a tiger?  Even for 
committing sin, the mind has to be relaxed. Constan t awareness of death is the 
means to be free from sin. If death is staring in t he face, who can muster up 
courage to commit sin? 
6. But man always evades the thought of death. The Fre nch philosopher 
Pascal has written a book titled ‘Pensees’ (Thought s). It contains his stray 
thoughts. He observes therein that although death i s always looking over our 
shoulders, we continually try to forget it; how to live with the awareness of 
death in the mind is never our concern. Man detests  even the very mention of 
the word ‘death’. If somebody utters this word whil e taking meals, he is 
immediately admonished. Nevertheless, we are contin ually moving towards 
death. Once you board a train to Mumbai, it is boun d to take you there even if 
you just keep sitting. The moment we are born, we h ave booked a ticket to the 
destination of death. Whether we run or keep sittin g, death is bound to come. 
Whether you think of it or not, you cannot avoid it . Whatever else may be 
uncertain, death is certain. The sun sets everyday,  taking away a portion from 
our life. Life is continually being gnawed at. It i s continually withering away. 
Still man takes no notice of it. Jnanadeva exclaims , ‘कौतुक ᳰदसतसे’ (How 
curious!). He wonders how man could be so thoughtle ss and unperturbed in 
such a situation. Man is so frightened of death tha t he cannot even bear the 
thought of it, and tries to evade it like an ostric h burying its head in the sand. 
Soldiers going to the front, play, dance or sing or  smoke to forget death. Pascal 
wonders how they lose themselves in eating and drin king, singing and dancing 
in order to forget death even when they see death e verywhere. 
7. We are all like those soldiers. We try to keep a sm iling face, apply creams 
to hide wrinkles, dye our greying hair. We are ceas elessly trying to brush aside 
the thought of death even though it is just around the corner. We talk about Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 104  anything but death. Ask a boy who has done his matr iculation about his future 
plans. He will reply, “Don’t ask me now; I have joi ned college just now.”  If you 
put the same question next year, he will reply, “Le t the second year of college 
pass. I shall think of the future thereafter.”  So it goes on. But should not one 
think of the future in advance?  One should plan th e next step beforehand; 
otherwise one will land oneself in a ditch. But the  student shirks this task. The 
education that the poor fellow receives is so full of darkness that he has little 
idea of what is in store for him. He refuses to vis ualize the future, since he sees 
only darkness ahead. But there is no escape from th e future; it is bound to 
catch him by the neck. 
8. The Professor of logic teaches in the college, “Man  is mortal. Socrates is a 
man. Therefore, Socrates is mortal.”  Why does he n ot give his own example?  
The Professor too is mortal. But he would not say, “All men are mortal. 
Therefore I, the Professor, am mortal and dear stud ents, you too are mortal.”  
He gives the example of Socrates, since Socrates is  already dead and is not 
there to protest howsoever we use his name!  Studen ts and teachers talk of the 
mortality of Socrates, but conveniently keep mum ab out their own. Perhaps 
they feel that they are fully secure from death. 
9. In this way, people everywhere are continually maki ng deliberate efforts 
to forget death. But does that ward off death?  It makes its presence felt when 
someone dear to us passes away. But still man does not think of death 
fearlessly and summon courage to overcome its chall enge. A deer chased by a 
tiger finally gets exhausted, although it is swift and agile. Death in the form of 
the tiger continues to pursue it. Imagine the condi tion of that poor creature. It 
cannot look at the tiger. It closes its eyes and bu ries its antlers and face in the 
ground and helplessly waits for death. We too canno t dare to look at death. But 
howsoever we may try, it is bound to pounce on us. 
10. And when death finally comes, man begins to take st ock of what he has in 
balance at the end of his life. A dull and lazy stu dent in the examination hall 
just looks here and there and whiles away his time.  Dear chap, is Saraswati, the 
Goddess of knowledge, going to come down from heave n to write answers for Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 105  you?  He keeps the answer-book blank or at best scr ibbles a few lines and 
submits it when the time is up. Our condition is no  different. But, keeping in 
mind that life ultimately ends in death, we must co nstantly practice throughout 
our life the means by which we can make the last mo ment pure, sacred and 
happy. From this very moment, we should be concerne d with having the best of 
the samskaras.  But who cares?  On the contrary, we are constantly  training 
ourselves in bad ways; we are constantly teaching o ur sense-organs to behave 
in a perverse and wayward fashion. The mind must be  trained in a different 
way. It should be led to what is good and should be  encouraged to get absorbed 
in it. The moment we realise that we have erred, we  should start taking 
corrective steps. Once we realise that we have made  a mistake, should we go 
on repeating it?  The moment you come to realise yo ur error is the moment of 
your rebirth. It should mark a new beginning in you r life. Look at it as the dawn 
of your new life. You are now truly awake. Now you should critically examine 
your life day and night. You should become alert le st you should slip again; lest 
you should go back to practising bad ways. 
11. A few years ago, I had gone to meet my grandmother.  She had grown quite 
old. She would say, “Vinya, I don’t remember things  these days. I go to fetch 
the ghee  but return empty-handed.”  But she could vividly d escribe an incident 
about her gold ornaments that had occurred fifty ye ars ago. She could not 
remember what had happened before five minutes, but  the strong samskara 
imprinted on the mind fifty years ago was still fre sh. What could the reason 
be?  She must have narrated the incident again and again. Hence it clung to her 
memory and became a part of her being. I said to my self, “O God!  Let grandma 
not remember her ornaments at least at the time of death!”  
 
38. ‘Ever Absorbed In That’  
12. How could something that is practised day and night  not stick to us?  Do 
not delude yourself by the story of Ajamila 2. To all appearances he was a 
sinner, but there was an undercurrent of virtue in his life. It surfaced at the 
moment of death. Do not, therefore, delude yourself  by imagining that you Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 106  could continue your sinful ways and still the Name of the Lord will be on your 
lips at the last moment. The mind has to be trained  and disciplined by 
strenuous practice right since childhood. It has to  be carefully ensured that 
good samskaras are imprinted on the mind one-by-one. Never have a careless 
and casual attitude. Do not ask, for example, why o ne should always get up 
early in the morning. If you give free rein to your  mind, you are bound to be 
caught in a snare. Then good samskaras  would surely elude you. Just like 
wealth and knowledge, samskaras have to be acquired bit-by-bit without 
wasting a moment. Therefore, see to it that the samskara  that is imprinted on 
the mind at every moment is good. If you utter a fo ul word, a bad samskara will 
be immediately imprinted on your mind. Every act of  ours is like the stroke of a 
chisel that shapes the block of stone of our life. Even if the day passes off well, 
evil thoughts surface in dreams. It is not that onl y recent thoughts surface in 
dreams; bad samskaras , imprinted on the mind inadvertently, may surface any 
time. Hence one must be ever vigilant even over lit tle things. A drowning man 
clutches even at a straw. We are drowning in the oc ean of samsara . Utterance 
of a few good words too can prove to be the life-li ne to save us. No good deed 
is ever wasted; it will save you. Therefore, even t he slightest of bad samskaras  
should be prevented. Always strive not to see anyth ing that could leave a bad 
samskara , never give an ear to abuse and revilement and kee p the speech free 
from foulness. If you are so conscious and alert, y ou will invariably be rewarded 
at the last moment. You shall become the master of life and death. 
13. To inculcate good and pure samskaras , one must always ruminate over 
noble thoughts. Let the hands be busy in doing pure  and good deeds. 
Remembrance of God within and performance of swadharma  without, hands 
engaged in service and vikarma in the mind—all this should continue day in and 
day out, without any lapse. Look at Gandhiji. He sp ins every day on his charkha 
(spinning wheel). He insists that everybody should spin daily. Why?  Will it not 
do if we spin for the cloth we need whenever it sui ts us?  But then that spinning 
would be a worldly activity done for a practical pu rpose, whereas there is 
spirituality in daily spinning. It reflects an urge  to do something for the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 107  country. That yarn daily links us to Daridranarayan —God in the form of the 
poor. Daily spinning is an affirmation of one’s fel lowship with Daridranarayan . 
14. If a doctor prescribes medicine to be taken daily i n particular doses, but 
we gulp it down all at once, will it serve the purp ose?  It will be plain stupidity. 
The body should be restored to health through daily  samskara of the medicine. 
The same holds good for life. Take the example of g radual abhishek 3 on the idol 
of Lord Shiva. It is my favourite illustration. I u sed to watch it everyday when I 
was a child. Two buckets of water might be tricklin g down drop by drop over 
the idol during twenty four hours. Why not pour two  bucketfuls of water all at 
once on the idol?  I got the reply to this at that time itself. Water must not be 
poured at once; it should trickle down drop by drop  uninterruptedly. That is 
what makes it an act of worship. There should be a continuous flow of the same 
samskaras  twenty four hours a day, every day, every year; ev en throughout the 
cycle of births and deaths. Each moment and each ho ur, each day and each 
night, each month and each year—even in each birth,  the same samskara  should 
be there. The divine stream of good samskaras  should flow in this way 
throughout our lives without interruption. Then onl y we can reach our 
destination and hoist our flag there. The stream of  samskaras  must flow in one 
single direction only. If the rainwater falling on a hill-top flows down the hill in 
several different directions, it does not form a ri ver; but if it flows in one single 
direction, it becomes a stream which gradually grow s in size, eventually 
becoming a river that finally reaches the sea. Wate r which takes one single 
direction reaches the sea while that which takes ma ny directions soon dries up 
and is lost. This also happens in the case of good samskaras . If they come and 
go, of what use are they?  Only when the stream of good samskaras  flows 
continually through life in one single direction, t hen death will be found to be a 
source of supreme bliss. A trekker who does not und uly linger in the way, does 
not yield to the temptations in the way and continu es to walk along the path, 
doggedly reaches the mountain-top, throws down all the load on his back and 
experiences the fresh breeze blowing there. The joy  that he experiences is 
beyond the imagination of others.  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 108   
39. ‘Day And Night, The Fight Goes On’  
15. In short, death will be a matter of joy when there is continuous 
performance of swadharma  outside while inwardly the mind is being purified 
through devotion etc., when the streams of vikarama  and karma flow within 
and without. That is why the Lord says, ‘ ᭥हणूिन सगळा काळ मज आठव झुंज तूं ’4  
(‘Remember Me all the time and fight’). He also ref ers to one who is ‘ever 
absorbed in that’—‘ सदा ᭜यांत िच रंगला । ’5  When love for the Lord pervades your 
whole being, when your whole life is informed with that love, you will then 
always rejoice in things sacred. Evil urges and ten dencies would never appear 
before you. Noble resolves and noble thoughts would  germinate in the mind and 
good deeds would follow naturally and effortlessly.  
16. It is true that good deeds become natural when one always remembers the 
Lord. But the Lord’s command is to keep on striving . Saint Tukaram says, ‘ राᮢी 
ᳰदवस आ᭥हां यु᭟दाचा ᮧसंग । ’  ‘अंतबाᭅ᳭ जग आिण मन ।। ’ (‘Day and night, we are 
required to fight with the world without and the mi nd within.’) This conflict is 
going on relentlessly. It is not that you will win every battle. One has to 
persevere till the end to win the war. It is the fi nal result of the war that 
counts. During the war we shall succeed and fail ma ny a times. But failure is no 
cause for dejection. When a stone breaks at the twe ntieth blow, it does not 
mean that the previous nineteen blows had been in v ain. In fact, they were 
preparing ground for the success of the twentieth b low. 
17. To feel dejected means to lose faith in God. God is  always there to 
support and protect you. Have faith in Him. To deve lop self-confidence in a 
child, the mother lets him wander here and there, b ut she keeps watch. She 
does not let him fall. If he starts tottering, she is there to lift him up in her 
arms. God too is watching you. He holds in His hand s the string of your life’s 
kite. Sometimes He pulls it taut while sometimes He  lets it loose; but be 
assured that He Himself is holding the string in Hi s hands. To teach swimming in 
a river, one end of a rope is tied to a tree on the  bank and the other end is tied Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 109  to the learner’s waist, and then he is thrown into the water. Trainers are there 
in the river to take care of him. The novice strugg les initially but, in the end, 
masters the art of swimming. God teaches us the art  of living in this way.  
 
40. Uttarayan And Dakshinayan  
18. So, if you continue striving day and night with all  the resources of the body 
and the mind at your command with faith in the Lord , the last moment will be 
extremely happy. You will have all the gods—that is , divine powers—on your 
side when the hour of death comes. This has been sa id at the end of this 
Chapter using a metaphor. Understand this metaphor properly. If at the time of 
one’s death fire is burning, the sun is shining, th e moon is waxing and there is a 
beautiful and cloudless sky of Uttarayan  (six months of the northern course of 
the sun), then one unites with the Brahman . But if at that time there is dense 
smoke, there is darkness within and without, the mo on is waning and there is a 
cloudy and dull sky of Dakshinayan  (six months of the southern course of the 
sun), he again gets caught in the cycle of births a nd deaths. 
19. This metaphor is puzzling to many. It tells that th e grace of the gods of 
fire (Agni), sun, moon and sky are necessary for a holy death. Fire symbolises 
karma  and yajna —work and sacrifice. The sacrificial fire must be b urning even 
at the time of death. Justice Ranade used to say, “ Blessed is the death which 
comes while one is performing one’s duties. I shall  be happy to die while 
reading, writing or doing something.”  This is what  the burning of sacrificial fire 
means. Working till the last breath signifies the g race of Agni, the god of fire. 
Grace of the sun-god keeps the intellect bright and  radiant till the end. Grace 
of the moon is indicated by the growth of pure and sacred feelings in the heart 
at the time of death, as the moon is the god of the  heart. Sacred feelings like 
love, devotion, enthusiasm, altruism, compassion et c. should wax and grow to 
fullness in the mind like the moon in the bright ha lf of the month. The grace of 
the sky means having the heart completely free from  the clouds of attachment. 
Gandhiji once said, “I am always talking of the spi nning wheel. I consider it 
sacred. But I must not have attachment even to it a t the last moment. He who Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 110  led me to the spinning wheel is fully capable of ta king its care. Now the 
spinning wheel has been taken up by many leading fi gures. I should now cease 
to worry about it and be ready to meet the Lord.”  Uttarayan  thus means 
freedom of the heart from the clouds of attachment.  
20. If death comes when a man’s body is engaged in serv ice till the last 
breath, pure sentiments have grown to fullness, the re is no trace of attachment 
in the heart and intellect is sharp and radiant, he  becomes one with God. To 
have such a supremely auspicious end, one must ever  be alert and continue to 
strive day and night. No impure and evil samskara  should be permitted in the 
mind even for a single moment. One must pray consta ntly to the Lord to have 
the necessary strength to achieve this. Again and a gain, one should remember 
His Name and meditate over His nature and essence.  
(10.4.32)  
 
References:  
1. Samskaras mean the imprints of actions, association s and experiences that remain 
indelibly engraved on our mind and mould our behavi our, personality and our world-
view. 
2. Ajamila led a life full of sin. At the time of deat h, he called his son Narayan (which is 
also a name of Lord Vishnu). Lord Vishnu, hearing h is name, rushed to Ajamila and 
redeemed him. 
3. Ceremonial bathing of the Lord's idol.  In the temp les of Lord Shiva, a pot having a 
hole at the bottom is hung over the idol of the Lor d.  It is filled with water.  Water 
trickles down drop by drop on the idol and bathes i t uninterruptedly. 
4. Gita 8.7 
5. 'Thinking of whatever state a man in the end casts his mortal frame aside, to that 
state does he accede, being ever absorbed in the th ought thereof'—Gita 8.6  
 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 111   
CHAPTER 9 
THE SOVEREIGN SCIENCE OF SERVICE TO HUMANITY: YOGA  OF SURRENDER  
41. Knowledge Through Direct Experience  
1. Brothers, I have a sore throat today and I doubt wh ether my voice could 
reach you. I am reminded here of an anecdote from t he life of Peshwa 
Madhavrao. That saintly man was on his death-bed. H e was acutely suffering 
from tuberculosis. His lungs were full of phlegm. I t is said that phlegm can be 
converted into dysentery. Madhavrao told his physic ian, “Please convert my 
phlegm into dysentery, so that I could take the Nam e of the Lord.” I too was 
praying to God today and He told me to speak as muc h as the throat permits. 
My intention in delivering these talks on the Gita is not to preach to anyone, 
although those who want to profit from them may sur ely do so. When I talk on 
the Gita, I do so to have the Lord’s Name on my lip s. 
2. What I am telling here has connection with the Nint h Chapter. This 
Chapter tells about the wonderful greatness of the Lord’s Name. It is at the 
centre of the Gita, which itself is at the centre o f the Mahabharata. For many 
reasons, this Chapter is considered particularly ho ly. It is said that when 
Jnanadeva bid farewell to the world and entered int o samadhi, 1 he was reciting 
this Chapter. Whenever I think of this Chapter, tea rs well up in my eyes and my 
heart dances with divine joy. How great is this gif t that Vyasa has given to us!  
Not only India but all of mankind is indebted to Vy asa for this gift. In fact, what 
the Lord told Arjuna was not something that could b e expressed in words; but 
Vyasa, moved by compassion, put it into Sanskrit ve rse. He revealed the secret 
wisdom through the medium of words. 
3. At the very outset, the Lord says that this greates t knowledge that 
liberates, this sovereign secret is something to be  directly experienced. This 
Chapter describes something that cannot be put into  words, but which has 
stood the test of experience. That is why it has be come exceedingly endearing. 
Saint Tulsidas has said,‘ को जानै को जैहै जमपुर को सुरपुर पर-धामको ; तुलिसᳲह बᱟत भलो Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 112  लागत जग जीवन रामगुलाम को । ’—What is the use of the stories of heaven that one  
can go to after death?  Who knows who will go to he aven and who to hell?  We 
are here to live only for a few days. Tulsidas says  that he is happy in spending 
these few days in the service of the Lord. This Cha pter describes the beauty 
and the sweetness of living in the service of the L ord. It tells about things 
which can be directly experienced in this body, see n directly with the eyes, 
enjoyed here and now in this life. When one eats ja ggery, one can directly 
experience its sweetness. This Chapter gives a tast e of sweetness in life that is 
totally surrendered to the Lord. It deals with the supreme knowledge that 
enables us to experience directly the sweetness in the life on this earth. This 
knowledge is otherwise most difficult to grasp, but  the Lord has revealed it 
here to all, made it accessible and comprehensible to all. 
 
42. The Easy Way  
4. The Gita is the essence of the Vedic religion—the r eligion that originated 
from the Vedas. The Vedas are considered to be the oldest among the ancient 
scriptures in the world. That is why the devout con sider it anadi  (having no 
beginning, existing from eternity). The Vedas are, therefore, held in great 
reverence. Even from the historical point of view, they are the oldest recorded 
expression of our ancient social mind. This written  record is far more valuable 
than the copper and stone inscriptions, coins, pots  and pans or animal fossils. 
The Vedas are the oldest historical documents. The religion that was in the 
form of a seed in the Vedas grew gradually into the  tree which finally produced 
the sweet divine fruit of the Gita. What else can w e have from a tree to eat 
than a fruit?  It is only when the tree bears fruit  that we can have something to 
eat. The Gita is the twice-distilled essence of the  Vedic religion. 
5. The ancient Vedic religion prescribed various rites  and rituals, yajnas , 
austerities and penances, different practices and v arious types of spiritual 
discipline. All these were not useless, but they ca lled for certain fitness; they 
were not open to all. Suppose I am hungry, and ther e is a coconut high up on 
the tree. How can I get it if I cannot climb the tr ee, pluck the coconut and Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 113  break it open?  Can the mere sight of the coconut s atisfy my hunger?  That 
coconut is of no use to me until I can have it in m y hands. The Vedic rites and 
rituals were based on subtle and significant ideas.  How could the common folk 
comprehend them?  Only the Vedic path could lead on e to moksha  (spiritual 
liberation), but only a few were entitled to follow  it. How could the others 
redeem themselves?  That was a predicament.  
6. The saints who had overflowing compassion for the m asses therefore came 
forward assertively and said, “Let us extract the e ssence of the Vedas and give 
it to the whole world.” That is why Saint Tukaram s aid, ‘ वेद अनंत बोिलला । अथᭅ 
इतुकािच सािधला । ’—‘There are innumerable teachings in the Vedas. Bu t all that 
boils down to this.’ To what?  To the Name of the L ord. That is the essence of 
the Vedas. The saints proclaimed that the Lord’s Na me can lead one to moksha . 
The door to moksha  was thus thrown wide open to all—to the women and the 
children, the workers and the peasants, the weak an d the ignorant, the sick 
and the handicapped. Moksha  that lay locked up in the Vedas was brought 
within the reach of everybody, thanks to the Lord H imself. A simple and easy 
way became available. Why cannot one’s ordinary day -to-day life, what one 
does as swadharma , one’s acts of service be infused with the spirit of yajna ?  
Where is the need for other complicated and elabora ted yajnas ?  Let your daily 
work itself be a yajna —let it be sacrificial in nature. 
7. This is the royal way. ‘ याना᭭थाय नरो राजन् न ᮧमा᳒ेत कᳲहिचत । धावि᳖मी᭨य वा नेᮢे 
न ᭭खले᳖ पतेᳰदह ।। ’—Even if you run on this road with closed eyes, th ere is no risk 
of stumbling or falling. The other way is like a sh arpened razor’s edge: ‘ ᭃुर᭭य 
धारा िनिशता दुर᭜यया । ’ The Vedic way is sharper than a sword’s edge and is thus 
extremely arduous. The way of devotion, the way of surrender and service to 
the Lord is easy. An engineer designs a road to the  hill-top in such a way that 
we have no feeling of having climbed such a height till we reach the top. 
Therein lies his skill. This royal way too is desig ned with such skill. By this way 
one can reach God, while remaining where one is, th rough performing one’s 
swadharma . Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 114  8. Is God hiding somewhere in a cave or in a river or in heaven?  Is He hidden 
somewhere just as diamonds and gold are in the womb  of the earth and pearls 
are in the depths of the sea?  Have we to dig Him u p from somewhere?  Not at 
all. All that is around us is nothing but God; He i s standing before all of us all 
the time. Everyone here is His image. The Lord is u rging us, “Please do not look 
down upon My image manifested in human forms.”  The  Lord, and the Lord 
alone, reveals Himself in everything animate and in animate. Where is then the 
need for devising artificial methods to seek and fi nd Him?  The way is straight 
and easy. Whatever work you do, do it in the spirit  of service and as a service 
to the Lord. Surrender totally to the Lord and be H is devoted and humble 
servant. The arduous Vedic path with its complex ri tes and rituals and the 
numerous yajnas  will no doubt take us towards moksha ; but the problem there 
is that the question of fitness arises there. Let u s have none of it. Just dedicate 
to Him whatever you do. Relate to Him every act of yours. This is what the 
Ninth Chapter tells us. Hence the bhaktas are extremely fond of this Chapter.  
 
43. No Problem Of Eligibility  
9. In the life of Lord Krishna, His childhood is parti cularly charming. 
Balkrishna (the child Krishna) has always been the object of special adoration 
and worship. He would go along with the cowherds to  graze cattle; He would 
eat and laugh and play with them. When they set out  to worship Indra 2, he 
asked them, “Has anybody seen Indra?  What do we ow e to him?  On the other 
hand, this Govardhan hill is here before our eyes. Cows graze on its slopes. 
Streams flow from it. It is better to worship it.” 3 Such things he taught them. 
To his cowherd companions, to their womenfolk, to t he cows and the calves 
whose company he enjoyed, to them all he opened the  door of spiritual 
liberation. Lord Krishna has thus shown through His  own life an easy way to 
moksha . He moved with cows in His childhood and with hors es when He grew 
up. On hearing the music of His flute, cows would g o into raptures. The horses 
would get thrilled as he stroked their backs. Those  cows and horses, belonging 
to the so-called lower species, would as if become one with Him and attain Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 115  spiritual liberation. Lord Krishna has thus shown t hat such liberation is not a 
prerogative of human beings only; even the birds an d the beasts can attain it. 
His life-story is a testimony to this fact. 
10. Vyasa too had the same experience. In fact, there i s an identity between 
Vyasa and Krishna. The quintessential message of th e lives of both is the same. 
Moksha depends neither on scholarship nor on performance o f rites and rituals. 
Plain, simple devotion is sufficient. We know of si mple devout women 
surpassing learned egotists in spiritual progress. If there is pure heart, 
innocence and faith, moksha is not difficult to attain. In the Mahabharata, 
there is a Chapter narrating a conversation between  King Janaka and Sulabha, 
an ordinary woman. Vyasa has depicted an incident w herein King Janaka goes 
for Self-knowledge to Sulabha. You may go on discus sing whether women have 
the right to study Vedas or not, but here we find S ulabha, an ordinary woman, 
imparting the knowledge of the Brahman  to Janaka, the great Emperor and 
scholar. Janaka was a learned man, but he was away from moksha . For that, 
Vyasa had made him fall at the feet of Sulabha. The  story of Tuladhar, the 
grocer, gives the same message. Jajali, a Brahmin  goes to him for Self-
knowledge. Tuladhar tells him, “All my knowledge co nsists in holding the scales 
perfectly even.” There is also a story of a hunter who used to kill animals and 
sell their flesh. That was his way of serving the s ociety. An egoistic ascetic was 
told by his guru (teacher) to go to that hunter for Self-knowledge. The ascetic 
wondered how a hunter could teach him. When he went  to the hunter, the 
latter was busy cutting up meat and cleaning the pi eces to put them up for 
sale. He told the ascetic, “I am doing my best to i nfuse my work with dharma 
to the extent possible. I pour my soul into this wo rk to the best of my capacity, 
and also serve my parents.” In the form of that hun ter, Vyasa has put before us 
an ideal. 
11. The Mahabharata narrates such stories about women a nd men of humble 
occupations specifically to make it abundantly clea r that the doors of  moksha  
are open to all. The Ninth Chapter affirms the same  point. The joy in serving 
the Lord can be found in that hunter’s life. Tukara m was a votary of non-Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 116  violence, but he has fondly described in appreciati ng terms the story of Sajan 
who attained moksha  through his work as a butcher. Elsewhere he has 
exclaimed with distress, “O God! What could be the fate of those who kill 
animals?”, but he has also described how the Lord h elped Sajan: ‘ सजन कसाया 
िवक ूं  लागे मास ’—The Lord helped Sajan the butcher in selling meat . Tukaram is 
telling that The Lord who honoured Narsi Mehta’s4 hundi , who fetched water for 
Eknath’s household, who became an untouchable serva nt for Damaji5, who 
helped Janabai, the maidservant, in household work,  helped Sajan the butcher 
too with the same love. The moral is that all our a ctivities should be linked to 
Him, dedicated to Him. Acts of service done with pu re heart and noble 
thoughts are essentially a form of yajna . 
 
44. Dedication Of The Fruit Of Actions To The Lord  
12. This is the special teaching of the Ninth Chapter. In this Chapter, there is a 
fascinating confluence of karmayoga  and bhaktiyoga.  Karmayoga  means doing 
work and renouncing its fruit. Work should be done with such an ingenuity that 
the mind remains untouched by attachment to its fru it. It is like planting a 
walnut tree. The walnut tree takes twenty five year s to yield fruit. One who 
plants it may not be able to eat its fruits. Still one must plant the tree and take 
care of it lovingly. Karmayoga  means planting the tree without expecting 
anything in return. Bhaktiyoga means getting attached to God with love and 
devotion. Karmayoga and bhaktiyoga combine together in rajayoga.  Rajayoga 
has been defined by different people in different w ays. I would like to define it 
as a beautiful blending of karmayoga  and bhaktiyoga.  
Work has to be done, but its fruit is not to be thr own away; it should be 
dedicated to God. To throw away the fruit would be to reject it. But dedication 
of the fruit of actions to the Lord is something ve ry different. It indicates an 
extremely beautiful state of the mind. Even if we r enounce the fruit, it is not 
that nobody will have it; somebody is bound to get it. Questions like the 
recipient’s fitness may then arise. If a beggar com es to our door, we say, “You Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 117  are strong and stout. It does not behove you to beg . Get lost.” We sit in 
judgement over the justification for his begging. T he poor fellow feels 
ashamed. There is no trace of fellow-feeling in our  hardened heart. How can 
we then have the right judgement about the fellow? 
13. When I was a child, I had expressed the same doubt to my mother. Her 
answer is still ringing in my ears. I had told her about a beggar, “This beggar 
seems to be strong and stout. To give alms to such a person will encourage 
indolence and bad habits.” I also quoted a verse fr om the Gita, ‘ देशे काले च पाᮢे च 
।’6 She said, “That beggar was the Lord Himself. Keep it in mind and then judge 
His worthiness. Would you rate God as undeserving?  In fact, what right have we 
got to judge his worthiness?  I see no need to thin k any more. To me, he is the 
Lord and that is all.” I have not yet found a fitti ng reply to what she said.  
We judge the worthiness of others when it is a ques tion of feeding others, but 
when it comes to filling our own bellies, the thoug ht of fitness never crosses 
our mind. Why should we regard the man coming to ou r doors as just a 
wretched beggar?  Why should we not look upon him a s the Lord Himself? 
14. Rajayoga  says, “Isn’t it true that somebody is bound to enj oy the fruit of 
your actions?  So better offer it to the Lord. Dedi cate it to Him.”  Rajayoga  
points out the proper recipient. Here, there is no negative action of giving up 
the fruit; and as it has to be dedicated to the Lor d, the question of judging the 
fitness of the recipient is also eliminated. Whatev er is offered to the Lord is 
always pure. Even if your actions have impurities, they will become pure the 
moment they reach His hands. However hard we try to  make our actions 
perfect, there will still be some flaws. Neverthele ss we should try our best to 
act with the utmost possible purity. Intellect is G od-given. It is our duty to keep 
it as pure as possible. Not to do so is a crime. So  we must judge the fitness of 
the recipient. But if we look upon the world as a m anifestation of God, it is 
easier to make the right judgement.  
15. The fruit of action should be utilized for purifyin g the mind. Dedicate the 
actions to God irrespective of their quality, as an d when they take place. The Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 118  mind should thereby be continuously strengthened an d purified. The fruit of 
work is not to be thrown away; it should be dedicat ed to Him. Dedicate to the 
Lord your desires and longings; even the passions a nd tendencies like anger that 
arise in the mind, and then have nothing to do with  them. ‘ कामᮓोध आ᭥हᱭ वािहले 
िवᲸलᱭ । ’ (‘We have dedicated to the Lord our passions and anger.’) There is no 
question of torturing oneself in the fire of self-c ontrol. Just dedicate everything 
to Him and be free of it. Nothing else needs to be done. There is no need for 
any suppression or of straining oneself to breaking  point. Surrender totally and 
find freedom. ‘ रोग जाय दुधᱶ साखरᱶ । तरी ᳲनब कां िपयावा । ’ (‘If milk and sugar can cure 
the disease, why should one take bitter neem  juice?’) 
16. The sense-organs too are means (for realizing Him).  Dedicate them to the 
Lord. People complain that they have no control ove r what they hear. Should 
we then refuse to hear anything?  Not at all. We mu st hear. But let us hear only 
the edifying stories of the Lord. It is difficult t o give up hearing altogether, but 
it is easier, and moreover more desirable and benef icial, to turn the ears to 
something worth hearing. Lend your ears to the Lord . Use your mouth to chant 
His Name. The sense-organs are not your enemies. Th ey are good and useful. 
They possess great capabilities. The royal way is t o take work from them in a 
spirit of dedication to the Lord. This is what rajayoga  means. 
 
45. Dedicate All The Activities  
17. It is not that only some particular actions are to be dedicated to the Lord. 
All our actions are to be dedicated to Him. Lord Ra ma gladly accepted the 
fruits offered by Shabari.7 One need not retire to a cave to worship the Lord.  
Whatever you do, where ever you do it, just dedicat e that to Him. A mother 
waiting on her child waits on God. Giving the child  a bath is like performing 
abhishek over the Lord. She should regard the child as His g ift and bring it up 
with reverence. Sages and saints like Shuka, Valmik i and Tulsidas consider 
themselves blessed while portraying how tenderly di d Kausalya care for Rama 
and Yashoda for Krishna. They describe it with fond  admiration. Such service by Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 119  a mother is indeed noble. The child is an image of God. What greater fortune 
could one have than having an opportunity to serve the Lord in the form of a 
child? Imagine the transformation that will take pl ace in our actions if we were 
to serve each other with this attitude!  Let each o ne of us consider the work 
that has fallen to his lot as service of the Lord H imself. 
18. A farmer looks after his bullock. Is that bullock t o be despised?  No. The 
bull that sage Vamadeva describes in the Veda as pe rvading the entire universe 
in the form of energy, is present in the farmer’s b ullock too. 
च᭜वारी शृंगा ᮢयो अ᭭य पादाः  
देव शीषᱷ स᳙ ह᭭तासो अ᭭य  
िᮢधा ब᭟दो वृषभो रोरवीित  
महो  देवो  म᭜याᲈ िववेश  । 
(‘The bull which has four horns, three legs, two he ads and seven hands and is 
tied to three posts is roaring. The Great God has p ervaded all the mankind in 
every way.’) That greatly effulgent bull, radiating  vigour and energy, immanent 
in all the mortal beings in the universe is roaring . It is the same bull which the 
farmer worships inwardly while taking care of his b ullock. Commentators have 
interpreted this verse in different ways. This bull  is indeed strange. The bull 
that roars in the sky and causes rainfall, is also present in the farmer’s bullock 
which litters the field with dung and urine and fer tilises it to yield abundant 
crop. If the bullock is looked upon with this feeli ng, then the ordinary work of 
taking care of the bullock would become the worship  of the Lord. 
19. The lady of the house keeps the kitchen spotlessly clean and cooks pure 
and wholesome food for the family. Her earnest desi re is to give nourishment 
and contentment to all the family-members. All that  work of hers is a form of 
yajna . The fire in the kitchen stove is verily the yajna  fire. Imagine how pure 
and holy the food will be if it is cooked for the L ord!  If the lady has such noble 
feelings in her mind, she would verily join the aug ust band of the wives of the 
sages described in the Bhagavata. Many such women m ust have redeemed 
themselves through such service, surpassing self-ce ntered scholars.  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 120   
46. The Whole Life Can Be Infused With God  
20. The moments of our daily life may appear commonplac e, but they are not 
really so. They have a deep significance. The whole  of life is like a great 
yajna—a continual sacrificial performance. Your sleep is also a kind of 
samadhi —an experience of oneness with the divine conscious ness. If we 
surrender all that we did and all that we experienc ed to the Lord before going 
to sleep, will not that sleep be a kind of samadhi ?  There is a custom of reciting 
the Purushasukta, a Vedic hymn, while taking bath. What is the 
connection between the bath and the Purushasukta?  You will discern it if you 
wish to. What connection does the great, all-pervad ing Purusha  (the cosmic 
Person) having thousand hands and thousand eyes hav e with your bath?  The 
connection is that, there are thousands of drops in  the water you pour over 
your head. They wash your head and clean it, riddin g it of your sins. They are 
the Lord’s blessing showering on you. The Lord Hims elf is washing off your sins 
through those thousands of drops of water. Let your  bath be infused with such 
an exalted sentiment; then it will be an altogether  different thing. It will then 
have boundless power. 
21. Any work, howsoever ordinary or commonplace, assume s sanctity if 
performed in the spirit that it is God’s work. You can experience it yourself. 
Just look upon a guest as the Lord Himself and then  see the difference it 
makes. When some distinguished guest is expected in  our house, we clean the 
house thoroughly and prepare special dishes. Imagin e the difference it will 
make if we look upon the guest as the Lord Himself!   Saint Kabir was a weaver. 
While weaving, he would lose himself in spiritual b liss and sing ecstatically. He 
was as if weaving the sheets to drape the Lord. The  sage in Rig Veda says, ‘ वᳫेव 
भᮤा सुक ृ ता वसूयुः ’—‘I am draping the Lord with my hymns.’  It is for  the Lord that 
a poet should compose hymns, and it is for Him that  a weaver should weave 
cloth. How stirring the idea is!  How purifying and  moving the thought is!  How 
pure our life would become if this feeling informs it!  A flash of lightening 
removes darkness in an instant. Is the removal of d arkness gradual? The Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 121  transformation is instantaneous and total. Likewise , life is instantly charged 
with wonderful energy when every action is linked t o the Lord. Every action 
will then become pure. Life will be full of zest. T oday our life is devoid of any 
zest or purpose. There is no joy, no happiness in i t. We are alive only because 
we are yet to die. But just think of linking your a ctions to the Lord, and then 
your life will be full of charm; it will be worthy of veneration. 
22. There is no doubt that the Lord’s Name brings about  instantaneous 
transformation. Never doubt the efficacy of His Nam e. Give it a try and see 
what happens. Suppose a farmer is coming home in th e evening and he meets a 
stranger in the way. Let him say to the stranger, ‘ चाल घरा उभा राहᱶ नारायणा ’—‘O 
Brother!  O Lord!  Soon it will be night. So please  come and spend the night in 
my house.’ These words will transform the stranger.  Even if he is a robber, he 
would undergo a change and become pure. It is the a ttitude that makes the 
difference. It is the attitude  that really matters in life. One welcomes a young 
man and gives him one’s daughter in marriage and bo ws before the bridegroom 
much younger in age. Why?  The act of giving away t he daughter is so sacred 
that the young bridegroom is regarded as the Lord H imself. This very sentiment 
has to be further developed and elevated. 
23. Some may object, “Why make such false assumptions?”   But one should not 
brand anything true or false beforehand. One should  first give it a try, see what 
happens, and only then one would know what is true and what is false. Do not 
just address the bridegroom as the Lord as a matter  of ritual; regard him so in 
your heart of hearts, and see the difference. That sentiment will bring about a 
total transformation. Even if the man concerned is not worthy, he will become 
so. Even if he is evil-minded, he will become good.  Did not this happen in the 
case of Valya Koli8?  He had never before come across a man chanting t he 
Lord’s Name while playing the veena ,9 and remaining not only calm and 
unruffled when he (Valya) was about to attack, but also continuing to look at 
him with love. He had till then seen only two types  of people. They would 
either run away or make a counter-attack. But Narad a did neither and 
remained as calm and serene as ever. He was not the  least disturbed or Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 122  perturbed and continued to sing. That made Valya’s axe stop in midair. Narada 
asked, “Why has your axe stopped?”  Valya replied, “Because you are so calm.” 
Narada brought about transformation in Valya. Was t hat transformation true or 
false? 
24. After all, who is to decide whether somebody is bad  or not?  Even if you 
come across a wicked man, look upon him as the Lord . That will transform him 
into a saint. Do not ask, “Why should we make unrea l suppositions?”  Who can 
be certain that the man is really wicked?  It is sa id that ‘good men, being good, 
find goodness everywhere, but that is not true.’ Sh ould it then be accepted 
that only what you see is true?  Are we then to sup pose that only bad men have 
the means to know the true nature of the creation?  Why not say that there is 
nothing wrong with the world, but it appears bad to  you as you yourself are 
bad?  Look, the creation is but a mirror. You will see in it your true image. It is 
the eye of the beholder that determines the nature of the world. Therefore, 
look upon the world as good and sacred. Let this at titude inform even your 
ordinary actions. Then you will witness a miraculou s change. This is what the 
Lord intends to convey: ‘ जᱶ खासी होिमसी देसी जᱶ जᱶ आचᳯरसी तप । जᱶ कांहᱭ कᳯरसी कमᭅ त ᱶ 
करᱭ मज अपᭅण । ’ (‘Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you  offer as 
sacrifice or gift, whatever austerity you perform, dedicate all that to Me.’)10  
25. When I was a child, my mother used to tell me a sto ry. It is an amusing 
story, but it contains a profound truth. There was a lady who had resolved to 
dedicate everything she did to Lord Krishna. After meals, she would clean the 
floor with dung 11  and throw the lump of dung out of the house saying , 
“Krishnarpan .” (I dedicate it to Lord Krishna.) The lump would then reach the 
idol in the temple and stick to it. The priest got tired of cleaning up the idol 
again and again. At last he discovered that it was all due to that lady; as long 
as she was alive, it was impossible to keep the ido l clean. One day she fell sick. 
Death seemed round the corner. She dedicated death also to the Lord. At that 
very moment, the idol of the Lord cracked and fell to pieces. A heavenly 
chariot came to take her to the heaven. She dedicat ed even that to the Lord. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 123  That then  dashed against the temple and was smashed up. The m oral of the 
story is that heaven is of no value before the love  for the Lord. 
26. The import of all this is that, unusual power is ge nerated when whatever 
good or bad that we do is dedicated to the Lord. A jowar12  grain is reddish 
yellow, but when you parch it, you have a nice popc orn. Put that white, 
beautiful and nicely shaped popcorn near a grain an d you will see that it has 
absolutely no resemblance with it. But there is no doubt that it is the grain that 
has turned into the popcorn. It is the fire that br ings about such a change. If 
you grind that hard grain, it will turn into soft f lour. Fire turns the grain into 
popcorn and grinding turns the grain into flour. Li kewise, infuse your ordinary 
and seemingly unimportant actions with the devotion  for the Lord and then 
your actions will be transformed beyond recognition . It is the spirit that 
enhances the value of actions. Do not consider wort hless even the leaves and 
the flowers; they become sacred when they are offer ed to the Lord. ‘ तुका ᭥हणे 
चवी आलᱶ । जᱶ का िमि᮰त िवᲸलᱶ । ’ (‘Tukaram says, whatever is mixed with the Lord 
becomes delicious.’) Add God to everything and expe rience the outcome. 
Which spice can equal the Lord in making things del icious?  Add this divine spice 
to every action, and then everything will become go od and delicious. 
27. Imagine it is night time. The pooja  is going on in the temple. The incense 
smoke is rising. Its fragrance is in the air. Lamps  have been lit. In such an 
ambience we really feel God’s presence. All day the  Lord was awake; now is 
the time for Him to go to sleep. The devotees sing,  ‘आतां ᭭वामी सुखᱶ िनᮤा करा 
गोपाळा । ’ (‘O Lord!  Now you may happily go to sleep.’)  Sc eptics ask, “Does the 
Lord sleep?”  But why can’t the Lord sleep?  O fool , if the Lord does not sleep 
and wake up, who do you think does so; can a stone do so?  It is the Lord who 
sleeps and keeps awake, it is the Lord who eats and  drinks. As the day dawns, 
Saint Tulsidas wakes up Lord Rama with gentle persu asion, ‘ जािगये रघुनाथ क ुं वर 
पंछी बन बोले । ’ (‘O Prince Rama! Please wake up. The birds have s tarted chirping 
in the woods.’) He is, in fact, waking up the peopl e, looking to them as the 
images of the Lord. What an enchanting idea!  Contr ast it with what happens in Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 124  a hostel. There the boys are woken up by rude shout s. Is this proper in the 
auspicious morning hours?  There is an incident in Valmiki’s Ramayana. Rama is 
asleep in the ashram  of sage Vishwamitra.  Vishwamitra is waking him up . 
Valimiki describes,   
‘रामेित मधुरां वाणᱭ िव᳡िमᮢो᭤यभाषत ।  
उितत नरशादूᭅल पू्वाᭅ सं᭟या ᮧवतित ।। ’ 
(Vishwamitra is saying softly to Rama, “Arise, O li on among men; the sky is 
brightening in the east.”)  
How sweet and loving the action is!  And how harshl y the boys are woken up in 
a hostel!  The poor sleeping lad feels that the fel low waking him up must be his 
arch-enemy for ages!  One should first call in a lo w, soft tone. If the boy does 
not wake up, call him in a little louder voice. But  never be rough or rude. If he 
still does not wake up, you may try again after a f ew minutes. If even that 
fails, hope that he will surely get up in time tomo rrow. Sing to him melodious 
songs, the songs of sunrise, or the hymns. An ordin ary action of waking up can 
thus be made poetic, tender and beautiful when it i s done with the feeling that 
we are waking up the Lord Himself. To wake up someb ody too needs a right 
technique. 
28. Let this idea inform all your actions. It is all th e more important in the 
sphere of education. A teacher should feel that the  pupils are the Lord 
incarnate and he is serving Him through teaching. H e would not then act upon 
the axiom ‘Spare the rod and spoil the child.’ He w ill not scold the pupils right 
and left and hurt them with disparaging remarks. In stead of rebuking them, for 
example, for wearing dirty clothes, he would wash t heir dirty clothes. If the 
teacher does so, what a deep impact such loving car e will have on the pupils’ 
minds!  Can beating ever have any good effect?  The  pupils should also look 
upon the teacher with the same reverence. If the pu pils and the teachers 
regard each other as images of the Lord and behave accordingly, then the 
knowledge that the pupils gain will have a rare lus tre. If the pupils feel that Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 125  they are being taught by the Lord Himself, you can imagine how they would 
behave. 
 
47. The Lord’s Name Destroys The Sins  
29. Once the sentiment that the Lord is present everywh ere is deeply rooted 
in the mind, we will naturally know how to behave w ith each other. There will 
be no need for any rules and canons of ethics. Vice s will disappear of their own 
accord, sins will flee and evil would vanish into t hin air.  
Tukaram has said, 
‘चाल क े लासी मोकळा   ।  बोल िवᲸल वेळोवेळां  
तुज पाप िच नाही ऐसᱶ   ।  नाम घेतां जवळᱭ वसे ’ 
(‘You are free to do whatever you like. Just chant the Lord’s Name again and 
again. Once you recite His Name, no sin will remain  near you.’) 
Well, you are free to sin now. You can now commit a s many sins as you can. Let 
us see whether you get tired of sinning or the Lord ’s Name gets tired of 
reducing them to ashes. Is there any evil stubborn and belligerent enough to pit 
itself against the Lord’s name?  ‘ करी तुजसी करवती ’—Sin as much as you can. Let 
the Lord’s Name and your sins fight it out. The Lor d’s Name is powerful enough 
to burn down in an instant the sins committed not o nly in this life but in 
countless births in the past. A cave may be full of  darkness since ages, but the 
moment you light a candle, darkness disappears. In fact, the older the sins, the 
more quickly they get destroyed, just as old wooden  logs are more easily and 
quickly reduced to ashes. 
30. No sin can ever exist in the presence of Ramanama   (the Lord’s Name). 
Don’t the children say, “Ghosts vanish when you tak e Ramanama. ”  In my 
childhood, we children used to challenge each other  to go to the cremation 
ground at night and drive in a peg there. There use d to be snakes and thorns in 
the way, and darkness all around. Still I would fea rlessly go there. I never came 
across ghosts. Ghosts, after all, are creations of the mind. How could they Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 126  appear before us? Wherefrom did a ten-year-old boy gather such courage?  
From Ramanama . It was the power of the Lord who is Truth. If a m an feels that 
the Lord is ever by his side and surrenders himself  to Him, then he will not be 
afraid even if the whole world turns against him. W hich demon can devour 
him?  A demon may destroy the body; but never the t ruth. No power on earth 
can destroy the truth. Sin can never stand before t he Name of the Lord. Hence 
seek His grace. Dedicate all actions to Him. Surren der completely to Him and 
be totally devoted to Him. Let the urge to dedicate  all the actions to Him 
become more and more intense. Then this trivial lif e will become divine. The 
soiled life will become beautiful.  
 
48. Not What But How You Offer Is Important  
31. ‘पᮢं पु᭬पं फलं तोयम् ’—Leaves, flowers, fruits, water,  anything can be offered 
to Him. What is important is that it should be offe red with bhakti . The spirit 
and sentiment with which you offer is important. On ce I was having a discussion 
on education with a professor. There was a differen ce of opinion between us. In 
order to clinch the issue, he said, “I have been te aching for eighteen years.” He 
should have convinced me of the correctness of his standpoint; he instead 
flaunted his experience. I said in a lighter vein, “If a bullock pulls an oil ghani 
(oil expeller) for eighteen years, will it become a n engineer?”  An engineer is 
an engineer and a bullock is a bullock. An educatio nist is different from a 
teacher who goes on doing his job in a routine and mechanical manner. An 
educationist will gain much more insight and experi ence in six months than a 
labourer working for eighteen years. The Professor boasted of his years of 
experience. But it proves nothing. Likewise, the vo lume and value of the 
offering is of no significance. What is important i s the spirit in which you make 
the offering. What is important is not what or how much you offer, but how you 
offer. The Gita contains only seven hundred verses.  There are some other books 
containing thousands of verses. But a bigger thing need not necessarily be 
better. You should judge the intrinsic quality, the  intrinsic strength in anything. 
The number of activities in life is not important; even a single action with Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 127  dedication, with surrender to the Lord, will make y our life richer. A single 
sacred moment can give experience that cannot be ac quired in years. 
32. Thus, the point is that even the ordinary actions i n life should be 
dedicated to the Lord. Life would then acquire a ne w vigour.  Moksha would 
come within our grasp.  Rajayoga,  which asks us to work and offer its fruit to 
the Lord instead of giving it up, is a step ahead o f karmayoga. Karmayoga  asks 
you to work without desires and give up the fruit o f the work. Here karmayoga 
stops. Rajayoga  tells, “Do not renounce the fruit of the actions. Dedicate all 
the actions themselves to the Lord. The actions are  a means that help you in 
making spiritual progress. They are like flowers wh ich should be offered at the 
feet of the Lord. Conjoin your actions with devotio n and go on enriching your 
life. Do not throw away the fruit, dedicate it to t he Lord.” The fruit that is cut 
off from the actions in karmayoga  is linked to the Lord in rajayoga.  There is a 
difference between throwing seeds and sowing them. You reap in abundance 
what you sow; what you throw is wasted. The work th at is dedicated to the 
Lord gets sown, and therefore life gets infused wit h infinite bliss and sanctity.  
(17.4.32)  
 
References:  
1. Saints and sages used to voluntarily end their life  when they thought that they had 
accomplished what they should have.  They would the n concentrate all their 
energies and merge into the Absolute, ending worldl y existence.  This is called 
samadhi . This is the sense in which the word is used here.  
2. The presiding deity of heaven. 
3. Indra thereupon became furious and caused incessant  rains.  The child Krishna then 
lifted the Govardhan hill on his little finger, ask ing the cowherds to join with their 
staffs supporting the hill.  All the people and the  cattle in the village took shelter 
under the hill and were saved from Indra's wrath. 
4. Narsi Mehta was a poet-saint of Gujarat in the medi aeval period.  In those days, 
people on pilgrimage used to deposit excess money w ith some merchant and get 
from him a hundi  (a sort of demand draft) in the name of a merchant  of another 
place, which the latter would honour.  Once some mi schievous persons suggested Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 128  Narsi's name for the purpose to some pilgrims.  Nar si gave them a hundi  on Dwarka in 
the name of Lord Krishna. 
5. Damaji, a devotee of Lord Pandurang, was a governme nt official.  Once, during a 
famine, he threw open the doors of the government g ranary to the people.  Sultan, 
on knowing it, got furious and ordered Damaji to de posit the necessary amount.  It is 
said that the Lord thereupon took the form of an un touchable servant, went to the 
Sultan's court and deposited the money. 
6. 'Charity should be given at the right place, at the  right time, and to the right person, 
as a matter of duty, without expecting any return.  Such charity is said to be 
sattvik'—Gita 17.20 
7. Shabari, an old tribal woman and devotee of Rama, i nvited him to her place.  As she 
had nothing to offer to Him, she picked jujube frui ts from the forest.  She tasted 
them by biting them to find out whether they were s weet, and therefore worthy of 
being offered to the Lord.  Rama gladly accepted th ose wild fruits, that too bitten by 
her. 
8. Valya Koli, a dacoit, was transformed by Narada.  H e then undertook penance and 
realized God.  He came to be known as sage Valmiki,  who later wrote the Ramayana. 
9. A stringed musical instrument. 
10. Gita 9.27 
11. This is a common practice, particularly in the vill ages.  People take meals sitting on 
the floor.  The floor has then to be cleaned.  Dung  is used for the purpose. 
12. A type of coarse grain.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 129   
CHAPTER 10 
CONTEMPLATION OF GOD’S MANIFESTATIONS  
49. The First Half Of The Gita: A Retrospect  
1. Friends, we have come halfway through the Gita. It will be worthwhile to 
recapitulate before we proceed further. In the Firs t Chapter, it is stated that 
the Gita is for overcoming delusions and inducing u s to follow swadharma . In 
the Second Chapter, the basic principles of life ar e stated and the concepts of 
karmayoga and sthitaprajna  are spelt out. Chapters 3, 4 and 5 explain the 
concepts of karma , vikarma and akarma . Karma means the actions done for the 
performance of swadharma . Vikarma means inner mental action that needs to 
be done to aid such performance. When karma  and vikarma fuse together, 
mind is completely purified, passions and cravings die out, distinctions vanish, 
and then the state of akarma  is reached. This state is of two kinds. In one, 
hectic activity goes on unceasingly but still the d oer feels inwardly that he is 
doing nothing. In the other, one is outwardly inact ive but is still acting 
ceaselessly. The state of akarma attains fruition in both the ways. Although 
these two ways appear different, they are completel y identical. These ways are 
called karmayoga and sannyasa respectively. Although they are known by 
different terms, they have the same essence. The st ate of akarma  is the 
ultimate goal, which is also called moksha . Thus, in the first five Chapters of 
the Gita, the philosophy of life has been fully spe lt out. 
2. To attain the state of akarma , there are various types of vikarma . There 
are several means for the purification of the mind.  Important among them have 
been described from the Sixth Chapter onwards. The Sixth Chapter tells about 
the yoga  of meditation to have one-pointedness of mind and about the 
supplementary means of abhyasa  and vairagya . The Seventh Chapter is about 
the great and noble means of bhakti.  You may go to the Lord either with love 
or with the quest for knowledge or with passion for  the well-being of all, or 
even with desire for personal gains; the important thing is to enter into the 
presence of the Lord. I call it prapattiyoga or the yoga that asks us to surrender Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 130  to God. The Eighth Chapter puts forward satatyayoga (the yoga of 
uninterrupted pursuit). You will not find these ter ms in other commentaries; I 
have coined these terms myself as I have found them  useful for understanding 
the Gita. Satatyayoga means continuing the sadhana —the spiritual quest—till 
death. One should never leave the chosen path; one should go on advancing 
along that path without a break. If one vacillates,  there is absolutely no hope 
that he will ever reach the goal. One should never despair or get tired and 
complain, “How long am I to go on doing sadhana ?”  Sadhana  should continue 
till it attains fruition. 
3. After explaining this satatyayoga , the Lord tells in the Ninth Chapter 
something very simple, yet capable of transforming life totally. That is 
rajayoga . This Chapter asks us to dedicate all the actions to the Lord as and 
when they take place. All the means enjoined by the  scriptures, all the karma 
and vikarma —everything gets dissolved in rajayoga,  the yoga of surrender. 
Nothing else is needed. Surrender of everything to the Lord is an all-
encompassing and powerful idea. It appears simple a nd easy, but still it turns 
out to be exceedingly difficult. This sadhana is easy because anybody, from an 
illiterate villager to a great scholar, can practic e it where ever he is, without 
much effort. But although easy, it requires extraor dinary moral and spiritual 
merit. 
‘बᱟतां सुक ृ तांची जोडी  । ᭥हणुनी िवᲸलᱭ आवडी ’ 
(‘It is only when good deeds are done in many birth s that the mind is drawn 
towards the Lord.’) 
The most trivial things bring tears to our eyes, bu t the Lord’s Name does not 
move us to tears. What is to be done then?  This sadhana , as the saints say, is 
easy in one sense, but difficult in another; it has  become all the more difficult 
in the modern times. 
4. Today, the film of materialism has obscured our vie w. We begin by 
doubting God’s existence. Nobody finds Him anywhere . Life is full of lust, 
passions and distortions and iniquities. The greate st among the philosophers of Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 131  our time cannot think of anything higher than provi ding two square meals daily 
to all. They are not to be blamed for it; it is a f act that many do not get even 
that. How to provide food to all is the biggest pro blem today, and the best 
brains are busy in tackling it. Sayanacharya has de fined Rudra as ‘ बुभुᭃमाणः 
ᱧᮤᱨपेण अवित᳧ते ’—the hungry people are Rudra 1 incarnate. A number of 
ideologies, isms and programmes have arisen to solv e the problem of hunger. 
We have no time to look beyond this problem and thi nk of anything else. The 
most strenuous efforts are being made to find out h ow people could have a 
couple of morsels in peace without clashing with ea ch other. In such a strange 
social order, it is no wonder that the simple idea of dedication to the Lord 
appears exceedingly difficult. What is the remedy?  We shall see in the Tenth 
Chapter how to master the yoga of dedication to the Lord, how to make it easy 
to practice. 
 
50. An Easy Way to Learn To See God  
5. The Tenth Chapter suggests the same methods that ar e employed in 
teaching the children to enable us to see the Lord everywhere. The children are 
taught the alphabet in two ways. One method is to t each the letters first by 
writing them in big size. When the children are con versant with them, they are 
acquainted with the letters in smaller sizes. The o ther method is to teach 
simple letters first and the complicated ‘joint’2 letters thereafter. In the same 
way, we should first learn to see God in bigger and  more conspicuous things. 
The Lord manifest in oceans or high mountains can b e grasped at once. When 
we come to experience His presence therein, we shal l realise subsequently that 
He is present even in a drop of water or a speck of  dust. There is no difference 
between the capital ‘A’ and the small ‘a’. This is one way. The other way is to 
see Him first in His simpler manifestations, and th en move on to His 
complicated manifestations. One can quickly compreh end His manifestation in 
a pure form. For example, one can easily discern Go d in Rama. Rama is like a 
simple letter. But what about Ravana?  Ravana is li ke a ‘joint’ letter. In 
Ravana, His manifestation is difficult to discern b ecause there is a mixture of Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 132  good and evil in the person of Ravana. Ravana’s pen ance and energy are indeed 
great, but they are mixed with cruelty. So, to begi n with, learn to behold God 
manifest in Rama, who is full of love and compassio n. It will take time to 
discern divinity in Ravana. But one has to reach th at stage. One should first 
learn to discern God in a good person, but ultimate ly one should be able to 
discern Him in an evil person too. The Lord who is in an ocean is present in a 
drop of water too. The Lord who is in Rama is prese nt in Ravana too. What is 
present in the gross is present in the subtle; what  is present in the simple is 
present in the complex. Our vision should be inform ed with this outlook. 
6. This vast creation is like the Lord’s Book. When ou r eyes are covered with 
thick veils, we think that the Book is closed. Ever ywhere in this Book, the name 
of the Lord is written in beautiful letters. But we  fail to read that. A major 
obstacle is that a man does not recognise the Lord in the ordinary and simple 
forms which are near him and His distant and dazzli ng manifestations are too 
difficult to grasp. If you tell him to see God in t he mother, he will say, “Is God 
so simple?”  But if the Lord appears before you wit h His dazzling splendour, will 
you be able to stand the sight? Kunti3 wished to see the sun-god face to face, 
but when he approached her, she could not stand the  scorching heat. We 
cannot bear the Lord with all His power and glory. But we do not accept Him in 
milder and gentler forms. We cannot digest sweets m ade from milk and do not 
relish ordinary milk!  These are the symptoms of ou r wretchedness and doom. 
Such a sick mind is a great obstacle that prevents us from seeing Him. We must 
discard this state of mind.  
 
51. God In Human Form  
7. The first and the foremost form of the Lord for us is our mother. The Veda 
says, ‘ मातृदेवो भव  ।’ (‘Let your mother be your God.’)  Who but the mothe r does 
the new-born baby see first?  The Lord Himself stan ds there as the embodiment 
of tenderness. We can move on from the worship of t he mother to the worship 
of Mother India and still further to the worship of  Mother Earth. But in the 
beginning the mother is the highest form in which t he Lord appears before the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 133  child. It is quite possible to attain moksha through the worship of the mother. 
Worship of the mother means worship of the Lord as love incarnate; the mother 
is just the medium. The Lord endows her with His af fection and impels her to 
toil for her child. The poor mother does not unders tand why she feels so much 
love and affection for the child. Does she do every thing for the child with the 
calculation that it might be of use to her in her o ld age?  Not at all. She 
undergoes labour pains while giving birth to the ch ild. That pain makes her 
passionately attached to her child. That pain makes  her love the child. She just 
cannot help loving it. The mother is the embodiment  of boundless service. To 
worship her is the highest form of the worship of t he Lord. It is as ‘Mother’ that 
we should address the Lord. Is there a word nobler and more exalted than this?  
Mother is the most prominent and the simplest manif estation of the Lord that 
we come across. Learn to see God in her; and then i n the father and in the 
guru . The guru  imparts knowledge to us, makes of us human beings in the true 
sense. How indebted are we to him!  Thus, we should  start with seeing God in 
the conspicuous forms of the mother, the father, th e guru and the saints, in 
this order. Where else can we see Him if not there?  
8. Likewise, how nice would it be if we could see Him in children!  Dhruva, 
Prahlad, Nachiketa, Sanak, Sanandan, Sanatkumar—all  these were children, but 
Vyasa and other authors of the Puranas (the ancient  mythological tales) are so 
fond of them that they are never tired of talking a bout them, of extolling them 
with love and admiration. Even as children Shuka, S hankaracharya, Jnanadeva 
were free from desires and attachment. Nowhere else  did the Lord manifest 
Himself in a purer form. Jesus was greatly fond of children. Once his disciples 
asked him, “You talk so much about the Kingdom of G od. Who can enter it?” 
 Jesus lifted up in his arms a child standing nearb y and said, “Only those who 
are like this child.” What Jesus said is indeed tru e. Saint Ramdas was once 
playing with children. Someone asked him with surpr ise, “What has happened 
to you today?” Ramdas said,  
वयᱶ पोर ते थोर होऊन गेले  
वयᱶ थोर ते चोर होऊन ठेले  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 134  (‘Children have attained greatness, while those adv anced in age have proved to 
be scoundrels.’) 
As the age advances, innocence gets eroded. One bec omes clever and 
presumptuous. Then one hardly thinks of the Lord. T he minds of children are 
pure and unsullied. We teach a child, “Do not tell lies.” He asks, “What is a 
lie?” Then we explain that the statement must corre spond to the facts. The 
child is nonplussed. How can one make a statement t hat does not correspond to 
the facts?  It is like telling that a rectangle mus t be called a rectangle and not a 
circle. The child is surprised at this teaching. Ch ildren are the purest 
manifestations of God. Adults teach them all wrong.   
In short, if we cannot see the Lord in the mother, the father, the guru , the 
saints and the children, we will not be able to see  Him in any other form, as 
these are His best manifestations. One must first l earn to recognise Him in His 
gentler manifestations, wherein divinity is inscrib ed in bold capital letters—
where it is the most conspicuous. 
 
52. God In Creation  
9. We must first learn to see Him in pure and gentle f orms among human 
beings. Likewise we should also see Him first in Hi s grand and beautiful forms in 
nature. 
10. Look at the divine glow that precedes sunrise on th e horizon at the dawn. 
The Vedic sages looked upon it as a goddess and dan ced in ecstasy while singing 
her hymns: “O Usha!  You are the messenger of the L ord. You are bathed in 
dew drops. You are the banner of immortality.” So c aptivating and magnificent 
their descriptions are!  The Vedic sage says, “If I  do not comprehend Him even 
after seeing you, the divine messenger, what else c an convince me of His 
presence?” Such is the splendour of Usha at the hor izon. But we have no eyes 
for her. 
11. Likewise, look at the sun. To see him is to see the  Lord. He keeps on 
painting an endless variety of pictures on the canv as of the sky. Artists labour Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 135  hard for months in trying to catch the beauty of th e sunrise on the canvas. But, 
rise early in the morning and just have a look at t he Lord’s art on the horizon. 
With what can we compare that divine art, that infi nite beauty?  But who 
bothers to look at that?  The Lord is there with al l His splendour; but man, the 
wretched creature, pulls the sheets a little closer  and continues to snore. The 
sun says, “You lazy man!  I shall not let you sleep  any more,” and it wakes him 
up with his warm rays. ‘ सूयᭅ आ᭜मा जगत᭭त᭭थुष᳟ ’—the sun is the soul of all that 
moves and all that is still. It is the support of e verything animate and 
inanimate. The sages have called it ‘ Mitra ’ (the friend). ‘ िमᮢो जनान् यातयित 
ᮩुवाणो िमᮢो दाधार पृिथवीमुत ᳒ाम् ’—‘This friend calls out people and makes them 
work. He sustains the heaven and the earth.’ The su n is indeed the support of 
life. See God in him. 
12. And the holy river Ganga!  When I was at Kashi (Ben ares), I used to go and 
sit alone on her banks in the silent hours of the n ight. How lovely and pleasing 
the Ganga is as she flows by! That serene and majes tic expanse and the 
countless stars in the sky reflected therein would make me silent. This holy 
river has descended from the matted locks of Lord S hiva, that is, from the 
Himalayan forests. Many kings cast off their kingdo ms, considering them no 
better than a bauble, and performed austerities and  penance on its banks for 
Self-realisation. The sight of that holy river woul d give me an experience of 
sheer peace. How can I describe that peace? Words f ail in describing it. I would 
then realise why a Hindu wishes that if he cannot t ake a bath in the Ganga 
during his life-time, at least his remains should b e immersed in her after death. 
You may ridicule such sentiments; that does not mat ter.  I find such sentiments 
sacred and worth cherishing. It is a custom to put a couple of drops of the 
Ganga-water in the mouth of a dying man. Those drop s symbolize God’s grace. 
The Ganga is a form of the Lord. In the form of the  Ganga, it is His compassion 
that is flowing. Like a mother, Mother Ganga cleans  us all over, washes off all 
the impurities of our body and mind. If you do not find the Lord in the Ganga, 
where else could you find Him?  The sun, the rivers , the majestic roaring ocean, 
all these are forms of the Lord. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 136  13. And the winds!  Whence they come and where they go,  nobody knows. 
They are the messengers of the Lord. In India, wind s blow from the unmoving 
Himalayas in the north as well as from the serene o cean in the south. These 
holy winds touch us and awaken us. They whisper mel odies in our ears. But who 
cares to hear their message?  If the jailor withhol ds an ordinary letter 
addressed to you, you feel dejected. Poor wretch!  What is there so precious in 
that letter?  The winds are bringing the Lord’s lov ing messages every moment. 
Listen to them. 
14. The Veda has prescribed fire-worship. Fire (Agni) t oo is a form of God. 
How bright and glowing it is!  When you rub two woo den sticks against each 
other, it reveals itself. Who knows where it was hi dden till then?  It is so warm 
and luminous!  The very first hymn in the Rig Veda,  in fact, is about fire-
worship— 
‘अिᲨमीळे पुरोिहतं य᭄᭭य देवमृि᭜वजम् । होतारं र᳀धामम्  ।। ’ 
Look at the fire, with whose worship the Veda begin s. The flames of fire remind 
me of the quest of the human soul to reach up to th e Lord. The flames may be 
from a kitchen stove or they may belong to the fore st fire—they are always 
striving to go upwards. They are always agitated an d restless. Scientists may 
say that their fluttering is due to ether or air-pr essure. But I see in it the quest 
of the luminous flames to reach the Supreme Spirit,  to reach the sun-god who is 
the ocean of luminosity. It is a quest of the part to merge into the whole. The 
endless quest of the flames starts with their creat ion and ceases only on their 
extinction. That the sun is too distant never bothe rs them; all they know is to 
make the best possible effort. It appears that the bright and glowing heat of 
vairagya  has assumed the form of the fire. The flame of vairagya  also does not 
remain still wherever it is. That is why the Veda b egan with the word ‘ अिᲨमीळे’/f02e 
 
53. God In The Animals  
15. And the cattle that serve us!  How full of love, te nderness and affection 
the cow is!  In the evening it rushes to its calves  running through hills and Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 137  forests. The Vedic sages are reminded of heavy-udde red cows rushing to their 
calves to feed them when they see rivers gushing th rough hilly ranges. The sage 
says to a river, “O Goddess, like cows, you bring m ilk-like holy and sweet 
water. Just as cows cannot stay back in the forest,  you too cannot stay back in 
the hills. You rush to meet your thirsty children.” —‘वा᮰ा इव धेनवः ᭭यंदमानाः ’ 
(‘The waters rushed to the sea like the lowing cows  eager to meet their 
calves’.) The Lord is there at your door in the for m of the affectionate cow. 
16. And the horse!  How noble, how faithful, how loyal it is!  How dearly the 
Arabs love their horses! Do you know the story of t he Arab who was compelled 
by financial difficulties to sell his horse?  He we nt to the stable with the bagful 
of money received as its price. But the moment he g lanced at the serene and 
loving eyes of the horse, he threw away the money a nd said, “Come what may. 
Let me die of hunger if I must. But I will not sell  the horse. God will help me.” 
How the horse snorts when we pat its back!  How lov ely its mane is!  Indeed, 
the horse has many qualities. What is there in a bi cycle?  Look after a horse 
well, curry it regularly, and it will be ready to d ie for you; it will become your 
friend. A friend of mine was learning to ride, but the horse would not let him 
mount it. When he complained about it, I told him, “You try to ride the horse, 
but do you ever care for it?  When someone else loo ks after the horse and you 
want to ride it, how will it work? Curry it first, give it food and water, and then 
try.” The friend did accordingly. He came to me aft er a few days and said, 
“Now the horse does not throw me off.” The horse to o is a form of the Lord. 
Will the Lord throw off His devotee?  That horse yi elded to my friend’s 
devotion. A horse does see whether the rider is a d evotee or not. Lord Krishna 
used to curry and feed the horses Himself. Unlike a  bicycle, a horse jumps over 
ditches and ascends the hills. The graceful and lov ing horse is verily a form of 
God. 
17. In my childhood, I was at Baroda. There I used to h ear a lion’s resonant 
roar in the morning. That majestic sound would move  my heart. It used to 
reverberate in the depth of my heart like the sound  in the sanctum sanctorum 
of a temple. How gallant and benign the lion looks!   It has a regal gait and Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 138  elegance. Its beautiful mane appears like a royal i nsignia. That lion in Baroda 
was caged. It would roam inside that cage. There wa s not a trace of cruelty in 
its eyes; they were rather full of pity. It appeare d absorbed within itself, 
totally unconcerned with the world. One feels that such a lion must indeed be a 
manifestation of the Lord. In my childhood, I had r ead the story of Androcles 
and the lion. How fascinating it is!  The famished lion remembered Androcles’ 
earlier kindness and, instead of devouring him, beg an to lick his feet lovingly. 
What does this mean?  This means that Androcles had  seen the Lord in the lion. 
Lord Shiva is always accompanied by a lion. The lio n is a manifestation of the 
Lord. 
18. And is the tiger less fascinating?  Divine brillian ce shines through it. It is 
not impossible to befriend it. Panini, the great gr ammarian, was teaching his 
students in the forest when a tiger came there. The  students got frightened and 
shouted, ' vyaghra,  vyaghra'  (Tiger, Tiger)!  But Panini calmly began explaining to 
them the etymology of the word ‘vyaghra’  (tiger): ‘ ᳞ािजᮖतीित ᳞ाᮖ :’—vyaghra  
is one having an acute sense of smell. The students  had got frightened, but to 
Panini, ‘ vyaghra ’ was just an innocent and interesting word. The ti ger ate him 
up. But so what?  Panini must have smelt sweet to t he tiger, so it ate him up 
with relish. What is striking is that Panini did no t run away. He was a devotee 
of God in the form of words. For him, God was in ev erything, even in that tiger. 
That is why he is reverentially referred to as ‘Lor d Panini’ in the commentaries, 
and his contribution is acknowledged with deep grat itude : 
‘अ᭄ाना᭠ध᭭य लोक᭭य ᭄ानाᲳनशलाकया   । 
चᭃु्ᱧ᭠मीिलतं येन त᭭यै पािणनये नमः ’ 
(‘We bow to Panini who opened the eyes of the peopl e, blind with ignorance, 
by putting the collyrium of knowledge in them.’) 
Jnanadeva has said, 
‘घरा येवो पां ᭭वगᭅ । कां वᳯरपडो ᳞ाᮖ  
परी आ᭜मबु᭟दीसी भंग । कदा नोहे ’ Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 139  (‘Let heaven descend to his house, or a tiger attac k him, he remains anchored 
in the Self.’)  
Panini had reached such a stage. He had realized th at a tiger too was a 
manifestation of the Lord. 
19. This is true of the snake too. People are very much  afraid of it. But look, 
how scrupulously clean and beautiful it is!  In its  stern regard for cleanliness, it 
is comparable to an orthodox Brahmin . Dirty Brahmins  are, however, in 
abundance; but has anybody ever seen a dirty snake?   A snake is like a hermit 
living in solitude. It looks like a pure, bright an d charming garland. Why should 
one be afraid of it?  In fact, our ancestors have p rescribed snake-worship.4 You 
may call it an idiotic superstitious practice in Hi nduism, but anyway it is there. 
In my childhood, on the Nagpanchami day, I would draw a snake with 
sandalwood paste for my mother to worship. I would tell her, “Nice pictures of 
snakes are available in the market.” But she would say, “They are no good. 
What is drawn by my child is the best for me.”  Wha t does snake-worship 
mean?  Is it craziness?  Let us think over it. In t he month of Shravana  (in the 
rainy season), the snake comes as a guest to our ho use, as its habitat is 
swamped by water. What can the poor creature do the n?  This sage-like, 
solitude-loving creature wants to give you the leas t possible trouble and 
therefore coils itself taking minimum space. But we  go after its blood. Does it 
behove us to kill a guest in difficulty?  It is sai d of Saint Francis that he would 
call the snakes in the forest and they would come a nd play and crawl all over 
his body. Do not disbelieve this. Love does have su ch a power. The snakes are 
believed to be poisonous. But is man less so?  A sn ake bites very rarely; it never 
bites without provocation. Nine out of ten snakes, at any rate, are non-
poisonous. They protect your fields by killing pest s that would otherwise 
destroy the crops. Such a helpful, clean and shinin g snake, the lover of 
solitude, is a form of the Lord. Snakes are associa ted with all our gods in some 
way or the other. Lord Ganapati wears a snake round  His waist, Lord Shiva has 
it round His neck and Lord Vishnu reclines on the b ed of a cobra. Try to Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 140  understand the secret of it. All this means that th e Lord has manifested Himself 
in the snake too. Get acquainted with Him in that f orm. 
20. How many such examples should I give?  I am just il lustrating a point. The 
essence of the Ramayana lies in such fascinating id eas. In the Ramayana, there 
is depiction of love between father and son, betwee n mother and son, between 
brother and brother, between husband and wife etc. But the Ramayana is dear 
to me not because of that, but because of Rama’s fr iendship with the 
vanaras 5 (monkeys). Now it is said that the vanaras  were in reality people 
belonging to the Naga tribe. It is the job of the h istorians to dig up the past and 
make such discoveries. I do not intend to join issu e with them. But why should 
it be impossible for Rama to befriend the monkeys?  Rama’s greatness and the 
charm of His personality lie precisely in this frie ndship. Similar is the 
relationship between Krishna and His herd of cows. Worship of Krishna is based 
on that relationship. In every picture of Krishna w e find Him surrounded by 
cows. He is adored as Gopalkrishna (Krishna the cow herd.) Krishna without the 
company of cows and Rama without the company of vanaras  are simply 
inconceivable. Rama saw God in the vanaras  and struck a relationship of love 
and affection with them. This is the key to the Ram ayana. Without it you would 
miss the charm in it. You would find the depiction of relationship between 
parents and children elsewhere too, but the beautif ul relationship between 
nara  and vanara —men and monkeys—is found only in the Ramayana. The  
Ramayana made us realize that there is God in the m onkeys too. The sages 
admired the monkeys fondly. Those monkeys would tra vel from Ramtek to the 
Krishna river,6 skipping from tree to tree, without ever touching the ground. 
Such dense forests and the monkeys playing therein with gay abandon would 
move the sages to write poetry. In an Upanishad, Brahman (God) is described as 
having monkey-like eyes. A monkey’s eyes are very r estless; they are always 
watching everything around. Brahman ’s eyes ought to be like them. God cannot 
sit still with closed eyes; we may. If God sits sti ll, what will happen to the 
world? In the monkey’s eyes the sages see the eyes of the Brahman  watching all 
of us solicitously. Learn to see God in a monkey. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 141  21. And what about the peacock!  Peacocks are rare in M aharashtra, but 
Gujarat has them in plenty. I am habituated to walk ing ten to twelve miles 
daily. While in Gujarat, I used to see a lot of pea cocks during my walks. When 
the clouds gather in the sky and the rain looks imm inent, the peacock gives a 
call. To hear that cry emerging from the depths of its heart is a stirring 
experience. Our whole science of music is based on the note of that cry—the 
shadja  (ष᭙जं रौित ). Shadja  is the basic note of the Indian system of music. T he 
peacock, with its eyes raised towards the rain-heav y clouds, gives a deep-
throated cry and spreads its plummage the moment th e clouds begin to 
thunder. It certainly is a bewitching sight. The be auty and elegance of that 
plummage is enough to humble man’s pride. Kings may  bedeck themselves with 
all the fineries, but they cannot excel a peacock. Its plummage with 
innumerable shades of colours is indeed a piece of marvellous artistry. Enjoy its 
beauty and also see God therein. The whole creation  is bedecked in such a 
fascinating way. The Lord is there all around; but we, the wretched creatures, 
fail to behold him. Tukaram has said, ‘ देव आहे सुकाळ दᱶशी, अभा᭏यासी दुᳶभᭃ   ।। ’ The 
Lord is everywhere, but to the wretched He is elusi ve. For the saints there is 
prosperity everywhere, while for us there is famine . 
22. How can one forget the cuckoo?  Whom does it call?  In the summer, rivers 
and streams dry up, but tender green leaves sprout on trees. Does it ask, ‘Who 
brought about this marvel?  Where is its creator?’  How intense and sweet is its 
voice!  A religious observance named kokilavrata  has been prescribed in 
Hinduism. Women observing this vrata take food only after hearing the 
cuckoo’s note. This observance teaches us to see th e Lord in the cuckoo. The 
cuckoo seems to be chanting the Upanishads in its m elodious voice. One hears 
its voice, but it remains hidden. The poet Wordswor th was so enchanted by the 
cuckoo that he would wander in the forest in search  of it. The great poet of 
England is mad after a cuckoo; but in India, even o rdinary housewives do not 
take food without hearing its voice. This  kokilavrata  has put ordinary Indian 
women at par with the great poet. To hear the cucko o’s sweet singing is the 
height of joy. The Lord has manifested Himself in t he form of the cuckoo also.  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 142  23. A cuckoo is worthy of admiration; is a crow less so ?  I like it very much. Its 
voice may be shrill, still it has its own sweetness . How nice a crow looks when 
it arrives fluttering its wings!  Little children a re particularly attracted to it. A 
child does not like to take his food within the fou r walls of the house. You have 
to take him into the open yard and make him eat by turning his attention 
towards crows and sparrows. Is this attraction of a  child for a crow a sign of 
craziness?  No. Rather, it is a sign of wisdom. A c hild instantly identifies itself 
with the Lord manifested in the crow. A mother may otherwise try in many 
ways to persuade him to eat; the child remains stub born. But he gets absorbed 
in observing the crow fluttering its wings, and eat s unmindfully what the 
mother puts into his mouth. Aesop’s fables are base d on the child’s curiosity 
about nature. Aesop saw the Lord everywhere. If I p repare a list of the books I 
like, Aesop’s Fables would be on the top of that li st. Aesop’s world does not 
have human beings only; it also has foxes, dogs, ha res, wolves, crows, tortoises 
etc. The whole creation speaks to Aesop. He has a d ivine vision. The Ramayana 
too is based on that vision. Tulsidas, while descri bing Rama’s childhood, has 
narrated a little incident. Rama, playing in the co urtyard, tries to catch a crow 
nearby, but in vain. Then Rama hits upon an idea. H e takes a piece of sweet in 
his hands and lures the crow. Tulsidas has written lines after lines describing 
such an ordinary incident. Why? Because the crow to o is a form of the Lord. 
God that is in Rama is there in that crow too. The acquaintance between Rama 
and the crow is one between two manifestations of t he Supreme Self.  
 
54. Seeing God In Villains Too  
24. To sum up, God is everywhere in the universe. As ho ly rivers, high 
mountains, serene oceans, tender-hearted cows, nobl e horses, majestic lions, 
sweet-voiced cuckoos, beautiful peacocks, clean and  solitude-loving snakes, 
crows flapping their wings, the upward-rising flame s, the still stars—He is 
pervading the whole creation in different forms. We  should train our eyes to 
see Him everywhere, first in simple forms and then in the complex ones. We 
should first learn simple letters and then the comp lex ‘joint’ letters. Until we Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 143  learn the ‘joint’ letters, there is no progress in reading. Unless we are able to 
see God manifest in crooked forms, our progress wil l be hampered. At every 
step, we shall come across the ‘joint’ letters. We shall come across crooked 
and evil forms every now and then. In the end, we m ust learn to see God in the 
villains too. God in Rama is readily acceptable, bu t we must also comprehend 
divinity in Ravana. God in Prahlad is readily accep table, but we must also 
comprehend divinity in Hiranyakashipu 7. The Veda has said, ‘ नमो नमः ᭭तेनानां पतये 
नमो नमः....नमः   पुंिज᳧े᭤यो.....नमो िनषादे᭤यः.....   ᮩ ᳬ दाशा ᮩᳬ दासा, ᮩᳬैवेमे ᳰकतवाः ’ 
 ‘Salutation to the robber chieftain, salutations t o the cruel and the violent. 
The robbers, the cruel, the swindlers, all are Brahman . Salutations to them 
all.’ 
What does this mean? This means that after masterin g the small letters, we 
should master the capital letters; after mastering the simple, we should master 
the complex. Carlyle has written a book on hero-wor ship. Therein he has called 
Napoleon a hero. God in him is not in a pure form, there is a mixture; but we 
must discern Him there too. That is why Tulsidas ha s called Ravana ‘Rama’s 
devotee in opposition.’  Ravana too is a devotee, a lbeit of a different type. Fire 
burns and causes swelling in the burnt part of the body, but the swelling 
subsides after fomentation, that is, after using a different form of the same 
element. The same element thus does different thing s while it is in different 
forms. Rama and Ravana are manifestations of one an d the only God, although 
appearances are different.  
Gross and subtle, simple and complex, small letters  and capital letters—learn 
everything and realise in the end that there is no place where the Lord is not 
present. He is present in every atom. He pervades t he whole universe. The Lord 
who cares equally for all, who is full of knowledge  and wisdom, love, 
compassion, power, beauty and holiness, is everywhe re all around us. 
(24.4.32)  
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 144   
References:  
1. The fearful form of the Lord, out to annihilate the  whole world. 
2. In Nagari script, alphabets are joined to form join t alphabets.  Their form may 
change in the process.  Therefore, they are more di fficult to learn. 
3. The mother of Pandavas and the aunt of Lord Krishna . 
4. The snakes are worshipped on Nagpanchami , the fifth day in the month of Shravana . 
5. Please refer footnote, Chapter 4.7 
6. Ramtek, a place in central India is over 800 kms. f rom the river Krishna in south-
western India.  All this area was covered with dens e forest in the time of the 
Ramayana. 
7. Hiranyakashipu, the demon king, was the father of P rahlad, a devotee of Lord 
Vishnu.  He tried to kill his own son for worshippi ng his arch-enemy, but failed in 
every attempt.  Lord Vishnu finally killed him, ass uming the form of Narasimha (the 
lion-man). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 145   
CHAPTER 11 
VISION OF THE COSMIC FORM OF GOD  
55. Arjuna’s Eagerness To Behold The Cosmic Form Of  God.  
1. Brothers, last week we learnt how to recognise divi ne presence in the 
countless things in this universe and how to let th at comprehension sink deep 
into us. We saw that one should discern divinity st ep-by-step, first in the simple 
and the gross and then in the complex and the subtl e manifestations of the 
Lord. One should thus see God everywhere, realise H im and through constant 
practice, learn to see the whole creation as the Se lf. 
Now we turn to the Eleventh Chapter. In this Chapte r the Lord has showered 
His highest grace on Arjuna by showing him His divi ne cosmic form. Arjuna had 
expressed a desire to see the Lord in His fullness,  in the form in which all His 
splendour and glory are fully manifest. What Arjuna  sought was to behold the 
cosmic form of the Lord. 
2. Our world is only a small part of the universe, and  we do not have an 
adequate understanding of even this small part. In relation to the universe this 
world, which appears so vast to us, is quite insign ificant. If we look up at the 
night sky, we see it dotted with innumerable points  of light. Do you know the 
real nature of those festoons of light hung up in t he sky, those lovely little 
flowers, those millions of twinkling stars?  They a re actually many times bigger 
and brighter than the sun. And they are countless. Even the naked eye can see 
thousands of them; a telescope would reveal them in  millions. With an 
advanced telescope, trillions could be visible. The re seems to be no end to 
them. Our world is but a tiny fragment of this boun dless creation; still we find 
it so vast! 
3. This vast creation is but one aspect of the Lord. A nother aspect is that of 
time. If we consider the past, our knowledge of his tory goes back at most to 
ten thousand years. Of the future, we know nothing.  Span of known history is 
ten thousand years, and our own lifespan is of hard ly hundred years!  Time is, Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 146  in fact, without beginning and without end. It is i mpossible to count the time 
that has passed into the past. It is equally imposs ible to have any idea of the 
time that is yet to come. Just as our world is insi gnificant compared to the 
universe, the ten thousand years of known history a re insignificant compared to 
the infinite time. The past is without a beginning and the future is without an 
end. As for the infinitesimal present, it is slippi ng into the past every moment. 
Even as we try to point out a finger at its presenc e, it has already passed into 
the past. This fleeting present is all that is with  us. I am speaking now, but the 
moment I utter a word, it becomes a part of the pas t. The stream of time is 
flowing continuously. We know neither its beginning  nor its end. What comes to 
our view is just a tiny portion of that stream in t he middle. 
4. Thus, when we look at creation we find a vast expan se of space on one 
hand, and on the other there is flow of time that h as neither beginning nor end. 
It then becomes clear that howsoever much we stretc h our imagination, we can 
never see the limits of it. In Arjuna’s mind arises  a desire to have a vision of 
the Lord in His omnipresent and all-pervading form,  the form that fills all the 
three-dimensional space and all the three-dimension al time. He wants to see 
Him all at once, at the same moment. This Chapter h as its genesis in that 
desire. 
5. Arjuna was very dear to the Lord; so dear that, in the Tenth Chapter, 
while mentioning different manifestations in which He is to be contemplated, 
the Lord has said, “Among the Pandavas, contemplate  Me in the form of 
Arjuna.” Can love ever be more crazy? This is the h eight of madness in love. 
The Lord’s Love for Arjuna knew no bounds. The Elev enth Chapter is the 
blessed gift of that Love. The Lord endowed Arjuna with the divine vision and 
fulfilled his desire to see His cosmic form.  
 
56. Full Vision Even In A Small Image  
6. This Chapter contains the beautiful and magnificent  description of that 
supreme divine form. However, I am not particularly  enamoured of it. I am 
quite happy with the small and lovable form which I  see. I have learnt to Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 147  appreciate the beauty therein. The Lord is not made  up of a number of parts. It 
does not appear to me that what I see is only a par t and the rest of Him is 
somewhere else. The Lord who pervades this vast uni verse is present in His 
fullness in a small idol; and even in a speck of du st. He is not a bit less there. 
An ocean of nectar and a drop therein have the same  sweetness. I am inclined 
to enjoy the sweetness in the little drop of nectar  that I have got. I have 
purposely chosen the example of nectar and not that  of milk or water. The 
sweetness that is in a cup of milk is certainly the re in a jar of milk; but the 
nourishment they provide is not the same. But such is not the case with nectar. 
Even a drop of nectar will make you immortal.  
In the same way, the divinity and sanctity that are  present in the Lord’s 
supreme form are there even in a small idol. If I c annot judge the quality of 
wheat from a handful of grains given to me as a sam ple, how can I judge its 
quality from a sackful of it?  If I fail to recogni se Him in His small form that is 
before my eyes, how can I recognise Him in His cosm ic form?  Hence I am not 
eager to have the vision of His cosmic form; nor am  I worthy, like Arjuna, to ask 
for it. Moreover, what I see is not a part of the c osmic form. We would not 
have an idea about the whole of a photograph from i ts fragment. But the Lord 
is not made up of parts. He has not been cut up and  divided into fragments. He 
is fully there even in a small form. What is the di fference between a small 
photograph and its enlarged copy?  Everything that is there in the big 
photograph is there in the small photograph too. Th e latter is not a fragment of 
the big photograph. A word may be printed in big ty pe or small type; this makes 
no difference as far as its meaning is concerned. I dol-worship has its basis in 
this way of thinking. 
7. Many people have assailed idol-worship. Many thinke rs from India and 
abroad have found fault with it. But the more I thi nk of it, the more I realise its 
beauty. What does idol-worship signify?  It is the art of learning to experience 
the whole universe in a small object. Is it not rig ht to learn to see the whole 
universe in a small village?  It is not mere fancy;  it is a matter of experience. 
That which inheres in the cosmic form is there in a  small idol as well. The world Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 148  is in a grain of sand. In a small theatre troupe, t he same set of actors play a 
variety of roles. The Lord does likewise. Like a pl aywright who acts in a play 
written by him, the Lord writes innumerable plays a nd enacts innumerable 
roles in them. Recognising Him in one role is as go od as recognising Him fully. 
8. The basis of idol-worship is the same as that of si miles and metaphors in 
poetry. A circle or a sphere is nice to see, as the re is order and symmetry in it, 
and these are divine attributes. The Lord’s creatio n is beautiful in all respects. 
There is order and harmony in it. A sphere is an im age of the shapeliness of the 
Lord. A twisted and disorderly tree in a forest is also His manifestation; therein 
you find the Lord’s freedom. That tree knows no con straints; and it is true of 
the Lord as well. The unconstrained and self-willed  Lord is there in that 
unshapely tree. A straight column shows His straigh tness. In a pillar with 
decorative engraving we see the Lord who decorates the sky with stars. We see 
His restraint in a well-laid out garden and in a pr imeval forest we see His 
freedom and grandeur. We experience joy in a forest  as well as in a well-
maintained garden. Is it strange?  No. It happens b ecause divine attributes are 
visible in both of them. An idol may be smooth or m isshapen; nevertheless, the 
divinity therein is the same. I would not, therefor e, mind if I could not get to 
see the cosmic form of the Lord apart from His pres ence in the creation. 
9. It is because the Lord is present in different obje cts as different attributes 
that we find joy in them and feel a kind of relatio nship with them. The joy is 
not without a cause; it is there because we are som ehow related to them. A 
child is a source of joy to his mother, as she know s the kinship. So, relate every 
object to the Lord. Realise that the Lord within yo u is there in that object too. 
As this realisation grows, your joy too will increa se. There is no other source of 
real joy. Start establishing relationships of love and see the wonderful results. 
You will then see in every speck of dust the Lord w ho is immanent in the whole 
creation. Once one gains this realisation, what mor e would one ask for?  But, 
for this purpose, the sense-organs must be discipli ned and trained. When the 
lust for sensual pleasures gives way to the pure sp irit of love, you will find Him 
and Him only in each and every object. There is a b eautiful description of the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 149  colour of the soul in an Upanishad. What could be i ts colour?  The sage says 
lovingly, ‘ यथा अयं इंᮤगोपः ’ (‘The soul is like an indragop’)1. The sight of an 
indragop fills us with immense joy. Why? Because th at which exists in me exists 
in the indragop too. Had there been no relation wit h it, I would not have felt 
such joy. The indragop too has the same beautiful s oul that I have. That is why 
the simile of indragop is given. Why do we use simi les?  Why do we find joy in 
them?  A simile pleases us as there is some similar ity between the objects 
compared; otherwise it would not be pleasing. If so mebody says that salt is like 
pepper, we would call him crazy; but if somebody sa ys that the stars are like 
flowers, we see the likeness and appreciate the sim ile. We find nothing 
common between salt and pepper; but if someone’s vi sion has become broad 
enough to see that the Lord who is present in salt is present in the pepper too, 
he would be delighted with the statement that ‘salt  is like pepper.’  What all 
this means is that everything in the world is fille d with the Lord’s presence. To 
realise this, one need not have the vision of the c osmic form. 
 
57. Vision Of The Cosmic Form Is Difficult To Bear  
10. Besides, how can I bear the vision of that cosmic f orm?  That form may not 
perhaps give rise to the same feelings of love and tender intimacy that I have 
for a small, beautiful and saguna  form. It happened with Arjuna too. He started 
trembling and beseeched the Lord to assume the fami liar and lovable form 
again. Arjuna is thus cautioning us from his own ex perience that we should not 
have the desire to see the cosmic form. It is good for us that the Lord is 
distributed over the entire three-dimensional space  and three-dimensional 
time. If He were to condense Himself and appear bef ore us as a glowing and 
fiercely hot ball of fire, what would our plight be ?  The distant stars appear 
tranquil. They seem to speak to us. But what would happen if a star that 
soothes the eye from afar were to approach us close ly?  It is a ball of fire which 
is sure to burn us down. Let all things in the cosm os remain where they are; 
what is the sense in bringing all of them in a sing le room?  One feels strange in Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 150  watching thousands of pigeons packed in a small avi ary. What freedom do they 
have?  It is good that the creation is spread all o ver the space. 
11. What is true of space is true of time too. We do no t remember the past 
and have no idea of the future; and that is good fo r us. The Holy Koran has 
mentioned five things which are exclusively under t he control of God, and man 
can do nothing about them. Knowledge of the future is one of those things. We 
can at best make a guess; but a guess is not knowle dge. It is indeed a happy 
situation that we do not have knowledge of the futu re and forget most of the 
past. Even if a bad man becomes good, we remember h is past and do not 
respect him. We cannot forget his past sins, howsoe ver hard he may try to 
convince us about his transformation. It is only wh en the person dies and is 
reborn in a different form that the world will forg et his sins. 
Remembrance of the past causes attachment and contr ibutes to the growth of 
passions. All our problems will be solved when all the memories and 
perceptions of the past are forgotten. There must b e some way of forgetting all 
the sinful and meritorious deeds. Death is such a w ay. When we cannot endure 
the suffering in this birth, why rake up the muck o f the past births?  Is the muck 
in this birth not enough?  We even forget most of o ur childhood years, and it is 
good that we forget them. For instance, the only me ans to achieve Hindu-
Muslim unity is to forget the past. Yes, Aurangzeb did commit atrocities; but 
how long are we going to harp on them?  There is a famous garba  song by 
Ratanbai in Gujarati. It says at the end, “In this world, what good the people 
achieve will be remembered; their sins will be forg otten.”  Time is sifting 
everybody’s deeds. We should take only what is good  from history and cast off 
what is evil. It would indeed be wonderful if one r emembers the good only. But 
alas!  It does not happen. Hence forgetting is extr emely necessary. God has 
created death for this purpose. 
12. In short, the world, as it is, is auspicious. There  is no need to pack this 
vast world of time and space into a little spot. Ex cessive familiarity is not good. 
We should be intimate with some things and maintain  a distance from some 
things. We respectfully keep a distance from the te acher, but would love to sit Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 151  in the mother’s lap. There is an appropriate way to  behave with anybody and 
deal with anything. A flower may be taken in the ha nd, but fire should be kept 
away. The beauty of the stars can be admired from a  distance only. It is true 
for all creation. It is not that something that giv es delight from afar will give 
more delight when brought near. Let the things rema in where they are. It is in 
our interest to let them be at a proper distance, a ppreciate them from a 
distance and derive joy from them, rather than tryi ng to bring them near in a 
clumsy and overbearing manner for the sake of exces sive familiarity. 
13. Thus, it is good that we do not live in Time in all  its aspects—past, present 
and future. Knowledge of all of it is not necessari ly pleasing or beneficial. 
Arjuna beseeched the Lord with love, and He fulfill ed his desire by revealing to 
him His cosmic form. But for us, His small form is sufficient. It is not, after all, 
a part of the Lord; the whole of the Lord is presen t therein. Even if it is only a 
part, I would consider myself blessed if I could ha ve a glimpse of even that 
part. This is what experience has taught me. When J amnalalji Bajaj opened the 
Laxminarayan temple at Wardha to the untouchables, I too had gone there. My 
gaze was fixed on the idol for some fifteen or twen ty minutes. I was as if in a 
state of samadhi . Beholding the Lord’s image from tip to toe, my ey es finally 
rested at His feet. There was no thought in my mind  except ‘ गोड तुझी चरणसेवा ’/f02e 
(‘Sweet indeed is Your humble service!’)  If the gr eat Lord cannot be contained 
in a small form, it is enough to behold His feet. A rjuna pleaded for the vision of 
the cosmic form. He was worthy enough to ask for it . How intimate was his 
relationship with the Lord!  What claims can I have ?  If I could see His feet, it is 
enough for me; I deserve nothing more.  
 
58. The Quintessence Of The Gita  
14. I am not at all inclined to use my reason or intell ect in analysing the 
description of that divine cosmic form; that would be a sacrilege. We should 
instead recite those holy verses again and again an d purify ourselves. To 
analyse the cosmic form would be a monstrosity. It would be like following in 
the footsteps of the aghorpanthis  who go to the cremation grounds and Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 152  mutilate the corpses to gain occult powers. We shou ld instead recite those holy 
verses that describe the Lord’s grand and infinite form, which has also been 
described as ‘ िव᳡त᳟ᭃुᱧत िव᳡तोमुखो िव᳡तोबाᱟᱧत िव᳡त᭭पात् ’2 (‘The one whose 
eyes are everywhere, whose mouths are everywhere, w hose hands are 
everywhere, whose legs are everywhere...’) and make  our mind sinless and 
pure. 
15. In this description, there is only one point at whi ch the mind begins to 
think. The Lord has said to Arjuna, “All these warr iors are going to die. Be only 
an occasion, an instrument. I have already slain th em.” These words keep 
ringing in the ears. When the idea that I should be come His instrument arises in 
the mind, one begins to think. How to do it?  How c ould I become the Lord’s 
flute?  To become His flute, I shall have to become  hollow; then only He can 
produce sweet tunes through me. I shall have to be free from all passions, vices 
and evil propensities. If I am fully stuffed with t hem, how can He play 
melodious tunes through me?  I am stuffed with ego.  I must purge myself of 
that and become hollow. But, in fact, it is prepost erous of me to aspire to 
become His flute. Even if I wish to become the sand als on His feet, it is not 
easy. The sandals should be so soft that they do no t pinch or otherwise cause 
any pain to His feet. So I would have to become sof t. I would have to protect 
His feet from the thorns. I would have to cure and make myself firm and 
strong, yet supple and soft. It is not thus easy to  become His sandals. If I want 
to become His weapon, I must not just be a lump of iron; I must sharpen myself 
through penance so that I could become a sword in H is hands. This thought 
reverberates in my mind and I lose myself in it. 
16. The Lord has Himself told, in the last verse of thi s Chapter, how to do it, 
how this can come about. Shankaracharya has, in his  commentary on the Gita, 
called this verse ‘the quintessence of the Gita’—  
‘म᭜कमक ृ ᭠म᭜परमो मदभᲦः स᭙गवᳶजतः  
िनवᱺरः सवᭅभूतेषु यः स मामेित पा᭛डव  ।। ’ Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 153  He who is free from enmity to all creatures, who is  ever engrossed in serving 
the world impartially without any expectations, who  dedicates all his actions to 
the Lord, who is full of devotion, who forgives all  and is detached and full of 
love, becomes an instrument of the Lord. This is th e essence of the Gita’s 
teaching.   
(1.5.32)  
 
References:  
1. Indragop is an extremely beautiful insect with brig ht red velvet-like skin.  It appears 
at the beginning of the rainy season. 
2. Rig Veda, Mandal 10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 154   
CHAPTER 12 
SAGUNA AND NIRGUNA BHAKTI 
59. Chapters 6 To 11: From One-Pointedness to Total ity  
1. Brothers, the waters of the river Ganga are holy ev erywhere, but some 
places on her banks like Haridwar, Kashi (Benares) and Prayag (Allahabad) are 
considered particularly holy. They have blessed the  whole world. The Gita too 
is holy from the beginning to the end, still some o f its Chapters have special 
holiness like the places of pilgrimage. The Chapter  on which I am going to talk 
today is one such Chapter. The Lord Himself has des cribed it as the nectar: ‘ ये तु 
ध᭥यामृतिमदं यथो᭜क ं  पयुᭅपासते । ’1□This is a small Chapter with only twenty verses; 
but it is sweet and life-giving like a spring of ne ctar. The Lord has Himself 
eulogised here the greatness of bhakti . 
2. In fact, the principle of bhakti has been introduced in the Sixth Chapter 
itself. The first five Chapters deal with the scien ce of life. They deal with 
karma (in the form of performance of swadharma) , vikarma  (the mental 
sadhana , the inner complementary process which helps that karma ) and the 
final state of akarma  that results from their confluence and burns to as hes all 
the karma . With this, the exposition of the science of life is complete. In one 
sense, it is the principle of bhakti  that has been discussed thereafter from the 
Sixth Chapter to the Eleventh. The Sixth Chapter te lls us how to have one-
pointedness of mind and discusses the means therefo r and the need for it. The 
Eleventh Chapter presents the complete and holistic  vision. Let us now see how 
we have made the long journey from one-pointedness to this vision. 
Beginning was made with one-pointedness of mind. On ce this is achieved, one 
becomes capable of pursuing any subject. One-pointe dness of mind can be 
utilized for the study of any subject with good res ults. But this is not the 
highest goal of the concentration of mind. The stud y of mathematics, for 
example, does not fully test the concentration of m ind. Concentration of mind 
can surely help in achieving proficiency in mathema tics or any other branch of Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 155  knowledge, but this is not its true test. Hence it was recommended in the 
Seventh Chapter that we should concentrate our mind  at the feet of the Lord. 
The Eighth Chapter exhorts us to try, till the mome nt of death, to be at the 
feet of the Lord with all the sense-organs devoted to Him and the whole being 
dedicated to His service. All our organs must be tr ained to serve this one 
purpose. ‘ पिडलᱶ वळण इंᳰᮤयां सकळां  । भाव तो िनराळा नाहᱭ दुजा  ।। ’ (‘All the senses have 
become used to devotion; there is nothing else in t he mind.’) This is what 
should happen. All the senses should be madly in lo ve of the Lord. Those 
around us may be wailing or singing hymns, they may  be absorbed in weaving 
webs of desires and passions, or one may be in the company of saintly persons; 
whatever may be the condition, the senses should be  trained by constant 
practice in such a way that the thought of the Lord  would be in mind at the 
moment of death. This lesson of constancy has been given in the Eighth 
Chapter. To sum up, there is teaching of concentrat ion of mind in the Sixth 
Chapter, that of prapatti or concentration directed to the Lord in the Sevent h, 
of the yoga of ceaseless striving in the Eighth and that of ded ication to the Lord 
in the Ninth Chapter. The Tenth Chapter tells us ho w to proceed step-by-step 
to come to grasp gradually that the Lord is pervadi ng the entire creation right 
from an ant to the creator of all beings. The Eleve nth Chapter presents the 
complete and holistic vision. I call this vision of  the cosmic form as the yoga of 
totality. This vision essentially means realising t hat the whole world is 
contained in a grain of sand. This is the complete and total vision. The element 
of bhakti has thus been examined from different angles from t he Sixth to the 
Eleventh Chapter.  
 
60. The Saguna  And The Nirguna  Devotee  
3. This discussion of bhakti is going to be completed in the Twelfth Chapter. 
Arjuna has asked a question here, which is similar to what he had asked in the 
Fifth Chapter, when the exposition of the science o f life was concluded. He 
asks: “Some devotees worship you in saguna form  while others worship you in 
nirguna 2 form. Whom do you like more?”  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 156  4. What answer could the Lord give?  It is just like a sking a mother having two 
sons, “Whom do you love more?”  The younger son is a little child, deeply 
attached to his mother. He is happy only in her com pany and is restive if she is 
out of sight even for a moment. He cannot bear sepa ration from her even for a 
moment. Without her, the world is like a big void f or him. The elder son too is 
full of love for the mother, but he is grown up and  mature. He can stay away 
from her. He serves her and takes all the burden an d responsibility upon 
himself. Being absorbed in work, he can endure sepa ration from her. He is 
admired by the world and his reputation pleases his  mother. If you tell this 
mother that she can have only one of these two sons  and she will have to 
choose between them, what could she do?  How can sh e make a choice?  Try to 
understand her plight. She will be totally nonpluss ed and may mumble, “I can 
bear separation from the elder one if I cannot help  it.” It is more difficult for 
her to tear away the younger son from her bosom. Hi s special attachment to 
her will weigh with her and she may reply according ly. But it cannot be said to 
be the real answer to the question as to which of t he two sons is dearer to her. 
She will reply, if she must; but it would not be pr oper to take her words 
literally. 
5. The Lord has been put exactly in the same predicame nt. Arjuna asks the 
Lord, “O Lord!  One of the two devotees loves You m adly. His mind is riveted 
on You. His eyes long to see You, his ears are eage r to hear Your praise, his 
hands yearn to serve and worship You. The other one  is self-reliant, he has 
controlled his senses and is ever-absorbed in worki ng for the well-being of all. 
Engaged in selfless service of the society day and night, he does not even seem 
to remember You. He has realised oneness with the e ntire creation.  Out of 
these two, whom do You love more?” The Lord has rep lied exactly like that 
mother. He says, ‘I love the former—the saguna bhakta —and the latter too is 
Mine.’ The Lord is clearly on the horns of a dilemm a. He has somehow given a 
reply just for the sake of replying.  
6. In fact, this is the truth. There is absolutely no difference between these 
two types of devotees. Both have equal merit. To co mpare the two is to Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 157  transgress the limit of propriety. The question tha t Arjuna had asked in the 
Fifth Chapter about karma has been asked here about bhakti . In the Fifth 
Chapter, it has been told that man attains the stat e of akarma with the help of 
karma and vikarma  and that the state of akarma appears in two forms. The 
yogi  works ceaselessly, but does nothing inwardly; whil e the sannyasi  sets the 
world in motion without doing anything outwardly. H ow to compare these two 
states?  How to compare the two halves of the same sphere? They are 
completely identical. For the two states of akarma,  two different terms have 
been used:  yoga and sannyasa;  but they have the same meaning. The question 
of choice between them has finally been clinched on  the ground of relative 
easiness. 
7. The question of choice between saguna and nirguna is similar. The saguna 
devotee  serves the Lord through his organs, whereas the nirguna  devotee  thinks 
of the good of the whole world. The former appears absorbed in outward 
service, but his mind is absorbed in the contemplat ion of the Lord. The latter 
does not appear to be rendering any concrete servic e, but he is certainly 
rendering a great service from within. Which one of  these two devotees is 
superior? These two types of devotees may appear ou twardly different, but 
they are intrinsically one and the same. Both of th em are dear to the Lord. But 
saguna bhakti  is easier. The answer given here is similar to the  one given in the 
Fifth Chapter.  
 
61. Saguna  Is Easy And Safe  
8. In the yoga of saguna bhakti organs can be directly employed. The organs 
could either be a help or a hindrance or both. Whet her they save or destroy 
depends on the way we look at them. Suppose a man’s  mother is on the death-
bed and he wants to meet her. But there is a distan ce of fifteen miles between 
them. There is no motorable road; there is only a n arrow trail that passes 
through a jungle. Now, in this situation, is the tr ail a means or a hindrance? The 
man may curse the trail at every step and say, “But  for this trail, I would be at 
my mother’s side this moment.” For him, the trail i s an enemy. He would walk Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 158  on it, as he must, but he will stamp his feet all a long with irritation. If he looks 
upon it as his enemy and sits down in despair, his supposed enemy will conquer 
him. But if he walks fast, he will overcome it. Ano ther man may say, “The 
jungle separates me from my mother. But, thank God,  at least this narrow trail 
is there. It will take me to my mother. Otherwise, how could I have crossed this 
wilderness?”  He would consider the trail as a mean s and walk swiftly along it. 
He would regard it as a friend and would have grati tude for it. It does not 
matter what you think of the road; there is no alte rnative to walking on it. It is 
your attitude and outlook which will decide whether  the road is a means or a 
hindrance. This is true about the organs as well.  
9. For the saguna  devotee, the organs are the means (to realise the Lord). 
They are like flowers that are to be offered to the  Lord. With his eyes he 
beholds His form; with his ears, he listens to His praise and His edifying stories; 
with his mouth, he chants His Name. He uses his leg s for pilgrimage and hands 
to render service. In this way, he dedicates all hi s organs to the Lord. For him, 
they are no longer the means for enjoyment. The flo wers are there to be 
offered to the Lord; one should not put their garla nd around one’s own neck. 
Likewise, the organs should be used in the service of the Lord. This is the 
outlook of the saguna devotee. But to a nirguna devotee the organs appear to 
be a hindrance. He restrains them, starves them, ke eps a watch over them. The 
saguna devotee  feels no need to do so . He surrenders his organs at the feet of 
the Lord. Both these are methods of controlling the  organs. Whatever be the 
way, it is imperative to restrain the organs and pr event them from wallowing in 
the pleasures of the senses. But one way is easier while the other one is 
difficult. 
10. Nirguna devotee is dedicated to the good of all. This is no  ordinary thing; 
it is easier said than done. One who is absorbed in  thinking about the good of 
the whole world can do nothing else. Hence nirguna sadhana is difficult. Saguna 
worship, on the other hand, can be done by anybody according to his capacity. 
To serve the small village we are born in or to loo k after our parents is a form 
of saguna worship. Such service should, of course, not go aga inst the interests Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 159  of the world. No matter how small your service is, it will have the character of 
bhakti  if it does not go against the good of others. Othe rwise it will be a sort of 
attachment. The saguna  worship consists of serving parents, friends, dist ressed 
people and saints, considering them as forms of the  Lord, and is content 
therein. It is easy. Hence, although both saguna  and nirguna  bhakti  are 
essentially the same, saguna  is preferable on the ground of relative easiness. 
11. Apart from the point of easiness, there is one more  point. Nirguna worship 
is fraught with some risk. N irguna  is all knowledge ( Jnana ). But saguna  is full of 
love and tenderness and the warmth of feelings. A d evotee is more secure 
therein. There was a time when I relied much on kno wledge, but experience 
has taught me that knowledge alone is not enough. I t does burn down gross 
impurities in the mind, but is powerless to wash aw ay subtler impurities. Self-
reliance, enquiry (into the nature of the Self), di scrimination (between the Self 
and the not-Self), abhyasa  (constant practice), vairagya  (detachment and 
dispassion)—all these means taken together are of l ittle avail here. Subtle 
impurities can be washed away only by the waters of  bhakti . Only bhakti has 
the efficacy to do it.  You may call it dependence; but it is dependence on  
nobody else but the Lord. The mind cannot be comple tely cleansed without His 
help. 
12. Some may say, “You are giving a narrow meaning to t he word ‘knowledge’ 
(Jnana ). To hold that knowledge cannot cleanse the mind c ompletely is to 
undervalue it.” This objection is certainly valid. But my point is that it is hard 
to attain pure knowledge while living in the mortal  body. The knowledge that 
we can have while we are encased in this body is bo und to be somewhat 
imperfect and incomplete; its power is bound to be limited. Pure knowledge 
will undoubtedly burn to ashes all the impurities i n the mind; and along with it, 
it will burn down the mind itself. But when associa ted with the weak flesh, its 
power proves to be inadequate. It cannot therefore wash away subtle 
impurities. One has to take recourse to bhakti  for this purpose. A man is 
therefore more secure in bhakti. This is my personal assessment. Saguna  bhakti 
is easier, as there is reliance on the Lord whereas  in nirguna bhakti there is Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 160  self-reliance. But, after all, what does ‘self’ in ‘self-reliance’ mean?  It means 
reliance on the Lord that dwells within us. You can not find anybody purified 
solely through reason. Through Self-reliance, that is, through knowledge of the 
Self within, we shall have pure knowledge. Thus, ev en in nirguna bhakti, 
reliance is on the Self.  
 
62. Without Nirguna,  Saguna  Is Defective  
13. I mentioned easiness and security as two plus point s of saguna worship. I 
can mention a few plus points of nirguna  worship also. In nirguna , one remains 
within limits. To take an example, we establish ins titutions to undertake 
various kinds of service. Initially an individual e stablishes an institution. He is 
its main pillar. Everything revolves round him. But  as the institution grows, it 
should not remain dependent on a single individual;  it should then be guided by 
principles. Otherwise decline is bound to set in so on after the departure of that 
individual. To take my favourite illustration, one cannot continue spinning 
when the belt on the wheel snaps nor can then one w ind up the yarn already 
spun. This is what happens to the institution when it loses the key person. It 
then becomes orphaned. This would not happen if the  institution advances from 
devotedness to an individual to devotedness to prin ciples.  
14. Saguna needs help from nirguna . One must eventually learn to free oneself 
from attachment to and preoccupation with individua ls and outer forms. The 
Ganga emerges from the Himalayas, from the locks of  Lord Shiva, but she does 
not linger there; leaving that support behind, she flows through the hills and 
the forests to the plains, and can therefore benefi t the people. In the same 
way, an institution should be ready to adopt princi ples as its mainstay in the 
eventuality of losing the support of the key indivi dual. While constructing an 
arch, support is given to it; but the support has t o be withdrawn later. If the 
arch remains firmly in place after the support is r emoved, the support can be 
said to have done its work. Saguna  is indeed the source of inspiration, but the 
ultimate culmination must be in nirguna,  in commitment to principles. Self-Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 161  knowledge must ultimately emerge from the womb of d evotion. The plant of 
bhakti must blossom into the flower of Self-knowledge. 
15. Lord Buddha had realised this. He therefore prescri bed three-fold 
surrender. Initially, one may be loyal to an indivi dual, but that loyalty should, 
in due course, grow into commitment to principles. If this is not immediately 
possible, it should at least develop into a commitm ent to sangha  (the 
community of like-minded persons). Respect for one individual should be 
replaced by respect for a group of individuals. If there is no love and 
commitment for the sangha , there would be dissensions and conflicts within i t. 
Loyalty to an individual should thus advance to com mitment to the community 
of the like-minded and from that to commitment to t he principles. ‘ बु᭟दं शरणं 
ग᭒छािम   ।  संघं शरणं ग᭒छािम   ।  धमᭅ शरणं ग᭒छािम   ।’  (‘I take refuge in Buddha, I take 
refuge in sangha , I take refuge in dharma .’) This is the three-fold surrender 
prescribed in Buddhism. Love for an individual or f or a group is shaky. There 
must eventually be commitment to principles. Then o nly the institution will be 
beneficial to the society. Even though the initial source of inspiration is saguna , 
saguna  must ultimately reach fruition in nirguna .  Saguna becomes defective in 
the absence of nirguna .  Nirguna  keeps saguna  balanced and within bounds; 
and the latter must be thankful for it. 
16. There is idol-worship, in some form or the other, i n all the religions 
including Hinduism, Islam and Christianity. Althoug h it is not considered the 
highest form of worship, it has been accepted and r espected. As long as it 
remains within the bounds set by nirguna , it remains free from defects. As soon 
as it crosses these bounds, defects appear in sagun a  idol-worship.  This has 
happened in all the religions: saguna therein has degenerated in the absence of 
restraint from nirguna . Animal sacrifice was prevalent in yajnas  and other rites 
in ancient times, and even today animals are sacrif iced to Goddess Kali. It is a 
travesty of idol-worship. It means that idol-worshi p has crossed the bounds and 
has gone astray. This risk is averted if saguna  is restrained by firm commitment 
to nirguna . 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 162  63. Complementarity between  Saguna  And Nirguna : Examples From The 
Ramayana  
17. Saguna  is secure and easy, but it needs nirguna. Saguna should, in fact, 
grow and eventually blossom into nirguna , into devotion to principles . Nirguna  
and saguna are not opposed to each other; in fact, they comple ment each 
other. One must advance from saguna to nirguna; and nirguna also  needs the 
warmth of saguna to remove subtle impurities from the mind. They thu s enrich 
and gain lustre from each other.  
18. Both these types of bhakti  are beautifully depicted in the Ramayana. We 
find them first in the Ayodhyakand (the second Chap ter) and they have been 
described extensively throughout the rest of the Ra mayana. Bharat, Rama’s 
brother, is an example of nirguna devotee and Lakshman, another brother, is 
an example of saguna devotee. The nature of saguna bhakti and that of nirguna 
bhakti will be clear from their examples. 
19. When Rama set out for the forest, he was not ready to take Lakshman with 
him. He felt that there is no ground for taking him  along. He told him, “I am 
going to the forest at the behest of our father. Yo u should stay at home. If you 
accompany me, our parents would be more disconsolat e. Serve them and the 
people. If you are with them, I shall be free from any worries. Be my 
representative here. Do not be worried about me. Go ing to the forest is not a 
matter of misfortune; I would rather have the oppor tunity to visit the ashrams  
of the sages.”  Rama thus tried to dissuade Lakshma n from his resolve, but 
Lakshman cut short all the arguments in one stroke.  Tulsidas has pictured this 
incident vividly. Lakshman says, “You are explainin g to me the path of duty 
prescribed by the scriptures. I should certainly fo llow it. But I would not be 
able to bear the burden of princely duties. I am no t competent to be your 
representative. I am just a child:  
दीि᭠ह मोिह िसख नीᳰक गुसांई  ।  लािग अगम अपनी कदराई  
नरवर धीर धरमधुरधारी  ।  िनगम – नीितक े  ते अिधकारी  । 
मᱹ िशशु ᮧभुसनेह ᮧितपाला   ।  मंदर – मेरउ ᳰक लेᳲह मराला  ।।  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 163  —Can a swan lift up the mountains?  O, Rama!  I hav e been nourished on your 
love. Please tell about princely duties to somebody  else. I am only a child.”  
Thus he put a stop to the discussion. 
20. Just as fish cannot live outside water, Lakshman co uld not live without 
Rama. With his whole being he lived for Rama. His j oy lay in serving Rama; in 
keeping vigil at night when Rama slept. If the eye is attacked, the arm 
immediately rushes to receive the blow. Lakshman wa s such a protective arm 
for Rama. Tulsidas has given a striking simile. A f lag flutters proudly and is 
lustily cheered; but who cares for the flag-staff?  Lakshman was like the flag-
staff; it was because of his solid and unstinted su pport that the flag of Rama’s 
glory has been fluttering high in the world. He nev er faltered; never bent. The 
world sees the flag and adores it, but the value of  the staff is hardly reckoned. 
A spire attracts the attention of the people, but t he foundation catches no eye. 
The banner of Rama’s glory is still fluttering, but  Lakshman remains 
unremembered and unsung. For fourteen years, he sto od upright and strong. He 
stayed in the background and spread Rama’s glory. R ama entrusted many 
difficult, delicate and unpleasant tasks to him. It  was Lakshman whom he asked 
to take Sita to the forest and leave her there. Poo r Lakshman obeyed that 
command too. He had virtually become Rama’s eyes, H is hands, His mind. He 
had merged himself into Rama, just as a river merge s into the sea. He had 
become Rama’s shadow. Lakshman’s bhakti was saguna one. 
21. Bharat, on the other hand, was a nirguna devotee. Tulsidas has beautifully 
sketched his character too. When Rama left for the forest, Bharat was out of 
Ayodhya. When he returned, Dashrath, his father, ha d already died. Bharat was 
asked by Vasishtha (preceptor of the royal family) to take up the reins of the 
kingdom. But Bharat insisted on meeting Rama at the  earliest. He was 
impatient to see Rama, but busied himself in making  necessary arrangements 
for the kingdom. He did not consider the throne as his own; and felt that the 
kingdom rightfully belonged to Rama and he must loo k after it as Rama’s 
representative. Like Lakshman, he could not just ab andon everything and 
follow Rama. For him, devotion to Rama meant doing his work; otherwise, what Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 164  value could such devotion have?  He first made nece ssary administrative 
arrangements and then only proceeded to meet Rama. He met Rama and said, 
“Dear brother, it is your kingdom, you should...”, but Rama did not let him 
complete the sentence and told him to go back and d ischarge the kingly duties. 
Bharat hesitated, but bowed before that command. Ra ma’s word was law for 
him; he had left everything to Rama. 
22. He went back. But, interestingly, he did not live i n Ayodhya. He preferred 
to stay in a nearby forest doing penance and ruled from there. When Rama and 
Bharat met after fourteen years, it must have been difficult to make out which 
of them was the true ascetic who had performed pena nce in the forest. If 
somebody draws a picture of this meeting, depicting  Rama and Bharat looking 
alike, with just a little difference in age and hav ing the same lustre of penance 
on their faces, it would indeed be a remarkable and  elevating picture 3. Bharat 
was physically away from Rama, but his mind was nev er away from him even 
for a moment. Although he attended to the affairs o f the kingdom, his mind 
was with Rama. Nirguna bhakti  is thus filled to the brim with saguna bhakti. 
How can one then speak of separation?  That is why Bharat did not feel any 
sense of separation. After all, he was doing the Lo rd’s work. 
23. Young people often say, “We cannot understand all t his talk of Ramanama , 
Rama’s bhakti , Rama’s worship. But we are ready to do God’s work .” Bharat 
has shown how to do God’s work. He overcame the pan gs of separation by 
immersing himself in that work. To keep doing God’s  work and so to have no 
time to feel the sense of separation from Him is on e thing; but it is quite a 
different thing to have nothing to do with the Lord . To do the Lord’s work and 
lead a life of self-control is rare indeed. Bharat’ s attitude was that of a nirguna 
bhakta , but saguna continued  to support nirguna . Bharat bowed to Rama’s 
command to go back to Ayodhya and bid farewell to h im; but he immediately 
turned back and said, “Rama, my heart is still not reconciled to your decision. I 
feel that something is lacking.”  Rama understood t he state of his mind and 
gave him his sandals. The respect for saguna  thus remained intact. Saguna  did 
soften and brought warmth to nirguna in the end. Lakshman would not have Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 165  been content with Rama’s sandals; he yearned for mu ch more. Bharat’s 
standpoint was different. Though he stayed away fro m Rama and worked from 
afar, his mind was full of Rama. To him, work was w orship; still he did feel the 
need for the sandals. It would have been difficult for him to carry on without 
them. He ran the administration deriving his author ity from those sandals. Both 
Lakshman and Bharat were Rama’s devotees. Their sta ndpoints were outwardly 
different. But although Bharat was committed to his  duties and principles, that 
commitment too needed the reassuring warmth of a sy mbol. 
 
64. Complementarity Between Saguna  And Nirguna : Examples From 
Krishna’s Life  
24. Tenderness and warmth of devotion must be there. Th at is why the Lord 
told Arjuna, ‘ म᭦यासᲦमनाः पाथᭅ ’—‘O Arujna!  Have attachment to Me’4 and 
repeated the advice again and again. The Gita other wise detests the word 
‘attachment’ and repeatedly exhorts us to work with out attachment, love or 
hate, and expectations. Non-attachment is its const ant refrain. Still it asks 
Arjuna to have attachment to the Lord. But, then, a ttachment to the Lord is a 
lofty ideal; it has nothing in common with attachme nt to worldly things.  
Saguna and nirguna are closely intertwined with each other. Saguna  cannot 
altogether dispense with nirguna’ s support and nirguna does need saguna’s  
warmth. Work is certainly worship, but it needs war mth of feelings. The Lord 
says, ‘ मामनु᭭मर यु᭟य च । ’ (‘Remember Me and fight.’) Work is worship in its elf, 
but devotion has to be there in the heart. The mech anical action of offering 
flowers to the Lord’s idol is no worship; that acti on has to be saturated with 
devotion. Offering flowers to the Lord’s idol is on e form of worship; doing good 
work is another way. In both of them there must be warmth of devotion. If this 
warmth is not there, offering flowers to an idol wi ll be no different from 
offering them to a stone. It is the inner feelings that matter. It is devotion 
which makes the difference. Saguna  and nirguna , work and love, jnana  and Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 166  bhakti —all these are completely identical. They all lead to the same ultimate 
experience. 
25. Look at Uddhava and Arjuna. I am taking a jump from  the Ramayana to the 
Mahabharata; but I do have a right to do so, as the re is complete identity 
between Rama and Krishna. Uddhava and Arjuna are li ke Bharat and Lakshman 
respectively. Uddhava always used to be with Krishn a, busy in serving him. He 
could not bear even a moment’s separation from him.  Without Krishna, life was 
dull and insipid for him. Arjuna too was Krishna’s dear friend, but he used to 
live at Hastinapur, away from him, doing his work. Such was their relationship.  
26. When it was time for Krishna to leave His body, he told Uddhava, 
“Uddhava, I am going now.” Uddhava pleaded, “Why do n’t you take me along?  
Let us go together.”  But Krishna said, “No, I am n ot for that. When the sun 
sets, it endows fire with its essence—heat and ligh t; likewise I am leaving my 
essence, my light with you.”  He then revealed Self -knowledge to Uddhava and 
sent him on a journey. During the journey, Uddhava came to know from sage 
Maitreya that Krishna had bid farewell to this worl d. But the news made 
absolutely no impact on Uddhava’s mind. His case wa s not like ‘ मरका गुरउ रडका 
चेला, दोहᱭचा बोध वायां गेला । ’ (‘When the master died, the pupil cried. The 
teaching and the learning were both wasted.’) He di d not feel that there was 
any separation. All his life he had performed saguna  worship. He had always 
lived in the company of Krishna. Now he had begun t o experience the joy of 
nirguna . He had to reach finally the destination of nirguna . Saguna  may come 
first, but it must be followed by nirguna ; otherwise there is no perfection, no 
fulfillment. 
27. Arjuna’s case was just the opposite. Krishna had as ked him to protect all 
the womenfolk after his departure from this world. Arjuna came to Dwarka, 
took them along and proceeded to Delhi. On the way,  dacoits robbed them near 
Hissar in Punjab. Arjuna was known as a man among m en, as one of the 
greatest warriors of his time. He was known as ‘ jaya ’ (the victorious) as he 
knew no defeat. Once he had even challenged and hum bled Lord Shiva. But 
such a fighter could not face a bunch of dacoits an d had to flee for his life!  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 167  Krishna’s departure from this world had affected hi m so deeply that he had as 
if lost all his vitality and strength; he had becom e a shadow of his former self. 
Thus Arjuna, the nirguna devotee, was overwhelmed with separation from 
Krishna in the end. His nirguna ultimately gave way. All his activity came to a 
standstill. His nirguna had the experience of the value of  saguna  in the end. 
Thus saguna has to go into nirguna  and nirguna has to go into saguna . They 
complement each other.  
 
65. Saguna  And nirguna  Are One: My Own Experience  
28. Hence, words fail while attempting to describe the difference between the 
saguna devotee and the nirguna devotee. Saguna and nirguna come together in 
the end. Though the spring of bhakti may flow out of saguna,  it reaches nirguna 
in the end. Long back, I had gone to Vaikom at the time of satyagraha  there. I 
knew that the birth-place of Shankaracharya was som ewhere on the Malabar 
coast. While passing by the Malabar coast, it occur red to me that Kaladi, the 
birth-place of Shankaracharya must be somewhere nea rby. On enquiry, my local 
companion told me that it was just 10-12 miles away  and enquired whether I 
would like to go there. But I declined. The purpose  of my visit was to observe 
the Vaikom satyagraha .5 I thought that it was not proper for me to go anyw here 
else. I still think that what I did was right. But every time I went to bed, the 
village of Kaladi and the image of Shankaracharya w ould stand before my eyes 
and I could not sleep. That experience is still fre sh in my mind. Thoughts about 
Shankaracharya—the power of his wisdom, his divine certitude in the advaita 
philosophy,6 his rare and fiery vairagya  that considered the phenomenal world 
as trash, his serene language, and the infinite deb t that I owe to him—would 
crowd in my mind. Then I realised how nirguna  is filled with saguna . Had I 
visited Kaladi, I perhaps would not have felt such surging emotions. Even in 
nirguna, saguna  is at its zenith. I rarely write letters to friend s making routine 
enquiries, but the thought of them is always there in my mind. Saguna thus lies 
hidden in nirguna . They are essentially one. Worship of an idol or v isible acts of Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 168  service and constant thinking about the world’s wel fare without any outward 
indication of worship—both these have the same wort h and value.  
 
66. Saguna And Nirguna Are Only Apparently Differen t: To Become A True 
Devotee Is What Matters  
29. Lastly, I want to say that it is not easy to clearl y distinguish between 
saguna and nirguna . What appears saguna from one angle may appear nirguna 
from another. In s aguna  worship a stone idol is looked upon as a symbol of  God. 
But it is in the mother and in the saints that divi ne consciousness is clearly 
manifest. Wisdom, love, tenderness of affection are  palpable in them. Still they 
are not worshipped as the idols of the Lord. Instea d of serving the people full of 
consciousness, instead of seeing saguna  God in them, God is seen in an 
inanimate stone!  To see God in a stone is, in a se nse, the height of nirguna . It 
is easier to see God in the saints, the parents and  the neighbours who can be 
seen to have wisdom, love or altruism. It is far mo re difficult to see God in a 
stone. Still we worship the stone idol. Is it not v erily a form of nirguna worship? 
30. On the other hand, one feels that if God is not to be imagined in a stone, 
where else can we see Him?  A stone is the most app ropriate thing to become 
God’s symbol, as it is unruffled, unmoved, peaceful  and undisturbed under any 
condition. Our parents, neighbours, the people in g eneral, all these have their 
weaknesses. You are bound to find some or the other  weakness or fault in 
them. Hence, serving them is, in a sense, more diff icult than worshipping a 
stone. 
31. To sum up, saguna and nirguna are complementary to each other. Saguna 
is easier than nirguna . But in another sense, nirguna is easy and saguna is 
difficult. Both lead us to the same end. In the Fif th Chapter, it has been said 
that the yogi who does not get attached to karma  though he is continually 
engaged in action and sannyasi , who does all the karma  while being apparently 
inactive, are one and the same. Similar is the case  here. Saguna state of karma  
and nirguna state of sannyasa  are one and the same. The Lord therefore faced 
the same predicament that he faced when he was aske d whether yoga was Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 169  better or sannyasa . Finally, He replied on the basis of comparative e asiness. 
Otherwise, there is no difference between yoga  and sannyasa  or between 
saguna  and nirguna . 
32. The Lord says in the end, “O, Arjuna! You may prefe r saguna  or nirguna , 
but be a bhakta (devotee); do not remain untouched by devotion.”  A nd then 
the Lord describes the characteristic attributes of  bhakta . The nectar may be 
sweet, but we have never tasted it. The verses desc ribing the bhakta ’s 
attributes, however, have a rare sweetness that we can experience directly. 
There is no need for any imagination. Like the vers es describing the attributes 
of sthitaprajna , these verses too should be read daily, reflected upon, 
ruminated over. We should try to imbibe these attri butes bit by bit and go on 
enriching our life. In this way, life should be gra dually led towards the Lord.  
(8.5.32)  
 
References:  
1. ‘The devotees who partake of this immortalizing nec tar of dharma , that is, follow 
the life-giving wisdom as I have taught herein, wit h faith, keeping Me as their goal, 
are exceedingly dear to Me’—Gita 12.20 
2. Please refer footnote in Chapter 5.28 
3. Interestingly, a stone image depicting this meeting  was unearthed in the course of 
cultivation at Vinoba's ashram at Pavnar, much late r.  He built a temple for it, now 
known as Bharat-Rama temple. 
4. Gita 7.1 
5. The famous Vaikom satyagraha  took place in 1924 for opening the roads around th e 
temple to the untouchables.  Vinoba had gone there as an observer at Gandhi's 
insistence. 
6. Advaita  (Non-dualism) philosophy believes that there is a duality between the Self 
and Brahman , the Supreme Self.  
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 170   
CHAPTER 13 
Distinction between The Self And The Not-Self  
67. Distinguishing Between The Body And The Self He lps Karmayoga  
1. Vyasa has poured into the Gita the essence of his l ife. He has written many 
voluminous works. The Mahabharata alone contains mo re than a hundred 
thousand verses. In fact, the word ‘Vyasa’ has acqu ired the meaning of 
‘extensiveness’ in Sanskrit. But in the Gita, his i nclination is not towards 
elaboration. Here he has only briefly stated, like Euclid has in his geometry, the 
principles useful for life. There are no long discu ssions in the Gita; brevity is its 
distinctive characteristic. It is so mainly because  everybody can test for himself 
the veracity of the Gita’s teaching in his life; an d it is meant to be so tested. 
The Gita tells only those things which are useful f or life. That being the object, 
Vyasa has contented himself with stating the princi ples concisely. It shows his 
firm faith in the power of truth and the possibilit y of its being directly 
experienced. That which is true does not need lengt hy arguments to 
substantiate it. 
2. Our main reason in studying the Gita is that whenev er we need help and 
guidance, we may get it from the Gita. Such help is  always forthcoming. The 
Gita is a treatise that tells us how life is to be lived. That is why it lays stress 
on swadharma. Performance of swadharma is the foundation of human life. The 
whole edifice of life has to be erected over this f oundation. Stronger the 
foundation, more enduring the edifice will be. It i s the performance of 
swadharma that the Gita calls ‘ karma ’. Around this karma , the Gita has built 
its architectonics. It has fortified it with many vikarmas . To make the 
performance of swadharma  meaningful and fruitful, it should be given all th e 
necessary help and support that it needs. In this c onnection we have examined 
many things so far. Most of them belonged to the re alm of bhakti . In the 
Thirteenth Chapter, we have to take a look at somet hing extremely important 
to the performance of swadharma.  It calls for discriminating reason. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 171  3. One who performs swadharma  should give up the fruit of actions: it is the 
main thing that is emphasised everywhere in the Git a. One must act, but one 
must also renounce the fruit; one must water a plan t and tend it with care, but 
should not expect for himself any return therefrom in the form of its shade, 
fruit or flower. This is what karmayoga  in the form of performance of 
swadharma means. Karmayoga does not just mean  doing karma. Karma is, in 
fact, going on everywhere in the world; there is no  need to tell anybody that it 
should be done. It may be easy to say or even under stand, but difficult to put 
into practice, that one should perform swadharma properly—not just any sort of 
karma —and renounce the fruit, as desire for fruit is con sidered to be the 
incentive for action. Action without desire for the  fruit for oneself is against 
the prevalent current; it is diametrically  opposite to what normally goes on in 
the world. We often say that a man doing a lot of w ork is a karmayogi . But it is 
an inaccurate use of language. This is not karmayoga as per  the Gita’s 
definition. You can hardly find a single karmayogi  of the Gita’s definition 
among the millions who work; he is rare even among the millions who perform 
swadharma . In fact, judging by the true and subtle meaning o f karmayoga , a 
perfect karmayogi can hardly be found. To work and then to renounce i ts fruit 
is something most unusual. The Gita has elucidated this particular point so far. 
4. Another complementary point has been put forth in t he Thirteenth 
Chapter. It is the distinction between the body and  the Self. If we can make 
this distinction, it can help us in renouncing the fruit. We see something with 
the eyes and call it a form, a body or an image. Bu t the eyes make us familiar 
with the outer form only; to get to know a thing fu lly we have to enter into its 
interior. We have to peel off the skin of a fruit t o taste the pulp within. We 
have to break a coconut to get its soft kernel. A j ackfruit too has a rough 
exterior but inside there is sweet and juicy pulp. We need to distinguish 
between the outer and the inner while looking at ou rselves as well as at others. 
The outer cover is to be set aside. What does it me an?  It means that we should 
make a distinction between the outwardly visible fo rm of anything and its inner 
essence. Everything has an outer body and an inner soul; just as we have a 
physical body outside and the soul or the Self with in. This is true about karma  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 172  as well. The fruit of the karma  is like its outer body which should be discarded, 
and the purification of mind that results from it i s its soul which should be 
cherished. We should inculcate the habit of making this distinction; we should 
acquire this penetrating insight. We should train a nd discipline the eyes, the 
mind and the reason through constant practice to ac hieve this purpose. 
Everywhere we should leave aside the body and adore  the soul. The Thirteenth 
Chapter has explained this distinction for us to re flect over it. 
 
68. The Basic Foundation Of Betterment  
5. It is extremely important to have the habit of look ing at the essence of 
things. How nice would it be if this habit could be  acquired in childhood itself!  
This is an outlook which is worth imbibing. Many fe el that the science of 
spirituality has nothing to do with life. Some othe rs feel that even if it has, it 
should have nothing to do with it. But it would ind eed be a happy situation if 
the distinction between the body and the soul could  be ingrained through 
education right since childhood. Nowadays, bad educ ation is imparting 
extremely evil samskaras . This education does not lift us out of our total 
identification with the body. We are doing everythi ng to pamper the body. Yet 
the quality that the body should attain, the form t hat should be given to it, is 
found nowhere. The body is thus being vainly worshi pped; there is no 
awareness of the bliss that lies in the experience of the Self. This condition has 
resulted from the present system of education. Day and night, indulgence of 
the body is being continually and insistently taugh t. 
Education of cherishing the body begins right from childhood. When a child 
stumbles while playing and gets a little hurt, he h ardly pays any heed to it. He 
takes ordinary bruises and abrasions in his stride.  But it is not so with his 
parents. They draw the child near and fuss over it,  saying, “Oh dear!  Have you 
hurt yourself badly?  How did it happen?  Oh, it is  bleeding!”  Even if the child 
is not crying, all this fuss makes him cry. What ca n one say about it?  A child is 
told not to jump, not to play lest he should get br uised or hurt. He is thus 
trained solely to think of the body. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 173  6. When we fondly admire a child, we admire him in ref erence to the body 
and when we scold him, it too is in reference to th e body. If a child has a 
running nose, we call him dirty. How greatly it hur ts the child!  How false the 
accusation is!  It is true that the child’s nose is  dirty and it is also true that it 
should be cleaned. But instead of cleaning the nose  without making a fuss 
about it, the child is reproached. He cannot bear t his. He feels miserable. 
When his heart and soul are full of purity and clea nliness, why this wrong 
accusation of dirtiness?  The child is not really d irty; it is the Lord Himself in all 
His purity, beauty, love and holiness. It is a spar k of the divine. Yet we call it 
dirty!  Is the outward dirtiness so important?  The  child does not even 
understand what this is all about. He feels hurt. H is mind gets disturbed and 
agitated; and such a state of mind stands in the wa y of improvement. We 
should therefore explain things properly and keep t he child clean and tidy. 
7. Instead of this, we impress on the child’s mind the  idea that he is nothing 
but the body. It is an important pedagogical princi ple that the teacher should 
regard the pupil as faultless in every respect. If a pupil fails to solve a 
mathematical problem, the teacher slaps him. Now, w hat is the connection 
between the slap and the failure to solve a problem ?  Likewise, the pupils are 
thrashed if they are late to the school. Yes, the s lap may cause blood to 
circulate faster, but how will it help in making th em punctual?  In fact, by such 
treatment, we only strengthen the animal in them. I t hardens the pupil’s notion 
that he is nothing but the body. We thereby build h is life on the foundation of 
fear. Real improvement can never be brought about t hrough coercion and by 
strengthening identification with the body. It is p ossible only when one realises 
that one is distinct from the body. 
8. There is nothing wrong in being aware of the defect s in the body and the 
mind. It helps in removing them. But one must under stand clearly that one is 
not the body. My ‘Self’ is altogether distinct from  the body. It is wholly 
beautiful, faultless, pure, sublime and holy. The m an who examines himself to 
remove the defects in him, does so by making a dist inction between the Self 
and the body. He does not, therefore, get angry whe n someone points out his Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 174  defects. Instead, he himself tries to find out whet her there are any defects in 
his body and mind and tries to remove them. He who does not make this 
distinction can never improve himself. How can one improve himself if he 
identifies himself with the body, which is nothing but a lump of clay?  There 
can be improvement only when it is realised that th e body is but an instrument 
given to us. Do I get angry if someone points out t hat something is wrong with 
my spinning wheel?  I rather try to remove the faul t, if there is any. The same 
is true about the body too. It is like an agricultu ral implement, an implement to 
cultivate the Lord’s field. If it is impaired, it s hould be repaired. The body is 
here as a means. I should strive to purge myself of  defects and faults by 
detaching myself from the body. I am distinct from the body, which is an 
instrument. I am the master, the owner of the body.  I am one who gets good 
work done from the body. Such a discerning attitude  should be inculcated right 
since childhood. 
9. Just as an impartial spectator can judge the game b etter, we can observe 
the merits and defects of the body, mind and intell ect only when we detach 
ourselves from them. We hear somebody saying, “My m emory is getting feeble. 
What should I do about it?”  When he says so, it cl early means that he is 
distinct from his memory; that the memory is an ins trument or a tool that is 
not working properly. Somebody may lose a book or s ome other thing; he 
cannot lose himself. Even at the time of death, whe n the body becomes totally 
worn out and useless, the Self is as healthy and fa ultless as ever. This is a vital 
point to be clearly understood. If we could underst and this, lot of our problems 
will be solved.  
 
69. Attachment To The Body Wastes Life  
10. Identification with the body is prevalent everywher e. As a result, man has 
thoughtlessly devised all sorts of ways and means t o cater to the body. Even a 
glance at them is disquieting. Man is always strivi ng to somehow prolong the 
life of the body even after it has become old and d ecrepit. But how long can 
this body, this shell be sustained?  At most till d eath; not a moment longer. All Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 175  the vanity is reduced to naught when death stares o ne in the face. Still man 
continues to produce various things for this worthl ess body; he ceaselessly 
worries about it. Nowadays, some people are even ad vocating meat-eating to 
sustain the body. In their view, human body is so p recious that one may eat 
flesh without compunction to sustain it; animals’ b odies, on the other hand, 
have little value. But what, after all, is the grou nd for believing that the human 
body is more precious?  The only ground is that ani mals eat anything and think 
nothing beyond themselves unlike human beings, who take care of the creation 
around them. This very basis for considering human beings superior is 
undermined by meat-eating. Human beings are superio r because they exercise 
self-control, because they care for other creatures . Man is superior because of 
this quality that is not found in the animals. That  is why it is said to be a rare 
gift to be born as a human being. How can man be co nsidered superior, if he 
undermines the very basis of his superiority? When man begins to eat flesh like 
other animals without any qualms, he undermines the  foundation of his 
superiority. It is like cutting the branch of a tre e on which one is sitting. 
11. Nowadays, medical science is performing all kinds o f miracles. Germs are 
injected into the bodies of living animals, multipl ied there and diseases 
produced there to watch their effects. Living anima ls are thus tortured and the 
knowledge gained is then used to prolong the life o f this worthless body. All 
this goes on in the name of compassion and humanita rianism!  Inoculation is 
only one among the many horrid things invented by m edical science. But the 
body for whose sake all this is done is as fragile as glass. It can break at any 
moment. All these efforts are being made to sustain  the body; but what is the 
outcome?  Even as we are trying to sustain this fra gile body, we see that it goes 
on disintegrating. Yet we keep trying to pamper the  body. 
12. It never occurs to us to find out the kind of food that would make the mind 
and intellect sattvik . Man never considers what should be done and whose  help 
should be sought to purify the mind and the intelle ct. All that he is anxious for 
is to make the body plump, to increase layers of fl esh thereon. But these layers 
are bound to peel off in course of time. Then what is the use of letting the fat Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 176  accumulate in the body till it becomes a burden and  an encumbrance?   The 
body is an instrument at our disposal and we should  certainly do whatever is 
necessary to keep it in order. We take work from a machine, but do we identify 
ourselves with it?  Why cannot one have the same at titude towards the body-
machine? 
13. To sum up, the body is a means and not an end. Once  this is deeply 
realised, man will not make much ado about nothing.  Life will then appear 
markedly different. Man would not then revel in dec orating the body. Indeed an 
ordinary cloth is sufficient to cover the body. But  we want the cloth to be soft; 
we want various designs on it. For the sake of this , we make a number of 
people labour. What is all this for?  Does not God,  the Creator, know His job?  
Had the human body needed designs or colours on it,  would not God have 
designed stripes on the human body, as He has done for the tiger?  Would He 
not have given plummage to human beings like the pe acock? Was it impossible 
for Him?  But He has thought otherwise. Man, as he is, is beautiful. God does 
not want his body to be decorated. Is not there mar vellous beauty in nature?  
Man should be content in beholding it. But he has b een deluded by 
artificialities. We accuse Germany of driving natur al Indian dyes out of the 
market. Dear friend, you first lost your real colou r—your true nature—and got 
enamoured by artificial dyes. As a result, you beca me dependent on others. 
You have been lured by the superfluous idea of deco rating the body and that 
has led you astray. You should be concerned about m aking the mind and the 
heart pure and beautiful, about developing the inte llect; but that has been lost 
sight of. 
 
70. ‘You Are That’  
14. Therefore, the idea that the Lord is putting forth in the Thirteenth 
Chapter is extremely valuable: ‘You are not the bod y, you are the Self’ ( Tat 
tvam asi ). This thought, this saying is most noble, sublime  and holy. We find 
this idea everywhere in Sanskrit literature: ‘You a re not the outer cover; you 
are the pure, indestructible kernel within.’ The mo ment a man realises that he Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 177  is That—the Supreme Self—and not the body, a new ki nd of joy that has never 
been experienced before will surge up in the mind. Nothing in the world can 
destroy, nothing is capable of destroying the Self.  This subtle thought is implied 
in this saying. 
15. I am the Self—the imperishable, unsullied element t ranscending the body. I 
have been given this body for the sake of the Self.  Whenever there is likelihood 
of that divine element getting sullied, I shall dis card the body to prevent that 
happening. I shall ever be ready to keep the divine  flame glowing. I have not 
come into the world riding this body to demean and humiliate myself. I must 
have control over the body. I shall use it for the well-being of all. ‘ आनंदᱶ भरीन 
ित᭠ही लोक  ।’ (‘I shall fill the universe with bliss.’) I shall  sacrifice the body at the 
altar of that great element and acclaim the glory o f the Lord. A rich man 
throws away clothes the moment they are soiled and puts on new ones. I shall 
treat the body in the same way. The body is needed for work. When it becomes 
useless for the purpose, I would not hesitate to th row it away. 
16. This is what we are learning from satyagraha . The body and the Self are 
separate entities. The day a man realises this trut h and its significance, his true 
education and true development begin. It is only th en that he will be able to 
offer satyagraha successfully. Therefore each one of us should imbib e this spirit 
in our hearts. The body just happens to be a means;  it is only an instrument 
given to us by the Lord. It is to be discarded the moment it ceases to be of any 
use. We put away our winter wear in the summer; we put away the quilts used 
during the night when the day breaks. That is what should be done with the 
body. It is to be preserved as long as it is useful  and flung aside when its utility 
is over. The Lord is hereby showing us the way for spiritual development.  
 
71. An End To The Power Of The Tyrants  
17. As long as we do not realise that we are distinct f rom the body, tyrants 
will continue to torment and enslave and torture us . It is fear that makes 
tyranny possible. There is a story of a demon who h ad captured a man. He Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 178  would make him work round the clock. If he paused a  little, the demon would 
threaten him, ‘I shall kill and devour you.’ The fr ightened man would then 
submit meekly. But when the man could stand it no l onger, he said, “All right, 
if you want to kill and eat me up, do so by all mea ns.”  But was the demon 
going to eat him up?  What he wanted was a submissi ve servant. Who would do 
the work if the man were killed?  The demon used to  threaten the man with 
death; but the moment the man said, “Well, you may eat me up”, tyranny 
stopped. Tyrants know that people have intense atta chment to their bodies; so 
if you inflict pain on their bodies, they submit an d become your slave. Give up 
that attachment and you will be sovereign. You will  be free. You will be all-
powerful. Nobody can then exercise authority over y ou. The very basis of 
tyranny breaks down. The power of the tyrants hinge s on your identification 
with the body. They threaten and intimidate you bec ause they think that if 
they inflict pain on your bodies, you would submit.  
18. When I feel that ‘I am the body’, others are induce d to persecute and 
torment me. But look at Cranmer, the British martyr . When he was going to be 
burnt at the stakes, he said, “If you would burn me , by all means, do. Here, 
burn this right hand first, for this hand hath offe nded.”  In the same vein, 
Latimer said, “Be of good comfort, Master Ridley, a nd play the man. We shall 
this day light such a candle by God’s grace in Engl and as (I trust) shall never be 
put out.”  Their task was to burn the candle of the  body to spread the light of 
truth. The body is, after all, going to perish one day. 
19. When Socrates was sentenced to death by poison, he said, “I am old. This 
body would anyway have disintegrated soon. What is so great in putting to 
death that which is mortal?  I fail to understand w hat is so great in killing a 
mortal being.”  The night before he was to drink he mlock, he was explaining to 
his pupils the immortality of the soul. He was merr ily describing the pain he 
would feel with the spread of poison in the body. W hen the discussion on the 
immortality of the soul was over, a pupil asked, “S ir, how should we bury you 
after your death?”  Socrates exclaimed, “How clever  you are!  Is it that they 
will kill me and you will bury me?  Is it that the killers are my enemies and you Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 179  are a friend?  They will kill me in their wisdom an d you will bury me in your 
wisdom!  Who are you, after all, to bury me?  I sha ll be there even when all of 
you are dead and buried in your graves. Nobody can kill me, nobody can bury 
me. What, after all, have I been explaining all alo ng?  The Self is immortal. 
Who can kill it or bury it?”  And the great Socrate s has indeed outlived all of 
them; he is remembered even after more than two tho usand years. 
 
72. Faith In The Power Of The Supreme Self  
20. To sum up, as long as there is attachment to the bo dy, as long as there is 
fear, a sense of insecurity would continue to haunt  you. Would not a snake bite 
me in bed, would not a thief come and attack me?—Fe ars like these would not 
let you sleep even if you shut your eyes. You sleep  with a staff near the bed to 
use it against the thieves if they come. But can a thief not use the same staff 
to hit you?  You are making the staff readily avail able to him in case he has 
forgotten to bring one with him!  After all, whom a re you relying upon when 
you sleep?  During sleep, you are totally dependent  on others for protection. It 
is only when you are awake that the question of you r protecting yourself arises. 
Who protects you when you are asleep? 
21. We go to sleep trusting some power; the same power which all the animals 
trust when they sleep. Even the tiger goes to sleep . The lion, which has enmity 
with the whole world and which, therefore, constant ly looks back with 
suspicion and apprehension while walking, also goes  to sleep. Had there been 
no faith in that power, the lions would have had to  evolve an arrangement of 
having a few of them keeping vigil while others sle ep!  We too go to sleep in 
the lap of that all-pervading power, relying on whi ch savage tigers, lions and 
wolves also sleep. A child sleeps in its mother’s l ap happily and confidently. At 
that time, it is as if the master of the world. We too must learn to sleep in the 
lap of the Lord, the all-sustaining Mother, with lo ve and trust and the 
knowledge that we are safe there. We should make ou rselves more and more 
familiar with the power which sustains the whole of  our life. We should feel the 
presence of that power more and more. The more we a re convinced of its Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 180  presence, the more shall we be secure. The more we experience that power, 
the more shall we grow. The Thirteenth Chapter give s some indication of the 
steps needed to be taken in this direction.  
 
73. Progressive Realisation Of The Supreme Self  
22. Man is absorbed in ordinary worldly activities as l ong as there is no thought 
of the Self within the body. He knows little else t han eating when hungry, 
drinking when thirsty, sleeping when drowsy. To be able to do all these things 
he will fight. He will crave for them. He is engros sed only in bodily activities. 
True development is yet to commence. The Self only watches all this. It stands 
silently like a mother keeping a watchful eye on he r child crawling towards the 
well. It just looks at all the activities silently.  This state has been described as 
that of a Witness. 
23. The Self watches, but does not gives its assent. Th e jiva  (individual soul), 
acting under the impression that it was nothing but  the body, subsequently 
wakes up. It dawns on it that it has been living li ke an animal. When the jiva 
comes to this point, the realm of ethics begins. Th en the question whether 
something is right or wrong, moral or immoral crops  up at every step. At this 
stage, man starts exercising rational discriminatio n. His analytical mind starts 
working. Impulsive actions cease. Self-restraint ta kes the place of self-
indulgence. 
24. When the jiva ascends to this moral plane, the Self does not rema in a 
silent spectator. It gives its approval from within . A voice is heard from within: 
‘Well done!’  The Self now no longer remains a mere  witness. It gives its 
assent; it upholds the jiva ’s actions and expresses appreciation.  
Suppose a hungry man comes to your door when you ha ve just sat down to eat 
and you give your plate of food to him. When you re member this good act in 
the night, you will experience a different kind of joy. The Self will say softly, 
“You have indeed acted well!”  When a mother pats h er child on the back and 
says, “Well done, my boy!”, he feels that he has go t the highest possible Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 181  reward. Likewise, such words from the Lord within e ncourage us and provide us 
with an impetus to do better. The  jiva at this stage stands on the moral plane, 
leaving the life of self-indulgence behind. 
25. Then comes the next stage. Man tries to cleanse his  mind in the course of 
doing duties while living a moral life. He strives hard, but gets exhausted at 
some point. The  jiva  then prays to the Lord, “Oh Lord!  I have come to the end 
of my tether. Give me more strength.”  Until a man realises that he cannot 
succeed by his own efforts, however hard, the true significance of prayer does 
not dawn on him. One should first exhaust all his s trength and when it is found 
insufficient, cry earnestly for the Lord’s help, as  Draupadi did.1 The eternal 
spring of the Lord’s grace and compassion is ever-f lowing. Whosoever is thirsty 
can come to it and quench his thirst as a matter of  right. Whosoever lacks 
anything can ask for it. Such is the relationship i n this third stage. The Lord 
now comes closer. He not only expresses His approva l by words, but also rushes 
for help. 
26. At first, the Lord was standing at a distance. The teacher asks the pupil to 
solve a problem and then stands at a distance and w atches. Likewise, the Lord 
lets the jiva  grapple with the problems when it is immersed in t he life of self-
indulgence.  The  jiva  thereafter ascends to the moral plane. Now the Lor d can 
no longer remain neutral. Finding the jiva  doing good deeds, He approves them 
and compliments the jiva . When the good deeds cleanse the mind of gross 
impurities and time comes for the removal of subtle  impurities, human efforts 
prove to be inadequate. Then we beseech the Lord an d He responds. He rushes 
to help us. Whenever the bhakta begins to lose heart, He is there ready to 
help. The sun is ever waiting at your door. But it would not forcibly open the 
door and barge into the room. It would not even kno ck on the door. Its job is to 
serve and it behaves accordingly. But the moment yo u begin to open the door, 
it will come in with all its rays and dispel darkne ss. The Lord acts likewise. The 
moment you call Him for help, He will rush to you w ith His arms outstretched. 
Tukaram has said, ‘ उभारोिन बाहे  ।  िवठो पालवीत आहे  ।’ (‘With outstretched hands, 
the Lord Pandurang is calling you.’) If the nostril s are open, air is bound to Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 182  come in. If the door is open, light is bound to com e in. But I find even these 
examples unsatisfactory. The Lord is nearer to us, He is more eager to come in. 
So He does not remain content in being a Witness or  a Permitter, He becomes a 
Supporter—one who helps and supports wholeheartedly . When we find ourselves 
unable to purify the mind completely, we make impas sioned pleas, we cry 
helplessly, ‘ मारी नाड तमारे हाथे ᮧभु संभगळजो रे ’, (‘I am wholly in your hands; O 
Lord, take care of me.’), we pray, ‘ तु ही एक नेरा मददगार है, तेरा आसरा मुझको दरकार 
है’  (‘You are the only one to help me. I need Your s upport’). Will the Lord, who 
is all compassion, then stand aloof?  He will rush to help His devotees, to 
provide whatever they lack. It is out of such compa ssion that He helped Rohidas 
in tanning leather, Sajan the butcher in selling me at, Kabir in weaving cloth, 
Janabai in grinding corn. 
27. The next stage is to dedicate to the Lord the fruit  of actions which we 
have received by His grace, instead of taking it ou rselves.  The  jiva  then says to 
the Lord, “This fruit belongs to you; take it.” Nam deva insistently urged the 
Lord to drink the milk that he had offered. This is  an extremely adorable 
sentiment. Namdeva is offering to the Lord the frui t of his actions in the form 
of the milk. Whatever you have achieved and acquire d is because of His grace 
and is, therefore, to be dedicated to Him. When Dha rmaraj was about to set 
foot in the heaven, the dog accompanying him was st opped at the gate. 
Dharmaraj then instantly renounced the privilege of  entering the heaven that 
he had become entitled to as a result of the merits  acquired in life. A bhakta 
also offers to the Lord the fruit of his actions re adily and instantaneously. The 
Lord who appeared as the Witness, the Permitter and  the Supporter, now 
becomes the Experiencer. The  jiva  now ascends to a stage wherein the 
Supreme Lord Himself becomes the enjoyer of the fru it within the body. 
28. Hereafter, making resolves ( sankalp ) should also be given up. There are 
three stages in any work. First, we make a resolve,  then we act and finally we 
receive the fruit of the actions. We act with His h elp and dedicate the fruit to 
Him. Our standpoint is that it is the Lord who acts  and it is He who enjoys the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 183  fruit. Now let Him be one to make resolve. Let Him be there in the work 
throughout all its stages. Jnanadeva has said,  
‘माळीयᱶ जेउतᱶ नेलᱶ ।  तेउतᱶ िनवांत िच गेलᱶ  
तया पािणया ऐसᱶ क े लᱶ । होआवᱶ गा ’ 
(‘The water flows without demur, as directed by the  gardener. One should 
become like it.’—That is, one should let his life b e guided by the Lord.) The 
water nourishes the plants and the trees of the gar dener’s liking. In the same 
way, let the Lord decide what actions should take p lace through me. Let me 
entrust to Him all the responsibility for all the r esolves of my mind. When I am 
riding a horse, making it carry all my weight, what  is the point in carrying my 
baggage on my head?  Let that burden also be placed  on the horse’s back as, 
anyway, the horse is going to bear all the weight, whether I keep the load on 
my head or on the horse’s back. Thus the Lord event ually becomes one who 
moves my life and makes it blossom. My life is then  completely in His hands and 
He does with it what He likes. He thus becomes ‘Mah eshwar’ (the Supreme 
Lord) who holds the reins of my life. Progressing i n this way, the whole life 
becomes saturated with His presence. Only the body then remains as a curtain 
separating me from Him. When that is removed,  jiva  and Shiva (God), atman  
and paramatman  (Self and the Supreme Self) become one. 
29. Thus we have to realise God progressively as the Wi tness, the Permitter, 
the Supporter, the Experiencer, and finally as the Supreme Lord. ‘ उपᮤ᳥ा sनुम᭠ता 
च भताᭅ भोᲦा महे᳡रः  ।’ To recapitulate, the Lord is at first a silent spec tator. He 
encourages us when we ascend to the moral plane and  start doing good deeds. 
When our efforts are found inadequate to remove sub tle impurities in our minds 
and and we pray to Him, He rushes to help us. We sh ould then dedicate the 
fruit of our actions to Him and let Him be the enjo yer thereof. And finally, we 
should surrender to Him the right to make resolves,  and let our whole life be 
suffused with Him. This is man’s ultimate goal. A s eeker is to reach this goal 
soaring on the two wings of karmayoga  and bhaktiyoga.  
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 184  74. Basic Means For Knowledge: Freedom From Pride, Deceit etc.  
30. To achieve all this, the firm foundation of moral sadhana is a sine qua non . 
We should discern between truth and untruth and fol low truth. We should 
discern between the essential and the non-essential  and stick to the essential. 
We should throw away the shell and keep the pearl. This is how we should 
begin our quest. We should proceed further through our own efforts as well as 
God’s grace. If we have learnt to make the distinct ion between body and soul, 
it will be immensely useful. In this context, I am reminded of Jesus’ crucifixion. 
While he was being crucified, words came to his lip s, ‘O God!  Why are they 
tormenting me?’  But he immediately collected himse lf and said, “Thy will be 
done, Lord. Forgive them, for they know not what th ey do.” This example of 
Christ has a profound significance. It shows the ex tent to which the Self should 
be dissociated from the body. Christ’s life shows h ow far we should and could 
progress. Here, a point has been reached where the body has dropped down 
like a shell. Whenever I think of disengaging the s oul from the body, Christ’s 
life stands before my eyes as a perfect example. It  shows how there could be 
complete dissociation from the body, how the link w ith the body could be 
almost severed. 
31. Without the power to discern between truth and untr uth, we cannot 
distinguish between the body and the Self. This dis crimination, this knowledge 
should become a part of our being. We associate jnana  (knowledge) with 
knowing, but knowing through reason only does not l ead to true knowledge. 
Eating does not just mean stuffing the mouth with f ood. Food should be 
properly chewed and it should get digested and conv erted into blood running 
through the veins. Only then the action of eating i s complete in the true sense. 
Likewise, intellectual understanding is not enough;  knowledge should be fully 
assimilated; it should become a part of our being a nd should get reflected 
through every action of ours. We should reach the s tate when all the organs of 
action and perception work with full consciousness.  The Lord has therefore 
given a beautiful definition of knowledge ( Jnana ) in the Thirteenth Chapter. 
The attributes of knowledge are similar to those of  sthitaprajna . The Lord has Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 185  enumerated twenty attributes including humility, fr eedom from deceit, non-
violence, uprightness and forgiveness. The Lord has  not only declared that 
these attributes constitute knowledge; He has also said that whatever is 
opposite of these constitutes ignorance. Knowledge means the  sadhana done in 
its pursuit. Socrates used to say, ‘Virtue is knowl edge.’ The end and the means 
are identical. 
32. Although the Gita mentions twenty attributes (which  are also means) 
Jnanadeva has reduced them to eighteen. He has writ ten on them with a rare 
earnestness. The Gita contains only five verses lis ting these attributes, but 
Jnanadeva has written seven hundred verses on them.  He was eager that these 
attributes should permeate the society and the glor y of the Lord as Truth 
should shine throughout the society. He has put all  his experience in the 
elucidation of these attributes. Marathi-speaking p eople will always be 
indebted to Jnanadeva for this. He was a personific ation of these attributes. 
His empathy for all the creatures was so great that  when a buffalo was 
whipped, marks of the lashes were seen on Jnanadeva ’s back. Jnaneshwari, his 
commentary on the Gita, emerged out of such compass ionate heart. 
Jnanadeva’s elucidation of these attributes should be read, reflected upon and 
assimilated. I consider myself fortunate for having  got an opportunity to read 
Jnanadeva’s beautiful language in the original. I w ould consider myself blessed 
if I could get another birth so that I could again have that sweet language on 
my lips. The essence of this is that all of us shou ld go on rising higher and 
higher, dissociating body from the Self and trying to make the life divine, to fill 
our being with God.  
(15.5.32)  
 
References:  
1. Draupadi cried for Lord Krishna's help when Dushsha san tried to disrobe her in the Kaurava 
court.  The Lord thereupon supplied her with innume rable garments.  
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 186   
CHAPTER 14 
THE GUNAS : DEVELOPING THEM AND GOING BEYOND THEM 
75. Analysis Of Prakriti1 
1. Brothers, the Fourteenth Chapter, in a way, complem ents the last 
Chapter. The Self has really nothing to achieve. It  is complete and perfect in 
itself. The natural movement of the Self is upwards . But just as any object is 
dragged down by a heavy weight tied to it, the Self  is pulled down by the body. 
We saw in the last Chapter that progress is possibl e if, by some means, the 
body and the Self could be separated. This is certa inly difficult, but the reward 
that we shall have will also be great. If we could break the fetters of the body 
that bind the Self, we shall experience a great joy . Then the suffering of the 
body would not make us miserable. We would then be free. Who can rule over 
a man who has conquered his body?  One who rules hi mself is the master of the 
universe. Therefore, end the domination of the body  over the Self. The 
pleasures and pains of the body are all alien; they  have absolutely no 
connection with the Self. 
2. I had given the example of Jesus Christ to give an idea of the extent to 
which the pleasures and pains of the body should be  separated from our Self. 
Christ shows how peaceful and cheerful one should b e even when the body is 
succumbing to death. But, separating body from the Self needs discernment on 
one hand and restraint on the other. Tukaram has sp oken of ‘ िववेकासिहत वैरा᭏याचᱶ 
बळ ’ (Strength of non-attachment in association with d iscernment). Discernment 
and non-attachment ( vairagya ), both are necessary. Non-attachment means, in 
a sense, self-restraint and endurance. The Fourteen th Chapter shows how we 
could proceed towards self-restraint. The oars prop el the boat, but the rudder 
sets the direction. The oars and rudder, both are n ecessary. In the same way 
discernment and self-restraint, both are needed to separate the Self from the 
bodily pleasures and pains. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 187  3. Just as a doctor examines the health of a patient a nd prescribes 
treatment, the Lord has examined the entire prakriti, analysed it and 
diagnosed the diseases. Prakriti  has been neatly classified here. There is a 
principle in diplomacy that if we could create diss ensions and divisions in the 
enemy’s camp, the enemy can soon be vanquished. The  Lord has done the same 
here. 
Prakriti of everything and every being consists of three con stituents. Just as in 
ayurved  (the Indian system of medicine), nature is divided  in three categories—
kapha (phlegm), pitta  (bile) and vata (wind)—,  prakriti  has three gunas  
(modes)— sattva , rajas  and tamas .  All the things are made of these three 
materials; difference being only in their proportio n. Only when we separate the 
Self from all of them, could we succeed in separati ng it from the body. To 
examine these gunas  and to conquer them is the way to separate the Sel f from 
the body. With restraint and firmness, we have to g o on subduing and 
conquering them one by one and reach the ultimate d estination. 
 
76. Bodily Labour: Cure For Tamas  
4. Let us take tamas  first. We are observing its terrible consequences in the 
present social situation. Its main consequence is l aziness which, in turn, gives 
rise to sleep and blunders. Only if we overcome all  the three things, we may 
take it that we have conquered tamas . Among them, laziness is extremely 
dreadful. It ruins the best among men. It is an ene my which destroys the peace 
and happiness in the society. It spoils everyone, f rom a child to an old man. It 
spares no one. It always lies in wait to pounce on us, and strikes at the slightest 
opportunity. A little more food induces us to lie d own and a little more sleep 
makes us dull. Everything is in vain until this laz iness is overcome. But, 
strangely, we look forward to idleness. We want to earn as much as possible in 
as less time as possible, so that we could relax la ter. The idea is to earn a lot 
to provide for idleness later!  We believe that we must get rest in old age. But 
this is an erroneous idea. If we lead our life in t he right way, we shall be able Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 188  to work even in old age. In fact, we could be of gr eater service in old age 
because of our experience. And still we seek rest a t that time! 
5. We should be alert lest indolence should get the be tter of us. King Nala 
was a great man, but once he did not wash his feet properly and it is said that 
Kali (the evil spirit) entered into his body throug h the dry spot on the foot. 
Although Nala was pure and clean in all respects, a  little neglect, a little 
laziness gave Kali an opportunity to enter into him . But our negligence is so 
total that indolence can gain an entry into us at a ny time, from anywhere. 
When the body becomes indolent, the mind and the in tellect follow suit. The 
present-day structure of the society rests on lazin ess. This has given rise to 
innumerable miseries. If laziness could be removed,  we would be able to 
eliminate a substantial number, if not all, of thos e miseries. 
6. At present, everywhere, there is a talk of social r eform. People are 
discussing about the minimum comforts that the comm on man should have, the 
structure of society necessary for it, and such oth er questions. At one end, 
there are excessive luxuries and at the other, ther e is extreme privation. At 
one end, there is excessive wealth and at the other , there is total destitution. 
How to remove these social disparities?  How could everybody have minimum 
happiness?  There is only one natural way for every one to get the necessaries of 
life; and it is that all should shake off laziness and be ready to work hard. 
Laziness is the cause of our main woe, and this woe  would be no more if all 
resolve to do physical labour.  
But what do we observe in our society?  On one side , there are men getting 
rusty and useless. The rich do not use their organs , which get rusted due to 
disuse. On the other side, some people are required  to toil so hard that their 
bodies get worn out through overwork. There is a te ndency in the whole of the 
society to evade bodily labour. Those who have to t oil till the point of 
breakdown do not do so willingly and cheerfully, bu t because there is no other 
alternative. Clever people devise all sorts of excu ses to avoid physical labour. 
Some say, “Why waste time in bodily labour?”  But n o one ever says, “Why 
should one sleep? Why waste time in eating?”  They eat when they are hungry Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 189  and sleep when they feel sleepy; but when the quest ion of doing bodily labour 
arises, they say, “Why waste time in bodily labour?   Why should we do such 
work?  Why should we toil?  We are already doing me ntal work.”  To them I 
would say, “My dear friend, you talk of mental work ; then why don’t you take 
mental food and mental sleep?”  
7. Thus, there are two sections in the society: some w ork to the point of 
breakdown while others do no work at all. A friend once said, “In society, some 
are intelligent while others are stupid. Some have only heads while some have 
only trunks.” The brains think and the trunks work.  Society has been divided in 
this manner. But, had there actually been some trun ks and some brains, some 
arrangement for cooperation between them could have  been evolved. The lame 
can lead the blind and the blind can carry the lame  on his shoulders. But in 
reality, everybody has a brain as well as a trunk. This combination of head and 
trunk is found in each and everyone. What should th en be done? Everybody 
must, therefore, shake off laziness. 
8. To shake off laziness one must do physical labour. It is the only way to 
conquer laziness. If we fail to do this, nature wil l make us pay for this lapse. 
The price may be in the form of diseases or in some  other form. As we have 
been given a body, it is imperative for us to use i t for labour. The time spent in 
physical labour is not wasted. We get its reward in  the form of sound health 
and pure, sharp and bright intellect. Physical disc omforts like headaches are 
often found reflected in the thinking of many think ers. If they work in the 
open, in contact with nature, their ideas would cer tainly be brilliant and 
healthy. It is a matter of experience that just as diseases of the body have 
adverse effect on the mind, good health of the body  has a positive effect on 
the mind. What is the point in going to health reso rts after contracting 
diseases?  Why not instead work in the open, do gar dening, digging or wood-
cutting to keep healthy?  
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 190   
77. Another Cure For Tamas : To Conquer Sleep  
9. Overcoming laziness is one thing; another is to ove rcome sleep. Sleep is, in 
fact, something sacred. When saintly persons put in  selfless service till they get 
tired and then go to sleep, that sleep is a kind of  yoga . Only the blessed ones 
can have such a sound and peaceful sleep. The sleep  must be deep; its duration 
is immaterial. It does not depend on the kind of be d or the time a man is lying 
on it. The deeper the well, the purer and sweeter i s its water. Likewise, deep 
sleep is more rewarding even if it is short. Half a n hour’s study with full 
concentration is more fruitful than three hours’ st udy done with a wandering 
mind. Similar is the case with sleep. It is not tha t a long sleep is always 
beneficial. Patients lie in the bed for twenty four  hours a day, but sleep eludes 
them. True sleep is essentially sound and dreamless . Whatever one may have to 
suffer in hell, one does not know; but when sleep e ludes and nightmares haunt, 
the torment is indeed hell-like. Troubled by such a  situation, the Vedic sage 
says, ‘ परा दुः᭭व᭡᭠यं सुव ’—‘Let me not have such a cruel sleep full of night mares.’ 
The sleep is meant to give rest, but if all kinds o f dreams and thoughts assail 
therein too, where is the question of rest? 
10. How can we have deep and sound sleep?  The cure for  laziness is 
applicable here too. The body should be continuousl y used; then one will sleep 
like a log the moment one retires to bed. Sleep is like death on a small scale. 
One must prepare thoroughly throughout the day to h ave such a beautiful 
sleep. The body must get completely exhausted. Shak espeare has said, ‘Uneasy 
lies the head that wears a crown.’ A king cannot sl eep. One of the reasons is 
that he does not do any bodily labour. One who is s leepy during the day is 
bound to be awake when it is time for sleep. Keepin g the body and the intellect 
idle during the day is nothing but sleep. Then the mind wanders at the time of 
sleep and the body too does not get real rest. Then  one just keeps lying in the 
bed. Life is given to us to attain its highest ends , to fulfill its mission. If it is 
eaten up by sleep, how can we achieve anything wort hwhile in life? Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 191  11. When a lot of time is consumed in sleep, the third manifestation of 
tamas —blunders—occurs naturally. A sleepy man’s mind is not alert. That 
results in inattentiveness. Too much sleep gives ri se to laziness which results in 
forgetfulness; and this forgetfulness is detrimenta l to spiritual progress. It is, in 
fact, harmful even in worldly affairs. But it has b ecome a normal phenomenon 
in our society. Nobody feels that it is a grave fau lt. We fix up an appointment 
with somebody and miss it, and then say casually th at we forgot about it. We 
have no sense of having erred and do not feel bad a bout it; and one to whom 
this answer is given is also satisfied with this ex planation. It looks as though 
people think that there is no remedy for forgetfuln ess. But such negligence is 
harmful both in worldly and spiritual matters. Forg etfulness is a serious 
disease. It corrodes the intellect and saps the vit ality of life. 
12. Lethargy of the mind is the cause of forgetfulness.  If the mind is awake, it 
will not forget things.  An inattentive mind is bou nd to contract the disease of 
forgetfulness. Hence Lord Buddha had said, ‘ पमादो म᭒चुनो पदं ’/f02e  Forgetfulness is 
death itself. 
To overcome it, one must conquer laziness and sleep , do physical work and be 
ever alert. Whatever you do, do it after due delibe ration. Nothing should be 
done casually and impulsively. Thinking should prec ede as well as follow action; 
thought should be present at all the stages of an a ction. If such a habit is 
ingrained, the disease of inattention will be cured . The whole of the time at 
our disposal should be carefully planned. One shoul d keep an account of every 
moment, so that laziness does not get any opportuni ty to penetrate one’s life. 
Efforts should thus be made to conquer tamas in all its forms. 
 
78. Cure For Rajas : Living Within The Bounds Of  Swadharma  
13. Thereafter, we should turn to rajas .  Rajas too is a terrible foe. It is the 
other side of tamas .  In fact, ‘ rajas’  and ‘ tamas ’ should be considered 
interchangeable terms. After resting for long, the body feels like doing 
something and after too much activity, it seeks res t. Thus rajas  follows tamas , Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 192  and vice versa. Wherever one of them is there, the other is invariably present. 
Like bread in the oven with the flames below and th e embers above, man is 
caught between rajas  and tamas . They toss him towards each other. They 
together ruin him. His life is spent in getting kic ked around by rajas  and tamas , 
like a football. 
14. The main characteristic of rajas is the itch and ambition to engage in all 
sorts of activities. There is an intense desire to do daring deeds. Rajas  gives 
rise to limitless association and attachment to act ions. It is essentially greed 
that binds a man to actions. Then it becomes imposs ible to withstand the 
onslaught of desires and passions. Man wants to do something or the other. He 
feels an urge to move mountains, to fill up lakes a nd create new ones in the 
deserts. He wants to dig a Suez canal here and a Pa nama canal there. He is 
completely seized with such wild ideas. There is no  thought except that of 
doing this or that thing. A child takes a piece of cloth, cuts it up and tries to 
make something out of its pieces. Activities impell ed by rajas are of the same 
kind. Man is then never satisfied with what exists and wants to interfere with 
everything. He sees a bird, wants to fly and make a eroplanes; he sees a fish, 
wants to live like it in water and makes submarines . Thus, in spite of being a 
human being, he feels a sense of achievement in bei ng like the birds and the 
fish. Although residing in a human body, he yearns to enter into the bodies of 
other beings to have different experiences. Some wa nt to go to Mars. The mind 
is thus never at rest; it wanders all the time. A m ultitude of desires possess 
man like an evil spirit. He wants change, activity,  excitement. He is not 
satisfied in letting things where they are. He feel s that if the things remain in 
their places in spite of him, it is an affront to h im!  A wrestler cannot contain 
the energy within him and bangs anything which come s in his way, without 
rhyme or reason. Rajas  is always gushing forth driving man to do this or that. It 
makes man dig the earth and bring out stones which he calls diamonds; it 
makes him dive deep into the sea and bring out rubb ish which he calls pearls. 
He then pierces holes through them, and through his  own nose and ears as well, 
so that those could be worn there!  Why does a man do all this?  All this is 
under the influence of rajas . Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 193  15. Another effect of the rajas is the loss of stability and patience. Rajas  
wants immediate results. A slight obstruction there fore makes man give up the 
activity. He starts new projects endlessly, leaving  earlier projects incomplete. 
A man full of rajas is always vacillating between different activities.  The result 
is that nothing concrete is achieved. ‘ राजसं चलमधु्वम् ’. A rajasic  activity is 
invariably marked with fickleness, wavering and lac k of firmness. A man with 
rajas  is like a child who sows a seed and impatiently di gs after a few minutes to 
find out whether it has sprouted. He is impatient t o have everything quickly 
and lacks restraint. He does not know how to plant his feet firmly on the 
ground. Having done some work at a place and earned  some recognition, he 
wants to go to other places seeking recognition the re. Rather than doing 
concrete work steadily at one place, he prefers hop ping from place to place in 
the pursuit of name and fame. His mind is fixed on that only. This lands him in 
a terrible condition. 
16. Under the influence of rajas , man intrudes into all sorts of activities. He 
forgets his swadharma . In fact, performance of swadharma implies giving up all 
other activities. Karmayoga as enjoined by the Gita  is the cure for rajas . 
Everything in rajas is unsteady and fickle. If the water falling on the  mountain-
top runs down in different directions, all of it di sappears eventually; but if it 
flows down in a single stream, it becomes a river, gathers strength and benefits 
all. Similarly, if a man concentrates all his energ y and applies it to a single task 
in an orderly manner instead of frittering it away in a variety of activities, it 
will prove fruitful. That is why pursuit of swadharma  is important. 
One should, therefore, always reflect upon one’s swadharma and devote all 
energies to it. The mind should never be drawn to a nything else. This is the test 
for swadharma .  Karmayoga does not mean excessive or stupendous work. 
Karmayoga  is not about how much you work. Karmayoga  of the Gita is 
something quite different. The distinctive feature of karmayoga is the 
performance of swadharma, which is in tune with our nature and which comes 
to us naturally and inescapably, without any attent ion to the fruit, and 
progressive purification of the mind thereby. Other wise, activities are Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 194  continually going on in the world. Karmayoga means doing everything with a 
particular frame of mind. Sowing seeds in the field  is not the same thing as 
throwing them here and there. There is a world of d ifference between these 
two actions. We know what we gain by sowing seeds a nd what we lose by 
throwing them. Karma that the Gita prescribes is like sowing the seeds. There 
is tremendous potency in performing one’s swadharma which is one’s duty. 
Here no effort is too great. There is, therefore, n o scope for running around 
helter skelter. 
 
79. How To Determine One’s Swadharma ? 
17. How to determine one’s swadharma ?  If someone asks this question, the 
only reply is that it is natural. Swadharma  comes naturally to everyone. The 
very idea of going in search of it is strange. Swadharma of a man is born along 
with him. S wadharma , like one’s mother, is not chosen, but pre-determi ned. It 
is given to us in advance, before we are born. The world existed before we 
were born and it will be there when we are no more.  We were born into a 
stream of existence; we are a part of a continuum. Service of our parents and 
our neighbours is our naturally accrued duty. We al so have the experience of 
our inborn natural urges; they are common to all. W e feel hunger and thirst; it 
is therefore our natural dharma  to feed the hungry and give water to the 
thirsty. Serving others, doing good to others, is t hus our dharma which we do 
not have to go in search for. In fact, if we find t hat there is a search on for 
swadharma, it is a sure sign that there is something vitally w rong, that 
something is being done which is neither rightful n or righteous. 
A man devoted to service does not have to search fo r the type and form of 
service; he finds his work laid out before him. But  it has to be borne in mind 
that what appears to have come unsought is not nece ssarily a righteous duty. 
Suppose a farmer comes to me at night and says, “Le t us shift the fence of my 
farm by a few feet so that the area of my farm will  be larger. We can do it 
unnoticed.”  Although this work has certainly come unsought before me, it is 
clearly not my duty, as it is unethical. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 195  18. The chaturvarnya 2 system appeals to me essentially because there are  
naturalness and dharma (duties) in it. Nothing can be gained by evading on e’s 
swadharma . My birth gives me my parents. Can I say that I do  not like them?  
Whatever I might feel, they will continue to be my parents. The parent’s calling 
comes naturally to the children. It is a distinguis hing characteristic of 
chaturvarnya that the people should continue to follow their anc estral callings, 
provided they are not unethical. This system has no w decayed and adherence 
to it has become difficult. But it would be nice if  it could be properly reformed 
and revived. Nowadays first 25-30 years of life are  spent in learning a new 
vocation and thereafter people try to get a job or start a business. Thus, man is 
getting educated for the first 25 years of his life  without doing anything else 
and this education has absolutely no connection wit h life. This period is taken 
as the time for preparation for the life ahead, whi ch perhaps means that it is 
not part of life; life is to come later!  It is as if one has to get education first 
and live thereafter. Learning and living have thus been divorced from each 
other. But anything unrelated to living is akin to death. The average 
expectation of life in India is 23 years and people  spend 25 years in learning a 
vocation!3 The best and the most precious period in life, whi ch should be used 
in fulfilling oneself through energetic and enthusi astic service of the people, is 
thus wasted. But life is not a child’s play. It is indeed tragic that a valuable 
part of life is wasted in finding a calling. To avo id this, Hinduism has devised 
the concept of varnadharma . 
19. But, even if the concept of chaturvarnya is set aside, everybody in all the 
nations of the world has his swadharma accrued to him even where there is no 
such system. All of us are born in a stream, in a c ontinuum, in a particular 
situation, and that defines our duties. It is, ther efore, imperative that one is 
not attracted to duties which are out of context fr om the situation that one is 
placed in, even though they appear good and attract ive. In fact, they should 
not be called duties at all. Often, a distant thing  looks attractive and man is 
taken in by it. A man surrounded by fog feels that the fog is denser at a 
distance, although it is equally dense everywhere. Thus, things that are closer 
often go unnoticed and man feels attracted to what is distant. But this is a Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 196  delusion that must be shunned. Swadharma  may appear to be commonplace, 
imperfect and uninteresting; still that alone is go od and beneficial. When a 
man is drowning in the sea it is the log floating n ear him, however rough and 
gnarled, that will save him. There may be a number of beautiful pieces of 
polished and carved wood in a carpenter’s workshop;  they are of no use to the 
man who is struggling for life in the sea. It is in  his interest to catch hold of the 
log that happens to be at hand. Likewise, the calli ng that has come to me as 
swadharma  is beneficial to me even if it appears unattractiv e and 
commonplace. I should follow it and be immersed in it. Therein lies my 
redemption. If I set out to search for another sphe re of service, I may end up in 
losing both of them; and also the very urge for ser vice. One must, therefore, be 
ever-absorbed in the performance of swadharma . 
20. When one is absorbed in swadharma , rajas  loses its force because the 
mind gets concentrated; it then never swerves from swadharma . Fickle rajas  
then becomes powerless. If a river is deep, it can contain within its banks the 
onrush of any quantity of water without getting und uly disturbed. The river of 
swadharma can likewise hold all the force and power of man. E nergy spent in 
the performance of swadharma is never too much. Pou r all your energy into it 
and then the restlessness, which is a distinctive c haracteristic of rajas , will 
disappear. The sting of fickleness will be broken. This is the way to conquer  
rajas . 
 
80. Sattva And The Method To Deal With It  
21. What now remains is sattva . One must be very careful in dealing with it. 
How can one detach the Self from sattva ?  It is a matter for subtle thinking. 
Sattva is not to be completely destroyed. Rajas  and tamas  are to be completely 
rooted out; but the matter is different with sattva . If a big mob is gathered at a 
place and it is to be dispersed, the police are ord ered to shoot below the waist, 
so the people are not killed, but they do get wound ed. Sattva is also to be 
wounded; it is not to be killed. After the disappea rance of rajas  and tamas,  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 197  pure sattva  remains. So long as the body is there, one must be  in some mode or 
the other. What then does detachment from sattva  mean? 
When we have  sattva , we become proud of it. This drags down the Self f rom its 
true nature. If we want bright light from a lantern , the soot deposit inside its 
glass cover has to be wiped off; but this is not su fficient. The dust on the outer 
surface of the glass cover has also to be removed. In the same way, the soot of 
tamas has to be wiped off and then the dust of rajas  should also be removed, 
so that the radiance of the Self could spread. Then  only the clean glass of pure 
sattva remains between the light and us. Does removing sattva  mean breaking 
this glass? No. The lantern will then become useles s. It needs glass. Therefore, 
instead of breaking the glass, one should fix a pie ce of paper on the glass so 
that we can have the light but avoid its glare. Con quering sattva means 
elimination of pride about and attachment to sattva . We should make use of 
sattva , but that has to be done with care and skill.  Sattva  should be freed 
from pride. 
22. How to overcome the pride that ‘I have sattva in me’?  There is a way. 
 Sattva should be imbibed through constant practice, so tha t it becomes our 
second nature. Continuous performance of sattvik actions withers away the 
pride about it. Through such actions, sattva becomes an integral part of our 
being. It should not remain a guest; it should rath er become a member of the 
family. We feel proud of things that we do once in a while. We sleep daily, but 
do not consider it something special and do not tal k about it. But if a patient 
has no sleep for days, and then sleeps for a while,  he would tell everybody 
about it. An even better example would be that of o ur breathing. We breathe 
for twenty four hours a day, but never talk about i t or brag about it. A piece of 
straw may be carried along the stream of a river fo r miles; it will not brag 
about it. But swimming a few feet against the curre nt will make one extremely 
proud of it. In short, one does not feel proud of s omething when it is natural. 
23. We feel proud when some good action gets done throu gh our hands. Why?  
Because it has not happened in the routine course. When a child does 
something good, the mother pats it on the back; oth erwise the child is familiar Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 198  with the mother’s scolding only!  When in the thick  darkness of night there is 
only one firefly, look how proudly it shows itself off!  It does not display its 
light steadily all the time. It twinkles and stops and twinkles again. That 
intermittent light fascinates us. A steady light do es not attract us. Unbroken 
continuity makes a thing appear natural. One does n ot feel that there is 
anything special about it. Likewise, if our actions  become sattvik , sattva will 
become part of our nature. A lion is not proud of i ts prowess; it is not even 
conscious of it. Sattvik  attitude should thus become so natural that one is  no 
longer conscious of it. Giving light is natural to the sun. It takes no pride in it. 
In fact, for it, to exist means to give light. A sattvik man should attain the 
same state. Sattva should be deeply ingrained in him; it should pervad e every 
pore of his being. Then he would not feel proud of it. This is one of the ways 
for subduing and overcoming sattva . 
24. Another way is to give up attachment even to sattva . Pride and 
attachment are two distinct things. This is a subtl e thought which can be 
understood more readily by means of illustrations. The pride of sattva  may 
disappear, but attachment to it may remain. Take, f or example, breathing. One 
does not feel proud about it, but attachment to it is very much there. We 
cannot stop breathing even for a few minutes. It go es on though there is no 
sense of achievement. Socrates was snub-nosed and p eople used to make fun of 
it. But the witty Socrates would say, “In fact, it is my nose which is beautiful as 
wide nostrils take in more air.”  The point is that  one feels attachment to 
sattva . Take, for example, compassion for all creatures. It is a good quality, 
but we should be able to keep away from attachment to it. We should have 
compassion, but no attachment to it.  
The saints can guide others because they possess sattva.   Their compassion 
attracts people to them so much so that the whole w orld showers love on them. 
As love has reached its zenith in them, they receiv e love from the whole 
universe. They give up attachment to their bodies, but the whole world gets 
attached to them. It cares for them. But the saints  should give up this 
attachment too; they should get free from this bond age also. They should Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 199  separate the Self from this love and adoration, whi ch is their great reward. 
They must not feel that they are somewhat special o r exceptional. Sattva 
should thus be assimilated. 
25. Thus, first pride about sattva should be conquered and then attachment. 
Pride can be conquered through constant practice of  sattvik  actions. To 
conquer attachment, one should work without desire for fruit and dedicate to 
the Lord the fruit that is received because of sattva .  When sattva is fully 
assimilated in life, the fruit of sattvik actions appears before us in the form of 
supernatural powers or fame. But that should also b e regarded as worthless. A 
tree never eats its own fruit, howsoever attractive  and delicious it may be. 
Renunciation is sweeter than enjoyment. 
26. Dharmaraj rejected the ultimate fruit of all the me rits acquired in life: the 
enjoyment of pleasures in heaven. That was the crow ning finale to his 
sacrifices. He was entitled to enjoy that sweet fru it. But had he enjoyed it, it 
would have been consumed. ‘ ᭃीणᱶ पु᭛यᱶ मृ᭜युलाकास येती .’ (‘Enjoyment of the 
heavenly pleasures consumes the merits and one has then to take birth again on 
the earth.’) He would have again got caught in the cycle of births and deaths. 
Dharmaraj’s great sacrifice always stands before my  eyes. How great it was!  
Thus, pride about  Sattva is to be vanquished by ceaseless performance of 
sattvik  actions and then attachment to it should be conque red by remaining 
detached from the fruit of actions and dedicating i t to the Lord. 
 
81. The Concluding Point: Self-Realisation And Refu ge In Bhakti 
27. Now, to conclude, one last point. Even if you have imbibed sattva , 
vanquished your ego and given up attachment to the fruit of actions, you shall 
continue to be vulnerable to the onslaught of rajas and tamas from time to 
time, so long as you are saddled with the body. You  may for a while think that 
you have conquered rajas and tamas , but they will return again and again with 
a vengeance. You must, therefore, be ever alert. As  the sea-waves rush in and 
make inroads into the land, the waves of rajas and tamas dash against the mind 
and make inroads into it. They should never be allo wed to do so. Vigilance Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 200  should not slacken even for a moment. And it must a lso be borne in mind that 
danger continues to lurk in the background despite all the vigilance so long as 
there is no Self-knowledge, no Self-realisation. Yo u must, therefore, attain 
Self-realisation at all costs. 
28. This is not possible through mere vigilance. Then h ow could Self-
knowledge be attained?  Will constant practice be s ufficient?  No. There is only 
one way, and that is bhakti  with all the earnestness and love. You may conquer  
rajas  and tamas , become steadfast in sattva  and make renunciation of the fruit 
a habit, but still this is not enough to attain Sel f-knowledge; and there is no 
redemption without Self-knowledge. The grace of the  Lord is essential for this 
purpose. Through loving devotion, we should make ou rselves worthy of it. I see 
no other way. Arjuna asks the same question at the end of this Chapter and the 
Lord answers, “Be devoted to Me with mind absolutel y one-pointed and without 
any desire for reward. Serve Me. He who serves Me t hus can cross the maya . 
Otherwise this mysterious maya  is hard to cross.”  This is the easy method of 
bhakti . This is the only way.  
(22.5.32)  
 
References  : 
1. Please see footnote in Chapter 2.13 
2. Please refer footnote in Chapter 1.8.  The system p f chaturvarnya  has been under 
fire from different quarters for being iniquitous.  Vinoba too held that as it has been 
distorted because of hierarchical stratification, i t has become irrelevant.  However, 
he looked to it as a social arrangement which avoid s unnecessary competition and is, 
therefore, conducive to peace and order in the soci ety.  He held that all the varnas  
or occupations should have equal social and spiritu al status and should earn equal 
remuneration.  He also believed that all should hav e the good qualities irrespective 
of their varna  or occupation.  It must also be pointed out that a lthough Vinoba spoke 
of chaturvarnya  in appreciative terms at times, referring to the b asic idea underlying 
that system, he was against the caste system.  He b elieved that it has nothing to do 
with the chaturvarnya  and called it a blot on Hinduism. 
3. This was the expectation of life at the time of the se talks.  Now it is well over 50.  
However, this does not affect the essence of the ar gument. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 201   
CHAPTER 15 
THE INTEGRAL YOGA: SEEING THE LORD EVERYWHERE  
82. The Way of  Bhakti Is Not Different From the Way of Efforts  
1. Brothers, in a way we have today reached the end of  the Gita. In the 
Fifteenth Chapter, all the ideas put forward in the  Gita reach their 
consummation. Chapters 16 and 17 are in the nature of appendices, and there 
is summing up in Chapter 18. Hence the Lord has ter med this Fifteenth Chapter 
‘a shastra ’ (science). ‘ अ᭜यंत गूढ हᱶ शाᳫ िनमᭅळा तुज बोिललᲂ ’ (‘O blameless one, I 
have told you this most secret  shastra .’), says the Lord at the end of this 
Chapter. The Lord says so not because this is the c oncluding Chapter, but 
because the elaboration of the principles of life a nd the revelation of the 
spiritual wisdom is complete here. The essence of t he Vedas is contained in this 
Chapter. The very function of the Vedas is to make man aware of the realm of 
spirituality. This has been done in this Chapter an d it has therefore earned the 
title, ‘the essence of the Vedas.’  
In the Thirteenth Chapter we saw that the Self shou ld be separated from the 
body. In the Fourteenth Chapter we saw how efforts could be done in this 
regard. Rajas  and tamas  should be resolutely forsaken, sattva should be 
developed and attachment to it should be overcome. The fruit received 
because of it should be renounced. Efforts should b e continued in this way. In 
the end, it was told that Self-realisation is indis pensable for those efforts to be 
wholly successful. And Self-realisation is possible  only through bhakti . 
2. But the way of bhakti is not something different from the way of making 
efforts. To suggest this, the samsara  has been compared, at the beginning of 
the Fifteenth Chapter, to a great tree. This tree h as enormous branches that 
are nourished by the three gunas . It is said right at the beginning that this tree 
should be cut down with the axe of detachment and d ispassion. It is clear that 
the ways and means described in the last Chapter ha ve been mentioned here 
again. Rajas and tamas are to be destroyed and sattva  nourished and Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 202  developed. One is the destructive aspect and the ot her is the constructive one, 
but both of them belong to the same work, just as r emoving weeds and sowing 
seeds are two parts of the same job. 
3. There are three brothers in the Ramayana: Ravana, K umbhakarna and 
Bibhishana. Kumbhakarna is the embodiment of tamas , Ravana that of rajas  
and Bibhishana that of sattva . The drama of the Ramayana with these three 
characters is being continuously enacted inside our  body. In this drama, Ravana 
and Kumbhakarna ought to be killed. Only the Bibhis hana-principle, provided it 
takes refuge at the feet of the Lord, may be nurtur ed, as it can help our 
progress. We saw this in the Fourteenth Chapter. Th is has been repeated at the 
beginning of the Fifteenth Chapter: Cut down the samsara tree full of sattva-
rajas-tamas by the axe of detachment. The Gita is thus placing before us the 
ideal of the lotus flower. 
4. In the Indian culture, the best and the noblest thi ngs in life are described 
using the simile of the lotus. The lotus is the sym bol of Indian culture. It 
expresses the most elevated thoughts.  It is clean and pure and remains 
unsoiled by the mud around. Sanctity and detachment  are its distinguishing 
characteristics. Different organs of the Lord are, therefore, described 
employing the simile of the lotus: He has lotus-eye s, lotus-feet, lotus-heart and 
so on. It is meant to show and impress on us that e verywhere there is beauty, 
holiness and detachment. 
5. This Chapter is intended to take to its consummatio n the sadhana  
described in the last Chapter. This consummation ta kes place when bhakti  and 
Self-knowledge are combined with effort. Bhakti is also a part of effort. Bhakti  
and Self-realisation are parts of the same spiritua l discipline. The Vedic sage 
says, 
‘यो जागार तं ऋचः कामय᭠ते    यो जागार तमु सामािन यि᭠त ’ 
‘Vedas love him who is awake; they come to meet him .’ It means that jnana  
and bhakti  come to him who is awake. Bhakti  and jnana  are not different from 
the effort. They, in fact, make the effort interest ing and add flavour to it. This Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 203  is what this Chapter intends to show. Grasp with fu ll concentration the nature 
of jnana  and bhakti that is revealed here. 
 
83. Bhakti Makes The Effort Easier  
6. I cannot cut up life into pieces. I just cannot con ceive that karma , jnana  
and bhakti are disconnected from each other; and they are real ly not so. Let us 
take the example of cooking in this jail. Some of u s do this job. If a man does 
not know cooking, he would make a mess of it; food will either be undercooked 
or burnt. But even if a man knows cooking, he would  still not be fit for the job 
if he has no love or devotion for the work; if he d oes not feel, “This food is 
meant for my brothers, that is, for the Lord Himsel f. I should prepare it as best 
as I can. This is service of the Lord Himself.”  Th us, cooking needs knowledge 
as well as love. Food would not be tasty unless the re is bhakti  in the heart 
while cooking. That is why nobody can cook better t han the mother. Who else 
can do it with equal love and care?  Cooking needs hard work or penance as 
well. It is thus clear that love, knowledge and eff ort, all three are needed for 
any job. All the activities in life are supported o n this tripod. If one of the legs 
of the tripod is broken, it cannot stand. All the t hree legs are necessary. The 
very term ‘tripod’ conveys this meaning. The same i s true of life.  Jnana, 
bhakti  and karma —that is, ceaseless effort—are three legs of the tr ipod of life. 
Life should be built on these three pillars. Logica lly, you may take  jnana, 
bhakti and  karma  as different things, but they cannot be separated from each 
other in practice. The three together make one grea t entity. 
7. Even though this is true, it does not mean that bhakti has no special merit 
of its own. If bhakti enters into any work, that work appears easy. Not t hat it 
ceases to involve toil, but that toil does not then  appear to be toil; it becomes 
a labour of love. To say that the way of bhakti is easy means that work does 
not appear burdensome because of bhakti . Work loses its strenuousness. No 
matter how much work we do, we feel as if we have d one nothing. Jesus Christ 
has said that when you fast, your face should appea r cheerful: “But thou, when 
thou fasteth, anoint thine head and wash thy face: that thou appear not unto Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 204  men to fast.”  In short, we should be so full of bhakti  that we do not feel any 
hardship. We talk of patriots walking smilingly to the gallows. Sudhanwa was 
smiling in the cauldron of boiling oil, chanting Go d’s name. It means that such 
persons did not feel even the most terrible pain be cause of bhakti . It is not 
difficult to row a boat in a river, but how difficu lt it would be to drag it over 
rocky land!  The boat of our life should also have the water of bhakti  beneath 
it, so that we could sail happily. If there is rock y and uneven terrain, then it 
would be extremely difficult to drag the boat of li fe. Bhakti , like water, makes 
easy the voyage of our life.  
Bhakti makes sadhana easy. But without Self-knowledge, there is no hope of 
going beyond the three gunas  permanently. How could then one have Self-
knowledge? The only means is the way of bhakti  which involves doing sattvik  
actions continuously, assimilating sattva  thereby, and overcoming pride for it 
and attachment to its fruit. Only by continuing eff orts on these lines 
unremittingly one can reach the goal of Self-realis ation. Till then, efforts 
should never be given up. This is a matter for the greatest endeavour. It is not 
a child’s play. It is not something that can be tak en casually. Spiritual quest 
demands that one does not allow despair to creep in  and slacken the efforts 
even for a single moment. There is no other alterna tive. The seeker does 
sometimes get exhausted and exclaims wearily, ‘ तुमकारन तप संयम ᳰकरीया, कहो कहां 
लौ कᳱजे!’  ‘O God!  How long should I continue to be engag ed in penance and 
self-control for you!’  But such utterances should not be given much 
importance. Penance and self-restraint should becom e so ingrained that they 
become our very nature. To ask, “How long am I to c ontinue sadhana ?” is 
unbecoming in the path of  bhakti .  Bhakti will never allow impatience and 
despair to arise. This Chapter has put forth an ext remely noble thought in order 
that one does not get tired and experiences ever-in creasing joy and enthusiasm 
in bhakti.  
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 205   
84. The Triad Of Service  
8. We see countless objects in the world. They are to be divided into three 
categories. When a bhakta  gets up in the morning, he has only three things i n 
mind. First, he remembers the Lord. Then he makes p reparations for His 
worship. The  bhakta  is the servant, while the Lord is the one who shou ld be 
served. The rest of the creation is the means of wo rship. It exists to provide 
flowers, incense and sandal paste for the worship. This is the triad of service. 
This is the teaching in this Chapter. But normally a devotee worshipping an idol 
does not look upon everything in the world as means  of worship. He picks and 
chooses a few things. He goes to a garden and fetch es a few flowers, brings a 
few incense sticks, prepares some food-offerings. T his is not in keeping with 
the teaching in this Chapter. All the means of doin g penance, the means of 
doing karma  constitute the means for the Lord’s service. Some of these may be 
called flowers, some may be called incense and so o n. The idea is to make all 
the actions the articles of worship in this way. No thing exists in the world 
except these three: the worshipper, the Lord and th e means of worship. The 
Gita is infusing the spiritual discipline of non-at tachment ( vairagya ), which it 
wants to impress on us, with bhakti . Thereby it is removing the arduousness in 
karma , the ‘action-ness’ in action and rendering it easy . 
9. When someone in the Ashram has to do more work, he never thinks, ‘Why 
should I do more work?’ There is great significance  in this. If a devotee gets an 
opportunity to worship for four hours instead of tw o, would he complain about 
it?  In fact, he would be more delighted. This is w hat we experience in the 
Ashram . We should have this experience everywhere in life.  Life should be fully 
devoted to service. There is the  Purushottam (the greatest Person, the 
Supreme Self) to whom service is to be rendered, an d there is the akshar 
purusha (the imperishable person)1, the eternal servant, who knows no 
weariness and who has been serving since the dawn o f creation. He is like 
Hanuman, who is ever standing before Rama with fold ed hands. Hanuman Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 206  knows no weariness. The servant, who is deathless l ike Hanuman, is also ever-
ready for service.  
Akshar purusha is such a lifelong servant . He says, “The Lord is ever there and 
I, the servant, too exist for ever. If He is deathl ess, so am I, the servant. Let us 
see whether He gets tired of my service or I get ti red of serving Him!  I shall 
follow Him in all His incarnations. If He is born a s Rama, I shall be born as 
Hanuman. If He is born as Krishna, I shall be Uddha va. Every time He comes 
into being, I too shall be born.”  Let there be suc h a lovely emulation. Akshar 
purusha , the imperishable person, serves the Lord in this way age after age. It 
should always be borne in mind that He is  Purushottam,  the Master and the 
bhakta  is His obedient servant; and the whole creation, w hich changes every 
moment and presents itself in innumerable forms, sh ould be made the means of 
worship, the means of service. Every act should bec ome the worship of the 
Lord. 
10. The Lord who is to be served is Purushottam  and jiva , the servant, is the 
akshar purusha . Both are imperishable, but the creation around us , which 
provides the means for service is perishable and it s perishability has profound 
significance. It is not a defect; it is rather a go od quality. It is because of this 
that the creation is ever new. Yesterday’s flowers will not do for today’s 
worship; everyday you can have fresh flowers. That the creation is perishable is 
a great blessing. It adds to the glory and splendou r of service. ‘Just as I daily 
use fresh flowers daily for worship, I shall also p ut on new bodies and serve the 
Lord. I shall go on giving new forms to my means of  worship.’—That is what the 
bhakta  aspires for. Beauty is because of perishability. 
11. Today’s moon is not the same as yesterday’s; tomorr ow’s moon will also 
be different. It exudes a different kind of charm e very day. What a joy it is to 
behold the two days old waxing moon!  It is the sec ond day’s moon that shines 
on the forehead of Lord Shiva. The beauty of the ei ghth day moon is quite 
different. Only a few stars are seen in the sky tha t night. The moon . On the 
full-moon night, stars are almost invisible. In the  full moon we can see the 
Lord’s face. The beauty of the new-moon night is tr uly serene. There is Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 207  calmness everywhere. Innumerable stars twinkle free ly in the absence of the 
overpowering brightness of the moon. The new-moon n ight celebrates freedom 
in its fullness. The moon on that night merges into  the Lord—into the Sun from 
whom it receives its luminosity. Then it seems to s how to the jiva how it should 
surrender itself to the Lord without causing any tr ouble to the world. The form 
of the moon is ever-changing; but that is, in fact,  a source of ever-new delight.  
It is its mutability that makes the creation perenn ial. The nature of the 
creation is like a gently flowing stream. If a stre am stops flowing, it would 
become a stagnant pool. The water of the river flow s in an unbroken stream. It 
is for ever changing. One finds joy in something if  there is newness, freshness in 
it. Traditional rituals have laid down that the Lor d should be worshipped with 
different leaves and flowers and fruits in differen t seasons. This lends newness 
and freshness to the worship and makes it interesti ng. Children initially find the 
learning of the alphabet quite boring. Mastering th e writing of the alphabet 
involves repetitive practice and the children try t o wriggle out of it. But 
subsequently they become familiar with different wo rds and sentences and 
start reading books. Then they develop a taste for literature, get acquainted 
with various classics and masterpieces and experien ce boundless joy. This 
happens in the realm of service as well. If the mea ns of service are ever new, 
the enthusiasm for service grows and the spirit of service gets developed. 
12. It is because of the perishability of the creation that we have fresh flowers 
every day. A town is lovable because there is a cre mation ground near it. 
Everyday, old people die and new children are born.  That makes life 
interesting. Had there been no death, and therefore  no cremation ground, life 
would have become a veritable hell. You would have got tired of seeing the 
same people day after day. In the hot summer, earth  is parched. But do not be 
troubled; summer days will pass. The heat of the su mmer is necessary to have 
later the joy of the rainy season. If summer is not  hot enough, rains will make 
the earth slushy. We would not then have plentiful crops. Once I was wandering 
about on a hot summer day. My head felt the heat an d it made me happy. A 
friend warned me that I could fall ill. I told him,  “The earth below is getting Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 208  heated. Let this head, a lump of clay, too get heat ed like it.”  How joyful is the 
experience of receiving the shower on the heated he ad!  But if a man is not in 
the habit of being out in the scorching summer heat , he would not feel like 
coming out in the open when it is raining; he would  remain within the four 
walls of the house and bury his head in books; he w ould not dance under the 
grand and sacred shower. He would miss the divine j oy. The sage Manu was a 
great lover of nature. He writes in his Smriti, “Wh en it starts raining, holiday 
should be declared.” Should the pupils sit in the ashram  roting something when 
it is raining outside?  That is the time for singin g, dancing, becoming one with 
nature, watching ecstatically the meeting of the ea rth and the sky. Nature is 
itself a great teacher.  
In short, the perishability of creation implies new ness in the means of worship. 
Thus we have creation endowed with creative energy to create endlessly new 
means, the eternal and ever-ready servant and the L ord. With the coming 
together of these three, let the game go on. Purushottam , the Supreme Person, 
is giving the bhakta  different means of worship and taking from him ser vice 
that springs from love. ‘He is ever-engaging me in play by putting in my hands 
new and newer means. I am nothing but His instrumen t.’—Let this feeling 
pervade the life and it will then be full of joy. 
 
85. Bhakti  Means Service Without Any Sense Of ‘I’  
13. The Gita wants every action of ours to be imbued wi th bhakti.  It is good to 
worship the Lord for half an hour. It is worthwhile  to steady the mind and 
meditate on the Absolute, forgetting the ordinary w orldly affairs for a while, at 
the time of sunrise and sunset when the splendour o f sunshine is particularly 
appealing. Such good habits must, of course, not be  given up. But the Gita is 
not satisfied with this much only. It wants that al l the activities that we do 
throughout the day should be done in the spirit of worship. While doing 
everything—be it bathing, dining, sweeping—we shoul d have the Lord in mind. 
For instance, while sweeping we should feel that we  are sweeping the Lord’s 
courtyard. All our actions should thus become acts of worship. Let this spirit be Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 209  ingrained in you, and then you would see how your b ehaviour changes. When 
we pick up flowers for worship, we choose them care fully, put them delicately 
in the basket, see that they are not crumpled and r emain fresh, and do not 
even smell them. All the activities in life should be informed with this spirit. 
While sweeping the village roads, I should feel tha t I am serving the Lord in the 
form of my neighbours. The Gita wishes to imprint t his attitude on us. It wants 
to see all the actions become acts of worship. Wors hipping for half an hour or 
so does not satisfy it. The holy text yearns to see  the whole life charged with 
the Lord’s presence, with the spirit of worship. 
14. By teaching Purushottamyoga , the Gita is bringing the life of action to 
fulfillment. The Lord ( Purushottam ) is the master, I am His servant, and this 
creation is the means for worship.— Once this is re alised, what else is needed?  
Tukaram says, ‘ झािलया दशᭅन करीन मी सेवा, आणीक ही देवा न लगे दुजᱶ  ।’ (‘When I meet 
you face to face, I shall devote myself to your ser vice; I do not need anything 
more.’) 
Then there will be never-ending service. Nothing li ke ‘I’ will exist. The sense of 
‘I and mine’ will be completely erased. Everything will be for the Lord. There 
would be nothing else except wearing ourselves away  for the good of others. 
The Gita is exhorting us repeatedly to remove the s ense of ‘I’ and live a life 
devoted to the Lord, imbue the life with  bhakti .  The Lord is the master, I am 
the servant and the creation is the means for servi ce; there is then no question 
of getting encumbered with anything else. Life will  then be free of any worries. 
 
86. The Mark Of Jnana : Seeing The Purusha Everywhere  
15. Till now, we have seen that bhakti  should be combined with karma . But it 
is also necessary to have jnana (knowledge) fused with them. The Gita is not 
otherwise satisfied. This does not mean that these three things are distinct 
from each other. We use different terms for them fo r the sake of convenience 
only. Karma  and bhakti  are one and the same; there is thus no question of  
combining bhakti  with karma . The same is true about jnana . How can we have Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 210  jnana ? The Gita says, “You will have it when you see the  Purusha  everywhere.”  
The eternal servant is Purusha;  the Lord, the recipient of service, the 
Purushottam, is also Purusha and the creation which flows continuously, takes 
different forms and provides different things for w orship,  is also  Purusha —all 
are different forms of Purusha  only. 
16. What is implied in having this outlook?  It implies  an attitude of perfect 
and flawless service to all. If your sandals squeak , oil them. Keep them in good 
condition. The Lord is present in them too. The spi nning wheel is a means of 
service. Lubricate it regularly. Otherwise it will refuse to let you spin. It too is 
Purusha.  It should be kept neat and clean and in working or der. The whole 
creation should be seen as full of consciousness; d o not look upon it as inert. 
Nothing is inert, nothing is devoid of His presence . The spinning wheel that 
hums melodiously is not inert; it is the Lord’s ido l. On the Pola 2 day we worship 
the oxen, shedding our pride. This is not an ordina ry thing. In fact, we should 
always have the Pola  spirit in mind while taking due work from them; it  should 
not be restricted to a single day. An ox too is a f orm of the Lord. We should 
also take due care of the plough and the agricultur al implements. All the means 
of service are sacred. How grand this vision is!  W orship does not mean offering 
flowers etc. to the idol; keeping anything neat and  clean and tidy is its 
worship—be it a lamp, a scythe or a door hinge. The  means of worship should 
be spotless and faultless. Divine consciousness per vades everything. When we 
have this vision, jnana will enter into our  karma . 
17. First, bhakti was infused with karma , and now jnana too is poured into it, 
forming the divine elixir of life. The Gita has fin ally brought us to the path of 
service that is full of advaita  (non-duality). There are three forms of Purusha in 
the whole of the creation, and it is the Purushottam who takes  all these forms. 
These three together constitute one single Purusha . Nowhere is there any 
duality, any distinctions. This is the pinnacle of spirituality where the Gita has 
brought us. Here, karma,  bhakti  and jnana fuse together and become one. Jiva 
(the lower self), Shiva (the Absolute, or the Supreme Self) and the creatio n Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 211  become one. There is then no conflict, no contradic tion between karma , bhakti 
and jnana .  
18. Jnanadeva has given in his ‘Amritanubhava’ an illus tration that is dear to 
Maharashtra, 
‘देव देऊळ पᳯरवाᱧ  ।  कᳱजे कोᱨिन डᲂगᱧ  
तैसा भᲦᳱचा वे᭪हाᱧ  ।  कां न होआवा   ।’ 
(‘The temple, the idol and the devotee are all carv ed out of a single rock. Why 
cannot bhakti  be like that?’) 
The temple, the image of the Lord and that of the d evotee and the flowers for 
worship are all carved in the same rock. A single r ock takes different forms3. 
Why should not the same thing happen in the realm o f bhakti?  Why cannot 
there be unity between the bhakta and God even when the relationship of 
master and servant is retained?  Why cannot the cre ation, the means of 
worship, verily become the Self even though it is d istinct?  All the three 
Purushas are after all one.  Jnana, karma and bhakti should combine together 
to form the spring of life. This is the perfect Purushottamyoga . The sport of 
loving devotion should go on even though the servan t, the master and the 
means of service are one and the same. 
19. A true devotee is one who has fully assimilated thi s Purushottamyoga.  
‘सवᭅ-᭄ ता सवᭅ-भावᱶ सवᭅ -ᱨपᱭ भजे मज ’ 
(‘He who knows Me, the Purushottam , knows all; and he worships Me in all the 
forms with all his being.’)4               
Such a man is a jnani  and still he is a perfect bhakta . One who has attained  
jnana  is invariably full of love. Knowing the Lord and l oving Him are not two 
different things. If we know that something is bitt er, we do not develop any 
love for it. Exceptions apart, bitter taste arouses  dislike. But sugar immediately 
arouses liking. In the case of the Lord, knowing Hi m and loving Him are one and 
the same thing. But should one compare the Lord wit h so ordinary a thing as 
sugar?  Knowing and loving Him being one and the sa me thing, there is no point Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 212  in debating over the place of bhakti in advaita (non-duality). As Jnanadeva 
says, ‘ हᱶ ची भिᲦ हᱶ िच ᭄ान । एक िवᲸल िच जाण  ।। ’ (‘As far as the Lord is concerned, 
knowledge and devotion are one and the same thing. Know the Lord, and that is 
all.’)  Bhakti  and jnana  are two sides of the same coin. 
20. When supreme bhakti  is infused into life, the karma that follows  is not 
different from bhakti  and jnana. Karma , bhakti  and jnana together make a 
single beautiful form. And wonderful service, satur ated with love and 
knowledge, springs from it naturally. If I love my mother, my love should 
express itself in my actions. True love always toil s for the loved ones. It 
expresses itself in service. Service is the outer, visible form of love. Love 
adorns itself with innumerable acts of service. Whe re there is love, knowledge 
inevitably follows it. When I am to serve somebody,  I must know what kind of 
service would please him; otherwise the service cou ld prove to be disservice. 
Love must therefore have knowledge of those whom it  serves. Knowledge is 
needed to spread the grandeur of love through actio ns. But love has to be there 
primarily. Without it, knowledge would be of little  use. An action done out of 
love is quite different from an ordinary action. Wh en the son comes home tired 
from the field, the old mother looks at him with af fection and concern and 
speaks a few comforting words, “My child, you reall y are tired; aren’t you?” 
These few words have tremendous effect. Pour knowle dge and devotion into all 
the actions in life. This is what Purushottamyoga  means. 
 
87. The Essence Of All The Vedas Is In The Palm Of My Hands  
21. This is the essence of all the Vedas. The  Vedas are many; but 
Purushottamyoga is their short and sweet essence. Where are these V edas?  
Their ways are strange indeed!  The very first vers e of this Chapter refers to 
the tree having the Vedas in its leaves—‘ ᭔या᭒या पानांमधᱶ वेद ’.  The Vedas—that is, 
the spiritual wisdom—are not, after all, hidden in a book; they are there in the 
whole universe for everybody to see. Shakespeare ha s spoken of ‘books in the 
running brooks, sermons in stones.’  The Veda is no t made up of words, it is not Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 213  in some book; it is in the creation around us. Devo te yourself to service and it 
will be revealed to you. 
22. ‘ᮧभाते करदशᭅनम्’—One should behold one’s palms in the morning. The  Veda 
is there in those palms. They ask you to serve. See  whether your hands have 
toiled yesterday, whether they are ready to toil to day, whether your palms 
carry marks of labour. ‘ ᮧभाते करदशᭅनम् ’ implies that when your hands work 
tirelessly, that which has been ordained for you by  Providence will become 
clear; you will know what you are destined to and a re supposed to do. 
23. What is the point in asking, “Where is the Veda?”  The Veda is not 
somewhere else; all of us have received it when we are born. We are the living 
embodiment of the Veda. We are the consummation of a long tradition. We are 
the fruit of the tree that has sprouted from the Ve da-seed. Within this fruit, 
there are seeds of innumerable Vedas. The Vedas hav e grown many times 
within us. 
24. In short, the essence of the Veda is in our hands; it is for us to realise it. It 
means that life has to be built on the foundation o f service, love and 
knowledge. We can interpret the Vedas in the way we  like. The saints, who 
were embodiments of service, claim, ‘ वेदाचा तो अथᭅ आ᭥हासीच ठावा ’ (‘We alone 
know the meaning of the Vedas’). The Lord is saying  here, ‘The Vedas know Me 
only; I am the Purushottam , the essence of all the Vedas.’  Would it not be 
wonderful if we could assimilate this Purushottamyoga  in our lives!  The Gita is 
suggesting here that the Vedas express themselves i n every action of the person 
who assimilates Purushottamyoga . This Chapter contains the essence of the 
Gita. The Gita’s teaching is fully revealed here. E verybody should strive to 
follow this ceaselessly. What else can one say?  
(29.5.32)  
 
References:  
1. We have already referred to the concept of Purusha  in the footnote in Chapter 7.2.  
'There are two persons in the world—the perishable and the Imperishable', says the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 214  Gita (15.16), 'All the contingent beings are perish able and the unchanging is called 
the Imperishable.  It also speaks of the third Purusha —the Purushottam .  The Gita's 
speaking of three Purushas  or rather a triple status of the Purusha  differs from the 
standpoint of traditional Sankhya . 
2. A festival, particularly in rural Maharashtra. 
3. Ellora caves in central Maharashtra are famous for these sculptures. 
4. Gita 15.19  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 215   
CHAPTER 16 
CONFLICT BETWEEN THE DIVINE AND THE DEMONIACAL TEND ENCIES  
88. Divine Qualities: The Harbinger of  Purushottamyoga  
1. Brothers, in the first five Chapters of the Gita, w e saw how life should be 
lived and its purpose fulfilled. From the Sixth Cha pter to the Eleventh one, we 
viewed bhakti  from various angles. In the Eleventh Chapter, we h ad the grand 
vision of bhakti . In the Twelfth Chapter, we compared saguna and nirguna 
bhakti and had a look at the noble attributes of the bhakta . Examination of 
karma and  bhakti  was complete at the end of the Twelfth Chapter. Jnana was 
then discussed in Chapters 13, 14 and 15. We learnt  therein that the Self should 
be separated from the body, the three gunas  should be conquered for that 
purpose and in the end, we should see the Lord ever ywhere. In the Fifteenth 
Chapter, the whole science of life was seen at a gl ance. Life reaches its 
consummation in Purushottamyoga.  Nothing remains to be said thereafter.  
2. I cannot bear to see karma , jnana and bhakti separated. Some seekers are 
so inclined that they can think of nothing but karma , while some imagine 
bhakti as a distinct path and put exclusive emphasis on it . Some have 
disposition towards jnana only. But I am not an exclusivist; I do not believe  that 
life means only  karma  or bhakti or jnana . I do not also subscribe to the doctrine 
that life is a combination of these three; nor do I  subscribe to the utility-
oriented view that life should have karma , bhakti as well as jnana in some 
measure. That karma , bhakti and jnana are the successive stages in sadhana , is 
also not acceptable to me . I do not also think that in life there should be 
harmony between karma , bhakti and jnana . I wish to experience complete 
identity between karma, bhakti and jnana .  To understand what I mean, let us 
take the example of a piece of a sweet. Every piece  of a sweet has sweetness, 
every piece has some size and some weight. The swee tness, size and weight are 
not distinct and separable things. When I put a pie ce into my mouth, I taste its 
sweetness, devour its size and digest its mass. It is not that some pieces have 
sweetness only, some have only size and some have o nly weight. Every action in Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 216  life should likewise be full of service, love, as w ell as knowledge. Karma, 
bhakti and jnana , all should permeate the whole of life. Every action sho uld be 
spiritual. This is what Purushottamyoga means. Infusing the whole of life with 
spirituality is, of course, easier said than done.  When we go deep into its 
implications, we realise that for pure and selfless  service bhakti  and jnana  
must be there within the heart. Karma , bhakti and jnana are thus completely 
and absolutely one and the same. Purushottamyoga  is the highest state in 
which this is attained. This is the pinnacle of lif e. 
3. Now, what does this Sixteenth Chapter tell us?  Jus t as the glow on the 
horizon proclaims that the sun is about to rise, th e rise of Purushottamyoga in 
life is preceded by the glow of virtues . This Chapter describes this glow, and 
also the darkness which this glow dispels. We seek concrete proof to get 
convinced about anything. How are we to know that s ervice, bhakti  and jnana  
have become part of our life?  We must have some te st. We toil in the field and 
measure the result in terms of the yield of the gra ins. Similarly, the progress of 
our spiritual quest should also be measured. We sho uld assess our experience, 
see how far good tendencies have become part of our  nature and how many 
virtues have been imbibed, how far life has been in fused with the spirit of 
service. This is what this Chapter tells us. In thi s context, the Gita uses the 
term ‘ daivi sampatti ’ (divine qualities) and calls the qualities oppose d to them 
‘asuric ’ (demoniacal). The Sixteenth Chapter describes the  battle between 
these two sets of qualities.  
 
89. The Forces Of Light And Darkness  
4. Just as in the First Chapter Kauravas and Pandavas are found pitted against 
each other, here the armies of the divine and the d emoniacal qualities have 
been pitted against each other. It has been the tra dition to use allegories while 
describing the struggle between the good and the ev il that has been raging 
since time immemorial in the human mind. There is f ight between Indra and 
Vritra in the Vedas, between gods and demons in the  Puranas, between Rama 
and Ravana in the Ramayana, between Ahura Mazda and  Ahriman in Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 217  Zoroastrianism, between God and Satan in Christiani ty, between Allah and Eblis 
in Islam. In all the religions, this fight has been  described. In poetry, gross 
things are described by subtle images whereas subtl e feelings are described in 
terms of gross images in the religious texts. I am not suggesting that the 
description of the battle at the beginning of the G ita is merely imaginary; it 
may have been a historical event. But the poet has used it for his own purpose. 
Giving the allegory of a battle, he tells us what t o do when the conflict of 
duties assails us. The Sixteenth Chapter depicts th e battle between the good 
and the evil. Allegorical description of the battle  is also there in the Gita.  
5. Kurukshetra, the battle-ground of the Mahabharata w ar, is inside us as 
well. If you observe carefully, you will realise th at it is the battle raging within 
the mind which we see in the world outside in the c oncrete form. The one 
whom I see as my enemy confronting me in the outsid e world is, in fact, the 
evil in my mind that has taken concrete shape. Just  as a mirror gives my true 
image, the good and the evil thoughts in my mind ha ve their images in the 
outside world as friends and enemies. I see in the dreams what I experience or 
think while I am awake. Similarly, that which is in  my mind is seen by me in the 
outside world. There is absolutely no difference be tween the battle within and 
the battle without. In fact, the real battle is tha t which is waged within 
ourselves. 
6. Virtues and vices are pitted against each other wit hin our mind. Both the 
armies are in neat formations. Every army needs a c ommander. The virtues too 
have nominated a commander. He is ‘abhaya’  (fearlessness, or freedom from 
fear). Fearlessness has been given the first place in this Chapter. This has not 
happened accidentally; it must have been deliberate . No virtue can develop 
without fearlessness. Virtues have no value without  truthfulness, and 
fearlessness is essential for commitment to truth. Virtues cannot develop in an 
atmosphere charged with fear; in such an atmosphere  they, in fact, prove to be 
vices. In such an atmosphere even good tendencies g et weakened. Fearlessness 
is the leader of all the virtues. An army has to be  alert about attacks both from 
the front and the rear. It can be surreptitiously a ttacked from the rear as well. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 218  Therefore, while fearlessness is at the front, humi lity has been stationed at the 
rear to guard the army. It is indeed an excellent s trategy. In all, twenty-six 
virtues have been listed here. You may imbibe twent y-five of them excluding 
humility, but if your ego gets inflated thereby, an  attack from the rear will 
make you lose whatever you have gained. That is why  humility has been placed 
at the rear. In the absence of humility, there is n o knowing when victory will 
turn into defeat. Virtues can be developed only by keeping fearlessness at the 
front and humility at the rear. Most of the twenty- four virtues in between them 
can be said to be synonyms of non-violence. Compass ion for all creatures, 
gentleness, forgiveness, serenity, freedom from ang er and malice—all these are 
different terms for non-violence. In fact, all the virtues are contained in truth 
and non-violence; truth and non-violence are the es sence of all of them. But 
fearlessness and humility are in a different catego ry. Fearlessness makes 
advance possible and humility ensures safety. With truth and non-violence in 
our armoury, we should march ahead fearlessly. We o ught to move freely over 
the whole expanse of the vast and extensive life. T here must, of course, be 
humility to prevent us from slipping. We can then f earlessly move ahead, 
carrying out experiments in truth and non-violence.  In short, Truth and non-
violence develop because of fearlessness and humili ty. 
7. Against this army of virtues, the army of vices is pitted. About hypocrisy, 
ignorance etc., the less said the better. We know t hem well. Hypocrisy is as 
though ingrained in us. The whole edifice of life a s if stands on that foundation. 
And of ignorance, it can be said that it has become  an innocent excuse for us to 
cover our lapses. We seem to think that it is not, after all, a serious crime. But 
the Lord says that ignorance is a sin. Socrates had  said just the opposite thing. 
In the course of his trial he said, “What you think  as sin is only ignorance, and 
ignorance is excusable. How can there be any sin wi thout ignorance, and how 
can you punish ignorance?”  But the Lord is saying that ignorance too is a sin. 
We know that ignorance of law is no excuse in a cou rt of law. Ignorance of the 
Divine law too is a crime. In fact, both the Lord a nd Socrates mean the same 
thing. The Lord is telling us how to look at our ig norance while Socrates is 
telling us how to look at others’ sins. The sins of  others should be forgiven, but Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 219  it is a sin to forgive ignorance in ourselves. We s hould not allow the least 
vestige of ignorance to remain in ourselves.  
 
90. Four Stages in The Development Of Nonviolence  
8. Thus the divine and the demoniacal qualities are ar rayed against each 
other. We should stick to the divine qualities and shun the demoniacal ones. 
Development of the divine qualities like truth and non-violence has been going 
on since time immemorial, but still there is much t o be done. There is 
unlimited scope for development so long as we live in society. Even if an 
individual develops himself to perfection, scope fo r social, national and global 
development ever remains. Individuals have to use t heir own development to 
stimulate development in others just as manure stim ulates growth of the crops. 
We can take in this context the example of the deve lopment of non-violence 
which has been going on for ages and is still going  on. 
9. It is worth studying how non-violence has developed  progressively. We 
would then understand how spirituality has progress ively developed in life and 
how it can develop further.  
The problem of protection from violent attacks had always been there before 
the non-violent man. At first he devised the idea o f having a special class of 
fighters—the Kshatriyas —for the protection of the society. But that class itself 
turned against the people. The non-violent Brahmins  then had to tackle the 
problem of protecting themselves from the Kshatriyas who were intoxicated 
with power. Parshuram, although non-violent, took t o violence and started 
exterminating Kshatriyas . He resorted to violence to make the Kshatriyas  
abandon violence. It was certainly an experiment in  non-violence, but it could 
not succeed. Parshuram is said to have exterminated  the Kshatriyas  twenty-one 
times; still they survived, as the attempt was basi cally flawed. How can 
Kshatriyas be rooted out when you yourself become a violent Kshatriya ?  The 
seed of violence survived. One may go on cutting tr ees; but new trees will 
continue to come up so long as the seeds are not de stroyed. Parshuram was 
undoubtedly well-meaning, but his experiment was st range. He was trying to Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 220  exterminate the Kshatriyas  by becoming a Kshatriya  himself. In fact, he should 
have begun by chopping off his own head!  I am poin ting out the flawed nature 
of Parshuram’s experiment, not because I am wiser; I am a child before him. 
But I am standing on his shoulders and can therefor e see much farther; and it 
appears to me that the basis of his experiment was wrong. Resorting to 
violence to counter violence results only in increa sing the number of the 
violent. But this was not realised at that time. Go od-natured and well-
intentioned people of that time, men of non-violenc e, experimented according 
to their lights. Parshuram was a firm believer in n on-violence and he resorted 
to violence, not for the sake of it, but to establi sh non-violence. 
10. That experiment failed. Then came the age of Rama. Brahmins  again 
began to think about the matter. They had already g iven up violence and had 
resolved never to commit violence themselves. But t hen how to repel attacks 
from the demons?  They thought that the Kshatriyas  have anyway taken to 
violence; so it is better to make them fight the de mons. Sage Vishwamitra, 
therefore, brought Rama and Lakshman to protect his  yajna  (sacrificial worship) 
from the demons and destroyed the demons through th em. Today we think that 
non-violence should be able to take care of itself;  it should not be dependent 
on others. But sages like Vasishtha and Vishwamitra  did not consider it infra dig  
to utilize the services of Kshatriyas  for their protection. But what would have 
happened, had Vishwamitra not found Rama?  He would  then have preferred to 
die rather than taking up arms. The experiment of f ighting violence by violence 
had been a thing of the past, and the resolve to re main personally non-violent 
was now firm. The non-violent men were ready to die  if they could not get 
Kshatriyas  to protect them. In the Ramayana, there is an inci dent wherein 
Rama enquires about the heaps of bones he had seen and the sages tell him 
that those were the bones of the non-violent Brahmins  who, on being attacked 
by the demons, embraced death without putting up an y resistance. This type of 
non-violence had the element of sacrifice in it, bu t there was also an 
expectation of protection from others. With such we akness, there cannot be 
perfect non-violence.  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 221  11. The saints of the mediaeval times carried out the t hird experiment. They 
resolved, “Now we will never seek protection from o thers and rely on non-
violence itself to protect us. That alone can be th e true protection.”  This 
experiment was on an individual plane; and on that plane, it was carried to 
perfection. But it did not have a social dimension.  Had people asked the saints 
what should be done in the face of a violent attack , they would perhaps have 
failed to give an unequivocal answer; they would pe rhaps have admitted their 
inability to give a definite guidance to the people  in such an eventuality. Again, 
it is childish impertinence on my part to blame the  saints. But I am telling you 
what I can see standing on their shoulders. The sai nts should forgive me for my 
comments; and I am sure that they would, as they ar e large-hearted. It is not 
that the thought of making collective experiments i n non-violence must not 
have crossed their minds, but they must have though t that the situation was 
not ripe for such experiments. They made different experiments on the 
individual level; but, a science, after all, develo ps through such experiments 
only. 
12. Now we are in the midst of the fourth experiment, i n which the whole 
society is engaged in resisting violence through no n-violent means.  
These are the four experiments in non-violence. All  of the earlier experiments 
were imperfect, and our present experiment too is i mperfect. This is but 
inevitable in the course of evolution. But in the c ontext of their times, the 
experiments of the past were the best possible ones . After thousands of years, 
our present non-violent war too would appear to hav e a large measure of 
violence in it. There will be many more experiments  in non-violence in future. 
Not only jnana , karma  and  bhakti , but even  all the virtues have been 
continually developing. Only the Lord, the Supreme Self, is perfect; none else 
is.  Purushottamyoga in the Gita is perfect; but it is yet to be fully d eveloped in 
individual and social life. 
The sayings too go on acquiring newer and higher me anings and connotations. 
The sages  are considered ‘seers’ of the mantras  (Vedic verses), not their 
authors, as they ‘saw’ their meanings through a vis ion. But those are not the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 222  exclusive meanings of the mantras . More developed meanings can be seen by 
us. This is so, not because there is something spec ial in us; it is on the basis of 
their experiments and experiences that we have gone  ahead.  
I have chosen non-violence as an example and review ed its development, as it 
is the essence of all the virtues, and also because  we are engaged in a non-
violent struggle 1. 
 
91. A Great Experiment In Nonviolence: Giving Up Fl esh-eating  
13. So far, we saw how non-violent men devised ways to protect themselves 
from violent attacks. This is one aspect of non-vio lence. We saw how non-
violence has been developing in human relationships  characterised by conflicts 
and clashes. But there is conflict between men and beasts too. Men have still 
not been able to solve the conflicts among themselv es and they are also unable 
to live without eating the flesh of animals of lowe r and weaker species. Human 
beings have been around for thousands of years and still they have not thought 
about how to live in a way that befits human beings . But change is taking place 
in this respect as well. In all probability, men in  prehistoric times ate roots and 
fruits only. But it appears that, in the course of time, perverse thinking led 
most of the mankind to take to flesh-eating. Good a nd wise men, however, did 
not like this and laid down a restriction that if a nybody wants to eat meat, he 
should eat the meat of animals sacrificed in yajnas only. Their intention was to 
minimise violence. In the course of time, some peop le completely abjured 
meat and others, who could not do so, were permitte d to eat it after offering 
the same to the Lord and undergoing some sacrifice and penance in a yajna . 
Permission for meat-eating only in yajna  was thus for limiting violence, but this 
was later misused on a large scale; performance of yajnas  just to have an 
opportunity to eat flesh became quite common. Lord Buddha then came 
forward and said, “You may eat flesh if you like; b ut do not do so in the name 
of the Lord.” This too was to limit violence and de velop self-restraint. Thus, 
through sacrifices in the yajnas as well as through their rejection, we learnt to 
abjure meat. In this way, we gradually gave up fles h-eating. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 223  14. This great experiment in the history of the world t ook place only in India. 
Millions of people became vegetarians. If we are ve getarians today, we can 
claim no credit for that. We have got used to it be cause of the merit of our 
ancestors. We are now surprised and shocked when we  hear or read that the 
sages of yore used to eat flesh. We cannot imagine it. It is creditable to them 
that they abjured flesh through great efforts in sp ite of being used to it. We 
have inherited their virtues without any efforts on  our part. The fact that they 
ate meat and we do not do so does not mean that we are better; we have been 
benefited by their experience and vegetarianism has  become natural to us. We 
should now proceed further. We should try the exper iment of giving up milk 
also as it also is an animal product. It is unbecom ing for man to take milk of 
other animals. Perhaps our descendants in the dista nt future would be shocked 
to learn that their ancestors used to drink milk. T hey may consider us 
barbarians. Some of us take a vow not to take milk.  Our descendants may fail 
to understand why a vow was necessary at all!  
In short, we should go on experimenting with fearle ssness and humility. There 
is ample scope for development; no virtue has yet b een developed to 
perfection. 
 
92. The Three Asuric Ambitions: Power, Culture And Wealth  
15. The Lord has described the demoniacal qualities too , so that we could 
keep away from them and concentrate on the developm ent of divine qualities. 
The essence of the demoniacal way of life is in thr ee things: power, culture and 
wealth. Those with this nature want to impose their  culture on the whole 
world, believing it to be the best. And why is it t he best?  Because it is theirs! 
Individuals with this nature, and empires built up of such individuals, are after 
these three things only. 
16. The  Brahmins  believe that their culture is the best, that all t he knowledge 
is contained in their Vedas. They want hegemony of the Vedic culture 
established over the whole world. ‘ अᮕत᳟तुरो वेदान् पृ᳧तः सशरं  धनूः ’ (‘The four Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 224  Vedas should be in the front, and the arms should f ollow them’) is what they 
want. But when arms are to follow the Vedas, the po or Vedas are as good as 
finished. Muslims also believe that whatever is wri tten in the Koran alone is 
true. Christians too believe that truth is containe d in the Bible only. They 
believe that nobody, howsoever noble and virtuous h e may be, can ever be 
redeemed if he does not believe in Christ. They hav e provided only one door to 
the house of the Lord; only through the door of Chr ist can one approach Him!  
People provide a number of doors and windows to the ir houses, but how 
strange it is that they provide only one door to Go d’s house! 
17. ‘क ु लीन मी िच संप᳖ माझी जोडी क ु ठᱶ असे ’ (‘I am of noble lineage. I have all the 
riches. None can equal me.’)—This is what everybody  thinks. We want to be 
known as descendants of some or the other great sag e  or king. This is the case 
in the West too. There too, people boast of being t he descendants of Norman 
nobles etc. We have the guru-shishya (master-pupil) tradition also, wherein 
people relate themselves to great sages. This too i s an attempt on their part to 
claim greatness for themselves and their culture. B ut, if your culture is really 
great, let it be reflected in your actions, in your  conduct. But people are not 
bothered about that. To aspire to spread the cultur e that we do not practice in 
our own life is a demoniacal ( asuric ) way of thinking. 
18. In the same way, some people think, ‘I am the only one fit to posses all 
the wealth in the world. I want all that wealth and  I shall have it. Why do I 
want it?  To divide it equally among all!’  Akbar u sed to feel sincerely that the 
Rajput kingdoms should be incorporated in his empir e, so that there would be 
reign of peace. Modern demons want that all the wea lth should be 
concentrated at a single place. What for?  To redis tribute it. 
19. For this, power is needed. All the power must there fore be concentrated 
in my hands. My word must prevail. Everybody must f ollow my dictates. 
Freedom means obedience to me!—That is what they th ink. 
Thus the demoniacal nature lays stress on culture, power and wealth. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 225  20. There was a time when the  Brahmins  were dominant in society. They made 
laws and laid down codes of conduct. Kings bowed be fore them. That era 
passed, and was followed by the age of the Kshatriyas . The  Kshatriyas  waged 
wars of conquest and fought with each other for sup remacy. The Kshatriya  
culture too passed in the course of time. The Brahmins  used to believe that 
only they are fit to be teachers; others should lea rn from them. They were 
proud of their culture. The Kshatriya s were concerned with power; they 
reveled in killing their enemies. Then came the age  of the Vaishyas . The 
Vaishyas  are concerned solely with making money. They are n ot bothered if 
they have to face humiliations provided their purse  is intact. All they want is to 
acquire more and more money. Do not the British tel l us, ‘If you want 
Independence, have it by all means; but give us fac ilities and concessions to 
sell our manufactured goods. Then you may study you r culture as much as you 
want. Remain poor and care for your culture; we are  least bothered about 
that.’ These days, wars are fought basically for ec onomic gains. This age too 
will pass; it is indeed on its way out.  
 
93. Self-restraint: The Scientific Way To Get Rid O f Desire, Anger And Greed  
21. We should try to get rid of the asuric tendencies. Desire, anger and greed 
represent the essence of the demoniacal character. These demoniacal passions 
have the world dancing to their tune. This dance mu st stop. We must shake 
them off. Anger and greed spring from desire. Greed  follows desire when 
circumstances are opportune for its gratification, and anger follows when 
desire is thwarted. The Gita has enjoined us repeat edly to keep away from 
these three enemies. The same has been said at the end of the Sixteenth 
Chapter. These are the three broad gateways to hell . Roads leading to hell are 
quite wide and there is a lot of traffic through th em!  One can find many 
companions on the way. But the path of truth is nar row. 
22. How are we to safeguard ourselves from desire and a nger?  By accepting 
the way of self-restraint laid down by the shastras . Experiences of the saints 
constitute the shastras  (the codes of conduct). A shastra evolves out of the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 226  lessons drawn by the saints from their experiments.  Therefore, hold fast to 
self-restraint that these codes prescribe. Do not h ave any unnecessary doubts. 
There is no point in sterile arguments like ‘What w ill happen to the world in the 
absence of desire and anger?  Is it not necessary t o have them, at least in a 
small measure?’  Desire and anger are already there  in too large a measure—
much more than needed. Why create unnecessary confu sion?  Do not worry that 
the human race will come to an end if desire (for s ensual pleasure) disappears. 
No matter how many children you produce, a day is b ound to come when the 
human race will disappear from the earth. This is w hat the scientists are 
telling. The earth is slowly getting colder. At one  time the earth was extremely 
hot. There were no living creatures on it. A time w ill come when the earth will 
become excessively cold and all life will come to a n end. It may take millions of 
years, but this is bound to happen. You may go on p rocreating; the day of doom 
cannot be averted. The Lord descends on the earth f or the protection of 
dharma , not for the protection of numbers. As long as the re is one man 
devoted to dharma , one man who is beware of sin and committed to tru th, 
there is no cause for worry. The Lord will take car e of him. People without 
dharma  are as good as dead. 
23. Taking all this into consideration, live in the wor ld with self-restraint and 
avoid excesses. Do not follow your own whims; and a lso do not follow the 
whims and wishes of the people; that is not what th e Gita calls ‘ loksamgraha ’.  
Loksamgraha  does not mean following the wishes of the people. Organising men 
in large numbers or accumulating wealth does not ne cessarily lead to progress. 
Development does not depend on numbers. If populati on grows unchecked, men 
will kill one another. Firstly, they will kill bird s and beasts and lose balance and 
will then kill and devour their own children. If de sire, lust and anger are 
considered useful, there can be no doubt that men w ill end up devouring each 
other. Loksamgrah  means showing the people the path of pure morality . If by 
freeing itself from lust and anger the human race d isappears from the earth, it 
may reappear on Mars. One need not have worry on th at count. God is 
unmanifest, but immanent. He would take care of all . Therefore, emancipate 
yourself, redeem yourself first. Do not look too fa r into the future. Do not Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 227  worry about the whole of creation and the human rac e. Increase your moral 
strength, eschew desire, lust and anger from your m ind. ‘ आपुला तूं गळा घेई उगवूिन ’ 
(‘Free your own neck from the noose.’). Even if you  could do this much, it is 
sufficient. 
24. It is a pleasure to watch the sea of samsara from a distance. How can a 
drowning man enjoy the beauty of the sea?  The sain ts stand on the shore and 
enjoy the sight of the sea of samsara . There can be no joy without imbibing this 
attitude of remaining detached like the saints. Be detached like a lotus-leaf. 
Buddha has said that the saints stand on the hill-t op and look down at samsara , 
which then appears trivial to them. Try to do likew ise, and you too would find 
it trivial; you would lose interest in worldly affa irs. 
In short, the Lord has exhorted us in this Chapter to shun the demoniacal 
qualities and acquire the divine ones. Let us make efforts in this direction. 
(5.6.32)  
 
References:  
1. Vinoba was addressing the political prisoners jaile d during the satyagraha  campaign 
in 1932. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 228   
CHAPTER 17 
PROGRAMME FOR THE SEEKER  
94. Disciplined Life Makes Mind Relaxed and Free  
1. Dear brothers, now we are gradually approaching the  end of the Gita. In 
the Fifteenth Chapter, we viewed the complete philo sophy of life. The 
Sixteenth Chapter was a sort of annexure to it. In the human mind, and in the 
society which is its image, a struggle between two types of tendencies, two 
ways of living or two types of human nature is cont inually going on. The 
Sixteenth Chapter teaches us to nurture and develop  the divine nature. The 
Seventeenth Chapter is the second annexure. It can be said to contain 
karyakramyoga (yoga of daily programme). In this Chapter, the Gita has 
suggested a daily routine. This Chapter deals with the programme for the 
seeker. 
2. If we want our mind to feel relaxed and happy, we s hould have discipline 
in life. Our daily living should follow a well-thou ght out design. It is only when 
life proceeds within particular pre-set bounds in a  disciplined way that the 
mind can be free. A river flows freely, but its flo w is bound between the banks. 
If it were not so bound, the water would scatter in  different directions and go 
waste. Let us keep the example of the jnani in our mind. The sun is the 
preceptor of the jnanis . The Lord has said in the Gita that he taught karmayoga  
first to the Sun, and Manu—the thinking man—learnt it from the Sun. The sun is 
free and independent. The secret of its freedom lie s in its regularity. It is our 
everyday experience that if we regularly take a par ticular route, we are able to 
think while walking, without paying any attention t o the road. But if we walk 
on different roads everyday, our attention would be  focused on the road and 
our mind would not be free to think. Thus, discipli ne in life is a must to have a 
free and happy life. 
3. In this context, the Lord has suggested a programme  in this Chapter. We 
are born with three institutions or orders. The Git a is suggesting here a Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 229  programme whereby they can operate in an efficient manner to make life 
happy. The first of these is the body that wraps us . The vast world, the whole 
creation around us, of which we are a part, is the second one. The third one is 
the society into which we are born. It includes our  parents, brothers and sisters 
and neighbours. Everyday we use these three and wea r them out. The Gita 
wants us to endeavour continually to replenish what  is lost through us, and 
thereby make our life fruitful. We should selflessl y discharge our inborn duties 
towards these three orders.  
These duties are to be discharged. But how?  Yajna (sacrifice), dana  (charity) 
and tapas (penance and austerities), these three together com prise the scheme 
for the purpose. We are familiar with these terms, but we do not comprehend 
them clearly. If we could comprehend them and bring  them into our lives, the 
body, the creation and the society, all would fulfi ll their purpose and our lives 
will also be free and happy. 
 
95. Triple Endeavour For This Purpose  
4. Let us first see what yajna  means. Everyday we make use of nature. If a 
hundred of us crowd together in one spot for a day,  that will spoil the place, 
pollute the atmosphere, and thus harm nature. We sh ould do something to 
recoup nature, to restore its balance. It is for th is purpose that the institution 
of yajna was created. Yajna  is intended to reimburse, to put back what we 
have taken from nature. We have been farming for th ousands of years and 
eroding the fertility of the soil thereby. Yajna  says, “Return to the soil its 
fertility. Plough it. Let it absorb heat from the s un. Manure it.”  To make good 
the loss is one of the purposes of the yajna . Another purpose is to purify the 
things we use. We use a well and make the place all  round it dirty and slushy. 
The harm thus caused should be undone; so we should  clean the surroundings. 
Production of something new is also an aspect of yajna . We wear clothes; so we 
should spin regularly to produce them. Growing cott on or food grains, 
spinning—all these are forms of yajna . Whatever we do as yajna should not 
have any selfish motive behind it; it should rather  be done with a sense of duty Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 230  to compensate the loss we have caused. There is no altruism in it; it is the 
repayment of what we already owe. In fact, we are b orn with a debt. What we 
produce for repayment of that debt is a form of ser vice; we are not obliging 
anybody thereby. We use so many things in the world  around us. Yajna  should 
be done for their replenishment and purification as  well as for new production. 
5. Human society is the second institution. Our parent s, teachers, friends—all 
of them toil for us. Dana  has been prescribed to discharge our debt to socie ty. 
Dana too is no altruism. We are already highly obliged t o society. We were 
totally defenceless and weak when we were born. It is the society that looked 
after us and brought us up. We should therefore ser ve it. When we serve others 
without taking anything in return, that is altruism ; but we have already taken 
much from society. The service that is rendered to repay that debt is dana . 
Dana  means contributing to the progress of mankind. Whi le yajna  means 
working for the replenishment of nature’s loss, rep ayment of the debt to 
society through exerting oneself physically or thro ugh money or some other 
means is dana . 
6. The third institution is the body. It too gets worn  out daily by our use. We 
daily use mind, intellect and organs. Tapas  has been prescribed for removing 
the defects and distortions that arise in the body and purifying it. 
7. Thus it is our duty to act in such a way that these   three institutions—
nature, society and the body—function smoothly and efficiently. We create a 
number of good or bad institutions, but these three  have not been created by 
us. They have already been given to us. They are na tural, not man-made. It is 
our natural duty to replenish through yajna , dana and tapas  the wear and tear 
in these three orders. If we follow this, all our e nergy will be harnessed for this 
purpose. No strength will be left for anything else . All our strength would be 
consumed for the sake of these three institutions. If we could say like Kabir, “O 
Lord!  I am returning this shawl given by you witho ut soiling it!” 1, that would be 
a matter of fulfillment for us.  But for this, the triple programme of yajna-
dana-tapas  must be followed.  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 231  Here we have regarded yajna, dana  and tapas  as if they were different entities; 
but in fact, they are not really different. Nature,  society and the body are not 
completely distinct entities. Society is not someth ing outside nature, nor is the 
body outside it. Therefore, productive labour ( yajna ), dana, tapas —all these 
can be called yajna  in a broad sense. It is in this spirit that the Gi ta has 
referred to dravyayajna  (sacrifice with material gifts) and tapoyajna  (sacrifice 
with austerities) in the Fourth Chapter. The Gita h as broadened the meaning of 
yajna . 
Whatever service we render to these three instituti ons is bound to be a form of 
yajna . But it is also necessary that this service should  be without any desire or 
expectation for reward. In fact, there can be no ro om whatsoever for expecting 
any fruit of our actions, as we have already receiv ed much from these 
institutions. We are already burdened with debt. Wh at we have to do is to 
return what we have already taken. Nature attains a  state of harmony and 
equilibrium through yajna , society attains such a state through dana, and  tapas  
maintains equilibrium in the body. Yajna-dana-tapas  is thus the triple 
programme for preserving balance and order in these  three institutions. It will 
lead to purification and elimination of pollution. 
8. To enable us to serve in this manner, we have to co nsume something. That 
too is a part of yajna . The Gita calls it aahaara  (food). Just as an engine needs 
fuel, body needs food. The food is not yajna in itself, but it is necessary for the 
successful performance of yajna . That is why we say before starting the meals, 
‘उदरभरण नोहे जािणजे य᭄कमᭅ ’ (‘This is not for filling the belly; it is an act  of 
yajna .’) Just as offering flowers to the Lord is worship , toiling in the garden to 
produce the flowers is also worship. Anything done for the performance of 
yajna  is a form of worship. The body can be useful to us  only when it is given 
food. Whatever is done for the sake of yajna  is a kind of yajna  itself. The Gita 
calls such actions ‘sacrificial acts’ (actions for the sake of yajna ). Whatever is 
offered to the body to enable it to be ever-ready f or service is a kind of 
sacrificial offering; it is a form of yajna . The food taken for the sake of service 
is indeed sacred. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 232  9. Again, all these things should have faith at their foundation. One should 
always have in mind the idea that all service is to  be ultimately dedicated to 
God. This is extremely important. Life cannot be fu ll of service if such a spirit 
is not there. Dedication to the Lord is the key tha t must never be overlooked.  
 
96. Making Sadhana Sattvik   
10. But, when could we dedicate our actions to the Lord ?  Only when they 
become sattvik. Yajna-dana-tapas —all must be sattvik . In the Fourteenth 
Chapter, we saw the principle of making our actions  sattvik . In this Chapter, 
the Gita tells us how that principle is to be appli ed. 
11. The Gita is doing this with a dual purpose. The ser vice that is being 
outwardly rendered to the world in the form of yajna-dana-tapas  should 
inwardly become spiritual sadhana . Service of the world and spiritual sadhana  
should not need two different courses of action. Th ey, in fact, are not two 
different things. For both, the efforts made, the a ctions performed are the 
same. Such actions are to be dedicated to the Lord in the end. The yoga  that 
combines service, spiritual discipline and dedicati on to the Lord should be 
realised by a single activity. 
12. Two things are necessary to make yajna sattvik . There should not be any 
desire for the fruit, but the actions must result i n some fruit. If there is desire 
for the fruit, yajna will be  rajasik ; if it is fruitless, it will be tamasik . 
Spinning is a yajna . But if you do not pour your soul into it, if ther e is no 
concentration of the mind, spinning will be a lifel ess and mechanical work. If 
there is no cooperation from the mind, the work wil l not be methodical and 
scientific. Unscientific work becomes lifeless. Tamas  creeps into such work. 
Such work cannot create something excellent. It can not yield any fruit. Yajna  
should be desireless, but it must yield the best po ssible fruit. If the mind is not 
in the work, if you have not poured your heart and soul in it, it becomes a 
burden. How can it then yield the best fruit?  If o utward work gets spoilt, it is a 
sure indication of the lack of cooperation from the  mind. Therefore, take to Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 233  work from the bottom of your heart, and have cooper ation from your mind. We 
must work for the best possible returns to repay th e debt due to creation. 
Cooperation from the mind is the systematic way to ensure that the work does 
yield some fruit. 
13. In this way, when desirelessness gets ingrained in the mind and systematic 
and fruitful actions begin to take place, only then  the purification of mind will 
ensue. What is the test for the purification of min d?  We should examine our 
outward actions for this purpose. If they are not p ure and well-done, we may 
take it that the mind too is impure. When does the work become beautiful?  
When we work with a pure heart and devote all our e nergy to it, the Lord, 
pleased with it, puts His seal of appreciation and approval on it. Beauty 
manifests in the work at the touch of the happy and  satisfied Lord. It is the 
divine grace showered on pure and sacred efforts. A  sculptor, absorbed in 
carving, feels that the beautiful image that is tak ing shape is not his creation; 
beauty somehow manifests itself in the image at the  last moment. Can divine 
art manifest itself unless there is purity in the m ind?  We pour the beauty and 
purity in our hearts in the Lord’s idol, and that m akes the idol holy. The idol is 
but an image of our mind in the concrete form. All our actions are images of 
our mind. If the mind is pure, actions too will tur n out to be beautiful. We 
should judge the purity of outward actions by the p urity of mind and the purity 
of mind by the purity of outward actions. 
14. In this connection, one more important point is not  to be missed. It is that 
all the actions should be charged with mantra —with the spirit, with the 
understanding of their true purport. Actions withou t mantra  are meaningless. 
While spinning, one should always have the feeling of establishing a bond with 
the poor. If we spin for hours on end, but without this mantra  in our heart, it is 
all wasted. It would not then purify the heart. Loo k at the action of spinning as 
the revelation of the Lord hidden in the sliver; th en that action will become 
sattvik  and beautiful. It will become a kind of worship; a  sort of sacrificial 
service. Then that thin yarn will link you to the s ociety, to the people, to the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 234  Lord. Yashoda saw the whole universe in the mouth o f child Krishna.2 You too 
will see the universe in the thin yarn when it is c harged with mantra . 
 
97. Purity In Food  
15. To enable us to render such a true service, we must  be vigilant about 
aahaara  (diet). The state of our mind depends on our diet.  We should take food 
in regulated and measured quantity. How much we eat  is more important than 
what we eat. It does matter what food we choose to eat, but it matters even 
more that it is in the right measure. 
16. Whatever we eat is bound to have its effect. Why do  we eat?  To enable us 
to render the best possible service. Eating too is a part of yajna . We should eat 
because it is necessary to make yajna of service yield fruit. Look at the food 
with this feeling. Food should be clean and pure. T here is no limit to an 
individual’s efforts for making his diet pure and sattvik . Our society too has 
made strenuous efforts for the same. Indian society  made extensive 
experiments in this regard for thousands of years. It is difficult to imagine the 
hardships and austerities involved in those experim ents. India is the only 
country in the world where a large number of commun ities have completely 
abjured meat-eating. Even non-vegetarian communitie s do not have meat as a 
main and regular item in their diet. Non-vegetarian s too feel that it is 
unbecoming to eat meat; they too have renounced it mentally. Yajna  was 
introduced to discourage meat-eating and it was to fulfill this very purpose that 
it was later abandoned. Lord Krishna changed the ve ry meaning of the word 
‘yajna ’. He impressed upon the people the value and impor tance of milk. 
Krishna did a lot of extraordinary things, but in w hich form do the Indian people 
adore Him most?  It is Gopalkrishna—Krishna the cow herd—that Indian people 
adore most. Gopalkrishna, with a cow by His side an d flute on His lips, is the 
most familiar image for Indians. The great benefit of learning to cherish the 
cow was that people gave up meat-eating. Cow’s milk  came to be greatly 
valued and the prevalence of meat-eating was reduce d. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 235  17. Still it cannot be said that we have reached the li mit of making our diet 
pure and sattvik . We need to advance further. Bengalis eat fish and  many are 
surprised at it. But it is not right to condemn the m on that account. They have 
nothing but rice in their diet. It does not provide  enough nutrition to the body. 
We shall have to make experiments for finding equal ly nutritious vegetarian 
substitutes for fish. Individuals will certainly co me forward for such 
experiments and make extraordinary sacrifices. Soci ety progresses because of 
such individuals. The sun keeps burning brightly an d that enables us to have a 
normal body temperature of 98 o F. and remain alive. Only when individuals 
whose vairagya  (non-attachment) burns brightly like the sun are b orn in the 
society, when they free themselves from the shackle s of circumstances and 
vigorously pursue their ideal, then ordinary beings  like us can have a little 
detachment necessary in worldly affairs. In this co ntext, I often think of the 
penance and the sacrifices of the sages, some of wh om must have even laid 
down their lives to end the practice of meat-eating  prevalent at that time. 
18. We have achieved this much; we have reached this po int through the 
collective quest for making our diet pure and sattvik . We should not lose what 
our ancestors attained through untold sacrifices. W e should not let go this 
achievement of Indian culture. It is not enough tha t we somehow manage to 
exist?  That is easy; even animals live likewise. A re we like them?  No, there is 
a difference. Cultural development lies in increasi ng this difference. Our 
country carried out the great experiment of abjurin g meat. Let us continue it. 
At least we should not slip below what has already been achieved. 
Such exhortation has become necessary as some of us  have now begun to think 
that meat-eating is desirable. Today, the cultures of the East and the West are 
impinging on each other and affecting each other. I  am confident that good will 
come out of it in the end. Our superstitious belief s are crumbling under the 
impact of Western culture. There is no harm in it. What is good will endure, 
what is bad will disappear. But superstitious belie fs should not be replaced by 
an unbelief which is held equally blindly and uncri tically. Just as we should not Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 236  believe in anything blindly, we should not disbelie ve in something blindly. It is 
not that only belief can be blind; unbelief too can  be blind. 
People have begun to think again about meat-eating.  Whatever may be the 
reason, the appearance of a new idea delights me. I t shows that the people are 
waking up. Indications of their wakefulness are rea ssuring. But if we begin to 
walk without being fully awake, we are likely to st umble and fall. We must not, 
therefore, hasten to change our habits in a hurry. We may go on thinking 
furiously from all the possible angles. Do subject dharma  to the test of reason. 
If it does not stand the test, it is good for nothi ng. Whatever part of dharma  
fails to stand the test of reason should be discard ed. The dharma  which is so 
robust that the tools of reason themselves break do wn while dealing with it is 
the true dharma . In fact, a criterion for judging what is true  dharma is that the 
tools of reason fail to cut it up.  Dharma  is not afraid of reason. One must never 
restrain thought; but one must not rush into action . Nothing should be done 
impatiently and impulsively until one is fully conv inced of its rightness. One 
must have patience and restraint while acting. We s hould not give up the gains 
which are hard won.  
 
98. The Gita’s Scheme for Harmonious Living  
19. Purity of food keeps the mind pure. It also strengt hens the body. One can 
then serve the society properly. Both the individua l and the society will then be 
happy. There will be no conflicts in the society wh erein yajna-dana-tapas  are 
going on in the right manner and are charged with mantra . Just as mirrors 
reflect the images in each other, happiness in the individual and in his society 
are reflected in each other. My happiness and the s ociety’s happiness are not 
two distinct things. This can be tested, and on tes ting we shall find them to be 
one and the same. One will experience oneness (non- duality) everywhere. 
Duality and malice will disappear. The Gita is sugg esting a scheme to have 
harmony and orderliness in society. How nice it wou ld be if we could organise 
our daily life in accordance with the Gita’s plan! Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 237  20. But today, there is conflict between individual and  social life. How to 
resolve this conflict?  This question is being disc ussed everywhere. What are the 
proper spheres of authority and action for the indi vidual and the society?  
Where is the boundary to be drawn?  Who should have  pre-eminence amongst 
them?  Who is superior?  Some are protagonists of i ndividualism; they regard 
society as an inert entity, whereas individuals are  full of consciousness. A 
military commander would speak gently to an ordinar y sepoy while dealing with 
him as an individual, but he will not mind ordering  a battalion in the way he 
likes. The battalion is as if inert, like a wooden block which can be moved at 
will. Even here, while I am addressing a couple of hundred persons, I am saying 
whatever occurs to me, irrespective of whether you like it or not, as if you all 
are an inert mass. But when I have to deal with an individual, I have to listen to 
him patiently and give an answer after thoughtful c onsideration. 
Thus there are some who expound that society is ine rt and only the individual is 
a conscious entity, while some others attach import ance to society. I may lose 
my hair, my hand may be amputated, I may lose eyesi ght, even one of my lungs 
may cease to function, still I continue to live. Ea ch organ, looked at separately, 
has no life of its own. If any one of the organs pe rishes, the whole does not 
perish. The body is a collective entity; it continu es to live. This is the 
standpoint of the collectivists. These are the two approaches opposed to each 
other. Your inferences will depend on your point of  view. What you see is 
coloured by the colour of your eyeglasses. 
21. Some give importance to the individual and some to the society. This is 
because the concept of ‘struggle for existence’ has  come to have a hold on our 
minds. But is life meant for struggle only? If it i s so, why not prefer death?  
Discord and strife is a recipe for death. It is bec ause of this concept that we 
distinguish between self-interest and the supreme i nterest, that is, the good of 
all. What could we say of the man who invented the idea that self-interest and 
the supreme good have nothing to do with each other ?  He could create the 
illusion of a difference where none existed!  It is  indeed surprising that this 
non-existent distinction is being widely accepted. It is like erecting a wall like Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 238  the Great Wall of China, setting bounds to the hori zon and then imagining that 
nothing exists beyond those bounds. All this is due  to the absence of yajna  in 
life. Therein lies the genesis of the dichotomy bet ween the individual and the 
society. 
In reality, such dichotomy is unreal. Suppose a cur tain is hung in a room, 
dividing it in two compartments. As the wind blows,  sometimes one 
compartment appears larger and sometimes the other appears so. The sizes of 
the compartments are not fixed; they depend on the wind. The Gita has 
nothing to do with such imaginary divisions. It exh orts us to follow the dictates 
of the law of inner purification. Then no contradic tion between the interests of 
the individual and those of the society would arise . Their respective interests 
would not then be opposed to each other. It is in e nsuring this, in securing 
interests of all that the Gita’s ingenuity lies. A single individual following the 
Gita’s law could make a nation rise. A nation is ma de up of the individuals 
comprising it. How can a nation be called a nation if it does not have 
individuals having wisdom and character?  What give s India its distinctive 
character?  India means Rabindranath (Tagore), Indi a means Gandhi, and a few 
such names. People know India as the land of such i ndividuals. Take a few 
individuals in the ancient times, a few in the medi aeval period, a few in the 
recent period, add to them the Himalayas and the Ga nga, and that makes India 
as it is. This is the definition of India. This def inition can be elaborated further. 
Just as the quality of milk is judged by the fat co ntent in it, the quality of a 
society is judged by the moral stature and worth of  the individuals in it. There 
is no conflict between the interests of individuals  and that of the society. How 
can there be a conflict?  In fact, there should be no conflict between different 
individuals as well. What does it matter if some ar e better off than others?  If 
nobody is destitute and the wealth of the rich is b eing utilized for the society, 
it should be okay. The money may be in my left pock et or in the right one, it is 
mine all the same. Individual and social life can b e organised skillfully in such a 
way that whenever any individual prospers, everybod y prospers, and the nation 
also prospers. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 239  Still we erect walls of divisions. But if the head is separated from the body, 
both the head and the trunk will be lifeless. So do  not imagine any division 
between the individual and society. The Gita is tea ching how an action can be 
done in such a way that it is neither against the d oer’s self-interest nor against 
the supreme good. There is no opposition between th e air in my room and the 
air outside. If I imagine any opposition between th em and shut the doors and 
windows of my room, I am bound to die of suffocatio n. If I do not assume such 
opposition between them and open the doors and the windows, the boundless 
air outside the room flows into it. The moment I im agine opposition between 
my interests and the society’s interests and cling to ‘my’ house, ‘my’ land etc., 
I deprive myself of the infinite wealth that lies b eyond ‘my and mine’. If this 
small house of mine is gutted by fire or collapses,  I cry as if everything is lost. 
But why should I cry?  What is the point in making petty and narrow 
assumptions first and then crying?  When I say that  a few rupees are mine, I 
deprive myself of the immeasurable wealth in the wo rld. When I call a couple 
of individuals ‘my’ brothers, I deprive myself of h aving brotherly relations with 
countless other individuals. But we are totally obl ivious of this. How petty a 
man becomes!  In fact, self-interest of a man and t he good of all should be 
identical. The Gita is showing a simple and beautif ul way to have perfect 
cooperation between the individual and society. 
22. Take the  matter of food. Is there any opposition between the  mouth and 
the stomach, the two organs involved in eating?  Mo uth should provide to the 
stomach only as much food as it really needs. It sh ould not go on eating 
something just because it is tasty and delicious. T he mouth should stop the 
moment the stomach signals it to do so. Both the st omach and the mouth are 
our organs. We are the master of both of them. Ther e is perfect unity between 
their interests. Why do you create any wretched opp osition?  The organs in the 
body are not opposed to each other; there is cooper ation between them. This is 
true for the society as well. To promote cooperatio n within the society, the 
Gita is prescribing yajna-dana-tapas,  to be performed with a pure heart. Such 
karma  will lead to the welfare of both the individual an d the society. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 240  A man whose life is full of the spirit of yajna  belongs to all. Just as every child 
feels that the mother loves him, everyone feels tha t such a person belongs to 
him. The whole world cherishes such a person. Ramda s has said, ‘ ऐसा पुᱧष ता 
पहावा  । जनांस वाटे हा असावा  ।’ (‘Everybody wants such a man in their midst.’) The 
Gita teaches us how to live such a life. 
 
99. The Mantra  of Dedication  
23. The Gita further says that after infusing life with  the spirit of yajna,  it 
should be totally dedicated to the Lord. It may be asked, ‘What is the necessity 
of dedicating it to the Lord when it is already ful l of service?’  The point is that 
it is easy to say that life should be imbued with s ervice, but it is far more 
difficult to achieve this. It can at best be achiev ed partially; and that too after 
many births. Moreover, the actions may be full of t he spirit of service, and still 
they can lack the spirit of worship. Hence the acti ons should be dedicated to 
the Lord with the mantra ॐ तत् सत् (Om tat sat ). 
It is difficult for the acts of service to be fully  saturated with the spirit of 
service. When we seek well-being of others, we sati sfy our own interest too. 
There is no action which is purely in the interests  of others. It is impossible to 
do anything that is free from even a trace of self- interest. We should, 
therefore, wish that our service should become more  and more selfless and 
desireless. If there is a wish to do increasingly p urer service, then you must 
dedicate all the actions to the Lord. Jnanadeva has  said, ‘ नामामृत-गोडी वै᭬णवां 
लाधली । योिगयां साधली जीवन-कळा. ’ (‘Vaishnavas , i.e. bhaktas taste the nectar-like 
sweetness of the Name of the Lord, and the yogis have mastered the art of 
living.’) Sweetness of the Name and the art of livi ng are not two different 
things. Chanting the Name from within and mastering  the art of living—these 
are in tune with each other. Bhakta  and yogi  are one and the same. When 
actions are dedicated to the Lord, self-interest, a ltruism and the supreme 
interest (i.e. the supreme good) will become one. ‘ I’ and ‘you’ are now apart; 
they should first be united to form ‘we’, which sho uld then be united with Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 241  ‘Him’, i.e. with the Lord. Firstly, we should achie ve harmony with the world 
and then with the Lord—that is what the mantra ॐ तत् सत् (Om tat sat ) 
suggests. 
24. The Lord has countless Names. Vyasa compiled a thou sand of them as the 
Vishnusahasranam (Thousand Names of Lord Vishnu). I n fact, any Name that we 
can think of is His. Whatever Name appeals to us, w e should take it to be one 
of His Names and should see the corresponding attri bute present in the whole 
of creation and shape our life in accordance with i t. To meditate over a Name, 
to see the corresponding attribute present in the w hole of creation and to 
imbibe that attribute—I call it tripada Gayatri  (three-stepped sacred mantra  of 
deliverance). For example, if we take the Name ‘ dayamaya ’ or ‘Rahim ’ (one 
full of mercy and compassion), that is, look upon t he Lord as merciful and 
compassionate, we should envision the merciful and compassionate Lord 
pervading the entire creation. We should realise th at He has given a mother to 
every child, He has given air for all to breathe. T hus, we should see that in the 
scheme of the merciful and compassionate Lord there  are mercy and 
compassion, and then we should infuse mercy and com passion into our own 
lives. The Gita suggested the Name that was most pr evalent in that age: ॐ तत् 
सत् (Om tat sat ). 
24. ॐ (om ) means ‘yes’. Yes, God does exist. He exists even in this twentieth 
century!  स एव अ᳒ स उ ᳡ः  He exists today, He existed yesterday and He shall  
exist tomorrow. He is always there. The creation to o is always there, and we 
too are ever-ready to continue our spiritual quest in all earnestness. We are the 
seekers and the worshippers, He is the Lord, and ev erything in the creation is a 
means for worship. When our whole being gets charge d with this feeling, we 
may be said to have digested the meaning of ॐ (om ). The spirit of ॐ (om ) 
should permeate our mind and find expression in our  sadhana . See the sun at 
any time. It is always there with its rays; never w ithout them. In the same way, 
our sadhana  should be clearly visible in our life to all at al l the times. Only then 
it can be said that we have assimilated the spirit of ॐ (om ). Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 242  Then comes सत् (sat ). The Lord is sat ; that is, He is good and auspicious. Look 
at the creation with this feeling and you will find  His goodness and 
auspiciousness in it. When you remove a pitcherful of water from a river, a pit 
is not formed there; surrounding water rushes in im mediately to fill the 
depression. What an expression of love and benignit y!  A river abhors 
depressions in its bed. ‘ नदी वेगेन शु᭞᭟यित । ’ (‘The water of a river is clean and 
pure because it is flowing continuously and speedil y.’) The river of creation is 
also getting purified continuously and speedily. Th at is why it is good and 
auspicious. Let our actions too be likewise. To und erstand the Lord as सत् (sat ), 
all our actions should be full of purity and devoti on. All our actions, our entire 
sadhana  should be continually examined and progressively p urified. 
Then comes तत् (tat ). ‘Tat ’ means ‘that’, something different, something 
unattached to the creation. The Lord is distinct fr om the creation and is 
unattached to it. As the sun rises, the lotuses blo om, the birds leave their 
nests, darkness disappears. But the sun is somewher e far off, quite aloof from 
all these outcomes. When our actions become detache d and disinterested, we 
can be said to have digested ‘ tat ’. 
25. In this way, the Gita teaches us to dedicate all th e actions to the Lord, 
using the Vedic Name /f020ॐ तत् सत् (om tat sat ). The idea of dedicating all the 
actions to the Lord had already been introduced in the Ninth Chapter. The 
verse ‘ य᭜करोिष यद᳤ािस ’3 tells the same thing. The same idea has been 
elaborated further in the Seventeenth chapter. This  Chapter has particularly 
pointed out that the actions to be dedicated to the  Lord must be sattvik , for 
only then they will be worthy of being offered to H im. 
 
100. The Name Of The Lord Effaces Sins  
26. All this is very well. Still a question remains. A virtuous man may be able 
to digest the Name ॐ तत् सत्, but what about a sinner?  Is there any Name that 
a sinner too could take?  Yes, a sinner too can cha nt ॐ तत् सत्. All Names of the 
Lord can lead us from untruth to Truth, from sin to  innocence. You must purify Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 243  your life gradually. The Lord will then certainly h elp you. He will support you in 
your moments of weakness. 
27. If I am asked to choose between a virtuous, but ego tistic life on the one 
hand and a sinful, but humble life on the other, I may falter in giving an 
unequivocal answer, but my heart would certainly ex claim, ‘Let me have the 
sin which turns me towards the Lord!’  If a virtuou s life is going to make me 
forget Him, then let me rather have a sinful life t hat makes me think of Him. It 
is not that I am justifying a sinful life. But vani ty about the purity of life is a 
greater sin. Tukaram has said, ‘ बᱟ िभतᲂ जाणपणा । आड न यो नारायणा  ।’ (‘Oh Lord!  
I am afraid of being learned; let it not separate m e from You.’) Let us not have 
such greatness. It is better to be a sinner and gri eve. ‘ जाणतᱶ लेकᱨ ं  माता लागे दूर 
धᱨ ं ।’ (‘A mother weans away from her a child who has gr own up.’)  But she 
would hold to her bosom her innocent child. I do no t want to be virtuous and 
independent; rather let me be a sinner dependent on  the Lord. His holiness is 
more than enough to wash off my sins. We should try  to avoid sins; if we fail in 
our efforts, our heart will cry out for His help. H e is always there, watching 
fondly. Tell Him, ‘I am a sinner and that is why I have come to your door.’ A 
virtuous man has the right to think of the Lord and  seek refuge in Him because 
he is virtuous; a sinner has the right to do so bec ause he is a sinner.  
(12.6.32)  
 
References:  
1. Here, reference to the famous poem of saint Kabir w herein he tells the Lord that the 
shawl (i.e. the body) given by the Lord is normally  soiled by people, but he has used 
it with meticulous care and is returning it to Him (while bidding farewell to the 
world) in the same spotless (i.e. sinless) conditio n. 
2. Yashoda, the forster mother of Krishna, once suspec ted that the child had stealthily 
eater butter and asked him to open his mouth.  When  Krishna did so, she saw the 
whole universe in it and realised that the child wa s not an ordinary one, but was the 
Lord Himself. 
3. 'Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you of fer as sacrifice or gift, 
whatever austerities you practice, dedicate all to Me.'—Gita 9.27  Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 244   
CHAPTER 18 
CONCLUSION: RENUNCIATION OF THE FRUIT OF ACTIONS LE ADS TO THE 
GRACE OF THE LORD  
101. Arjuna’s Last Question  
1. Dear brothers, by the grace of the Lord, we have no w reached the last 
Chapter. In this world of chance and change, fulfil lment of any resolve depends 
on the will of the Lord. Jail life, in particular, is marked by uncertainty at 
every step. It is difficult to expect that any work  started here would be 
completed here itself. It was also not expected tha t these discourses on the 
Gita would be completed here; but the Lord willed s o, and hence we have been 
able to reach the end of the Gita. 
2. In the Fourteenth Chapter, life or karma  was divided into three categories: 
sattvik , rajasik  and tamasik . We learnt that what is rajasik  or tamasik should 
be given up and what is sattvik should be cultivated. The Seventeenth Chapter 
taught the same thing in a different way. The essen ce of life is yajna-dana-
tapas ; or to use a single word, yajna . Actions like eating which are necessary 
for the performance of yajna  should also be made sattvik  and turned into a 
kind of yajna . Only such actions should be done; all others shou ld be given up. 
This was hinted at in the Seventeenth Chapter. We a lso saw why we should 
constantly remember the mantra /f020ऊ ँ  तत् सत् (om tat sat ). ऊ ँ denotes constancy, 
tat denotes detachment and sat  denotes purity. Our sadhana  should have these 
three things: constancy, detachment and purity. Onl y then can it be dedicated 
to the Lord. All this indicates that only some and not all of the actions are to 
be renounced.  
If we look at the whole message of the Gita, we fin d it advocating at several 
places that actions are not to be renounced. What i t asks us to renounce is the 
fruit of actions. Everywhere in the Gita it is taug ht that we should act 
ceaselessly and renounce the fruit of our actions. But this is one side of it. The 
other side appears to be that certain actions shoul d be renounced while certain Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 245  other actions should be done. That is why Arjuna as ks, at the beginning of the 
Eighteenth Chapter, “On the one hand, it is said th at whatever action we do, it 
should be followed by renunciation of its fruit ( falatyaga ) and on the other 
hand, it also appears that some actions must be str ictly abjured while some 
actions should be done. How to reconcile these two positions?”  This question 
has been asked to understand clearly the direction in which life should proceed 
and to have an insight into the true meaning of the  renunciation of the fruit of 
actions. Actions in themselves are to be renounced in what the scriptures call 
sannyasa , while in the falatyaga  there is renunciation of the fruit of actions. 
Does renunciation of the fruit of actions as enjoin ed by the Gita needs 
renunciation of the actions themselves?  This is th e crux of the matter. With 
reference to the criterion of the renunciation of t he fruit, is there any role for 
sannyasa ?  What are the limits of sannyasa  and falatyaga ?  This is what Arjuna 
asks. 
 
102. Renunciation Of The Fruit: The Universal Test  
3. The Lord has made one thing absolutely clear while answering this 
question: Renunciation of the fruit is the universa l test. It can be universally 
applied. There is no contradiction between renuncia tion of the fruit of all the 
actions and the renunciation of rajasik  and tamasik  actions. The nature of some 
actions is such that they automatically fall off wh en the test of renunciation of 
the fruit is applied. When it is said that renuncia tion of the fruit should be 
associated with the performance of actions, it inva riably implies that some 
actions will have to be given up. When we act in co njunction with renunciation 
of the fruit of actions, it naturally involves abju ration of certain actions. 
4. Let us think over it in depth. When we say that wha tever actions we do, 
we should renounce their fruit , actions prompted by desire for the fruit, 
actions prompted by selfish motives cease immediate ly. Such actions, as well as 
actions which are forbidden, being immoral and unri ghteous, are ruled out 
when it is said that the fruit of actions is to be renounced. To act with 
renunciation of its fruit is not something mechanic al, something done without Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 246  application of mind. In fact, when we apply this te st, it becomes clear which 
actions are worthy of doing and which are not so. S ome say that the Gita 
enjoins us to act with renunciation of the fruit; i t does not suggest which 
actions should be done. It does appear so, but it i s not true. When it is said that 
one should act and renounce the fruit of actions, i t becomes clear which 
actions should be done and which should not be done . Actions intended to harm 
others, actions full of falsehood, actions like ste aling can never be done if their 
fruit is to be renounced. The sun illuminates all t hings, but does it illuminate 
darkness too?  No, it disappears altogether. That i s what happens to selfish or 
forbidden actions. All the actions should be subjec ted to this test. When we 
intend to do something, we should see whether it is  possible for us to do it 
without any attachment and expectation of returns. Renunciation of the fruit  is 
the only unfailing test for actions. When this test  is applied, actions with desire 
or selfish motives show themselves up as fit to be rejected. They must be 
renounced. Then pure and sattvik actions remain. They should be done with 
detachment, selflessness and humility. Renunciation  of selfish actions is also an 
action and it should also be subjected to this univ ersal test. Renunciation of 
selfish actions should not require any effort.  
Thus, we have seen three things: (i) Whatever actio ns we do, we should 
renounce their fruit. (ii) When the test of renunci ation of the fruit  is applied, 
rajasik and tamasik actions, selfish and forbidden actions stand reject ed. (iii) 
The same test is to be applied to such renunciation  too. There should not be 
any vanity about renunciation, any feeling that ‘I have made so much sacrifice.’ 
5. Why should rajasik  and tamasik actions be abjured?  Because they are not 
pure; and because of their being impure, they smear  the mind of the doer with 
impurities. But on deeper observation, one finds th at sattvik  actions too are 
flawed. In fact, every action has some or the other  defect in it. The swadharma 
of farming comes to mind as a pure and sattvik occupation. But even in such 
work, which is of the nature of yajna, some violence is involved. Ploughing and 
other operations destroy a number of living beings.  When we open the door in 
the morning, the sun’s rays enter the house and kil l a number of living beings. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 247  What we call purification turns out to be a killing  operation. Even sattvik  work 
is thus flawed. What is then to be done? 
6. I have already said that we have yet to develop to the full all the virtues. 
We have been able to have just a fleeting glimpse o f qualities like wisdom, 
devotion, service and non-violence. It is not that they had fully blossomed 
sometime in the past. Mankind is learning from expe rience and making 
progress. In the Middle Ages, it was thought that a griculture involves violence; 
so it should be avoided by the people believing in non-violence and they should 
prefer trade and commerce instead. It is strange th at to grow grains was 
considered sinful, but to sell them was not conside red so!  To avoid actions in 
this way does no good. Restricting the sphere of ac tions in this way will 
ultimately prove suicidal. The more a man thinks of  escaping from actions, the 
more will he get entangled in them. If you have to trade in grains, is it not 
necessary for someone else to grow them?  If so, ar e you not an accomplice in 
the violence involved in farming?  If growing cotto n is a sin, it should be equally 
sinful to sell it. Not to produce cotton on the gro und of it being an impure work 
is a sign of warped thinking. An attitude that goes  on rejecting actions of all 
the types on different pretexts is not a sign of co mpassion; on the contrary, it 
shows lack of true compassion. We should understand  that when the leaves are 
plucked, a tree does not wither away; it rather get s fresh foliage. In the 
contraction of the sphere of activities, there is c ontraction of the Self.  
 
103. The Right Way To Extricate Oneself From Activi ty  
7. The question then arises, ‘if all the activities ar e flawed, then why should 
not all of them be renounced?’  This question has a lready been answered. 
Renunciation of all the actions is indeed a very at tractive and fascinating idea; 
but how to renounce innumerable actions?  Is the wa y of giving up rajasik  and 
tamasik  actions applicable to sattvik  actions too?  How to avoid sattvik  actions 
that are flawed or impure?  The curious result of s aying ‘ इंᮤाय तᭃकाय 
᭭वाहा ’1 (‘Let Indra along with Takshak be offered as sacri fice in the yajna ’) is Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 248  that Indra, being immortal, does not die, and Taksh ak too escapes death and 
becomes stronger. Sattvik  actions have a good deal of merit and a little fla w in 
them. When you try to sacrifice them because of tha t flaw, the merit in them 
does not die because of its inherent strength, but the flaws survive and grow 
behind the shield of the merit. The flaws which oth erwise could have been 
removed, get strengthened because of such indiscree t sacrifice. If we drive 
away the cat because it commits the violence of kil ling the rats, we shall have 
to suffer the violence committed by the rats. If sn akes are done away with 
because they commit violence, a lot of pests will m ultiply and destroy the 
crops, resulting in the death of thousands of peopl e. Renunciation must, 
therefore, be accompanied with wise discrimination.  
8. There is a story that Machchhindranath asked Gorakh nath, his disciple, to 
give a boy a good wash. Gorakhnath literally washed  the boy like a piece of 
cloth by thrashing him on a washing stone, squeezed  him and put him on the 
clothes-line for drying!  Is it the way to give a b oy a wash?  Clothes and boys 
are not washed in the same way. Similarly, there is  a lot of difference between 
renouncing sattvik  actions and renouncing rajasik  and tamasik actions. Sattvik 
actions are to be renounced in an altogether differ ent way. 
Actions bereft of wise discrimination can result in  something adverse and 
unexpected. Has not Tukaram said, ‘ ᭜यागᱶ भोग मा᭕या येतील अंतरा   ।  मग मी दातारा 
काय कᱨ ं   ।। ’ (‘If I outwardly renounce the desires and passion s, they will enter 
my heart. O Lord!  What am I to do then?’) Even if one tries to make a little 
sacrifice outwardly, the subtle urge for indulgence  remains in the mind and 
grows there in strength, rendering that sacrifice m eaningless. If a little bit of 
renunciation is going to lead us to build palatial houses, it makes no sense; it 
would have been better to live in a hut. It is bett er to continue to be dressed in 
the coat and the turban than to wear a loin-cloth a nd amass wealth and wallow 
in worldly pleasures. That is why the Lord has pres cribed an altogether 
different way for renunciation of sattvik  actions: they are to be done, but their 
fruits should be severed from them. While some acti ons themselves are to be 
renounced, fruits of some other are to be severed f rom them. A stain on the Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 249  body can be washed off; but if the natural colour o f the skin is dark, what is 
the point in white-washing it?  It is better if no attention is paid to it. 
9. There is a story about a man, who thought that his house was filthy and 
inauspicious and therefore left and went to another  village. He found filth in 
that village too and therefore went to a forest. Th ere, as he sat under a mango 
tree, a bird’s droppings fell on his head. Disguste d, he cursed the forest and 
went and stood in a river. There he found big fish eating up the small ones, and 
that heightened his disgust. Convinced that the who le of creation was 
abominable, and there was no way out except through  death, he came out of 
the water and kindled a fire to end his life. A gen tleman who was passing by 
enquired, “Brother, why do you want to end your lif e?”  The man replied, 
“Because the world is an abominable place; it stink s.” The gentleman said, 
“But imagine how it would stink when your flesh beg ins to burn!  How awful the 
stench is when even a single hair burns!  What woul d happen when your whole 
body gets burnt?  We live nearby. How would we bear  it?  Where could we go?” 
 The man was bewildered and exclaimed, “One cannot live in this world, nor 
can one die!  What is one to do then?” 
10. The moral is that if you go on condemning everythin g as abominable and 
try to escape from it, you simply cannot carry on. If you try to avoid a small 
flawed act, an act with a bigger flaw will become i nescapable. The nature of 
karma is such that it cannot be got rid of by outward ren unciation only. If a 
man tries to fight the karma  that has come to his lot in the natural course, if  he 
tries to swim against the current, he is bound to g et exhausted in the end and 
be swept off by the current. His interest lies in a cting in tune with the current 
of swadharma . Then the coatings on the mind will peel off gradu ally and the 
mind will go on getting increasingly purified. Acti vities will wither away of 
themselves even though actions will continue to be done. Karma will remain, 
but activity will disappear. 
11. There is a difference between karma  (action) and kriya  (activity). Let us 
take an example to explain this. Suppose there is a  great commotion at a place 
and it is to be stopped. A policeman goes there and  shouts at the top of his Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 250  voice. To make the people silent, he has to do the intense action of shouting. 
Someone else may go, stand up and raise his finger;  and that will be sufficient 
to quieten the people. Another person may just go t here and his very presence 
will stop the commotion and the noise. In the first  case, activity is intense; in 
the second case, it is gentle; and in the third cas e, it is subtle. But action is the 
same, that of quietening the people.  
As the mind gets purified, intensity of activity wi ll go on diminishing. Activity 
will go on becoming gentler and subtler, and will a ltogether cease in the end. 
Action and activity are different things. Even gram matically, these two terms 
are different from each other. 
This must be clearly understood. A man may express his anger either by 
shouting or by keeping silent. He may thus resort t o different activities for the 
sake of one and the same action. A jnani  does no activity, but his karma  is 
infinite. His very existence induces innumerable pe ople to take to the right 
path. Even if he is just sitting still, he does inf inite karma . As activity goes on 
becoming subtler and subtler, the karma  goes on growing. Thus, one can infer 
that when the mind is completely purified, activity  will cease altogether and 
karma  will become infinite. Activity will progressively become gentler and 
subtler till its complete cessation in the end, and  then infinite karma will take 
place by itself. 
12. Karma cannot be got rid of by rejecting it superficially.  It is possible only 
gradually through selfless, desireless work. There is a poem by the poet 
Browning wherein a man asks the Pope, ‘Why do you b edeck yourself with robes 
etc.?  Why do you have all this paraphernalia?  Why  do you keep a serene face?  
Why this pretence?’  The Pope answers, ‘I do all th is because it is possible that 
as I go on play-acting in this way, faith may touch  me one day, without my even 
realising it.’  One should, therefore, go on doing desireless activity; it will 
finally culminate in the state of no activity.  
 
 Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 251   
104. An Insight Into Swadharma   
13. In short, rajasik  and tamasik  actions are to be renounced without 
exception and sattvik actions that come to us in the natural course shoul d be 
done, even if they have some flaws in them. Let the m be defective. If you try 
to avoid their defects, other defects will overtake  you. If your nose is crooked, 
let it be so. If you attempt to cut it to make it b eautiful, it will look more 
frightful. You should be what you are; trying to do  something unnatural would 
invite trouble. Sattvik  actions may be defective, but as they come to us i n the 
natural course, they should be done; only their fru it should be renounced. 
14. There is one more thing to say. You must not take u p the karma that has 
not come to you in the natural course, even if you feel that you could do it 
quite excellently. Do only what has come to you in the natural course. Do not 
go out of the way to take on new tasks which are no t naturally yours. Avoid the 
work which needs a lot of deliberate efforts to bui ld it up, even though it 
appears attractive. Do not be tempted by it; for, r enunciation of fruit is 
possible only in the case of the karma  that comes to you in the natural course. 
If a man begins to run after each and every karma , imagining that ‘this is good 
and that also is good’, renunciation of fruit  is inconceivable. This will result in 
nothing but making a mess of one’s life. It is with  the desire of having its fruit 
that one will do the karma  that one is not duty-bound to do, and still the fr uit 
will elude him. Life will then always be unsteady a nd unsettled. The mind will 
get attached to that karma . Even if sattvik karma is found tempting, one 
should keep away from that temptation. If you try t o pursue a variety of sattvik 
karma , rajas and tamas will creep into them. You must therefore restrict 
yourself to the sattvik karma which comes to you as your natural swadharma . 
15. Swadharma  is comprised of swadeshi 2 dharma, swajateeya dharma (duties 
arising out of one’s being a part of a particular c ommunity) and swakaleen 
dharma (duties appropriate for the time). These three toge ther constitute 
swadharma . While deciding about one’s swadharma , one is required to take 
into account what is appropriate to one’s nature an d  tendencies and what are Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 252  the duties that have fallen to him. You have someth ing in you which makes you 
what you are. That is why you are different from ot hers. Everybody has 
something that is distinctively his own. A goat can  develop itself as a goat; if it 
aspires to be a cow, it is impossible. It can never  give up its ‘goatness’. To give 
up the ‘goatness’ it will have to give up its body;  it will have to die to take a 
new body and acquire a new dharma . In the present birth, that ‘goatness’ 
alone is sacred for it. You must be knowing the sto ry of the bull and the frog. 
There is a limit beyond which a frog cannot inflate  its body. It will die if it tries 
to become as big as a bull. It is not right to imit ate others. That is why it is said 
that taking up another’s dharma  is disastrous. 
16. Swadharma  consists of two parts; one changes while the other  does not. I 
am not today what I was yesterday, nor shall I be t omorrow what I am today. I 
am changing continually. A child’s swadharma  is to seek all-round 
development. A young man’s swadharma  is to use his abundant energy for the 
service of society. Swadharma  of a mature adult man is to give others the 
benefit of his wisdom. A part of swadharma  thus changes, but the other part 
remains unchanged. To use the language of the scrip tures, we may say that a 
man has varnadharma  (duties that follow from being in a particular varna ) as 
well as ashram- dharma 3 (duties that follow from being in a particular ashram ); 
and that varnadharma  does not change while ashramdharma  changes. 
Ashramdharma  changes. What does this mean? When we successfully  pass the 
stage of brahmacharyashram , we enter the next stage—become a grihasth (the 
householder)—, then enter vanaprasthashram and finally become a sannyasi .  
But varnadharma does not change. I can never go beyond my natural l imits. Any 
attempt to do so will be foolish. You cannot overlo ok your distinctive attributes 
and personality. The scheme of  varnadharma is based on this idea. The concept 
of varnadharma is quite appealing. Is varnadharma absolutely unchangeable? Is 
belonging to a varna  akin to belonging to a species?  Is it that just a s a goat will 
always be a goat, a Brahmin  will always be a Brahmin ?  I concede that it is not 
so; one should take a balanced view. When varnadharma is used as an Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 253  ingenuous arrangement for social order, exceptions are inevitable. The Gita has 
acknowledged this. 
The key point is that one should understand these t wo types of dharma and 
keep away from any other dharma , even if it appears beautiful and alluring. 
 
105. The full Meaning Of The Renunciation Of Fruit  
17. From the elaboration of the idea of the renunciatio n of fruit of actions  the 
following points emerge: 
a) Rajasik and tamasik karma should be completely given up. 
b) The fruit of the action of that renunciation should  also be renounced. 
There must not be any pride or vanity about it. 
c) Sattvik  karma should not itself be renounced, but its fruit shoul d be 
renounced. 
d) Sattvik karma , whose fruit is to be renounced, should be done ev en if it 
has some impurities in it. 
e) When such karma  is done continually, the mind will get purified. A ctivity 
will go on becoming gentler and subtler, and will c ease completely in the 
end. 
f) Activity will disappear; but actions for the sake o f loksamgraha —to bring 
the people together and show them the path of right eousness—will 
continue. 
g) Only that sattvik karma should be done which comes to us in the natural 
course. One should keep away from other karma, howsoever good it may 
appear. One should not be tempted by it. 
h) Swadharma  that comes to us naturally consists of two parts. One is subject 
to change and the other is not. Varnadharma  does not change, while the 
ashramdharma keeps changing. The part of swadharma that is subject to 
change must change. That will ensure purity and avo id stagnation. Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 254  18. If a stream stops flowing and water stagnates, it b egins to stink. Similar is 
the case with   ashramdharma . A man first accepts family life. He submits to 
the restraints of family for the sake of his growth . There he gets different 
experiences. But if he remains bound there permanen tly, it will spell his doom. 
The family-life, which was his dharma at one stage, becomes adharma  
(irreligion) at a later stage, as it then becomes b inding. If the changing part of 
the dharma is not given up in time because of attachment, the result is 
disastrous. There should not be attachment even to a good thing. Attachment 
inevitably leads to terrible consequences. Germs of  tuberculosis may enter the 
lungs unawares, but they will nevertheless eat away  the whole of our life. If, 
through our carelessness, the germs of attachment e nter into sattvik karma , 
that will then result in the rotting of  swadharma. The sattvik swadharma will 
then degenerate into rajas and tamas . The part of swadharma  that ought to 
change must be left behind at the appropriate time.  This is true for the dharma 
about family as well as the dharma  about nation. If attachment creeps into 
patriotism, it will degenerate into dangerous chauv inism. That will halt 
development. Attachment will corrupt the mind and c ause degeneration. 
 
106. Fulfillment Is Nothing But The culmination Of Sadhana  
19. In short, if you aspire for the fulfillment of your  life, you should seek and 
catch hold of the  principle of the renunciation of fruit of actions w hich will free 
you from all worries . It would show you the right path. This principle a lso tells 
us the bounds within which to act. When we have thi s guiding light with us, we 
shall know what to do, what to discard, what to cha nge and when, and so on. 
20. But now let us consider something different. Should  the spiritual seeker 
have his attention riveted on the ultimate state ma rked by the complete 
cessation of activities?  A jnani  continues to act without doing any activity. 
Should a seeker have this aim in mind?  
No. Here too, the principle of renunciation of the fruit should be applied. Our 
life is so wonderfully fashioned that we would get what we want even without 
paying any attention to it. Moksha  (the state of oneness with the Supreme) is Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 255  the highest fulfillment of life. But one must not b e greedy even for moksha , or 
the state of akarma . That state would be reached without one being awa re of 
it. Sannyasa is not something that can happen at some particular  moment. It is 
not something mechanical. You will not even notice how it grows in your life. 
Let us not therefore worry about moksha . 
21. A bhakta  always says to the Lord, “ Bhakti is enough for me. I do not have 
desire for moksha , the ultimate fruit of sadhana .”  After all, moksha too is a 
kind of fruit—something that is to be enjoyed—and i t too must be renounced. 
But when we renounce  moksha, it will not move away from us; rather, 
attainment of moksha  will become more certain. When you give up the hop e of 
attaining moksha , you will advance towards it without your being aw are of it. 
Let sadhana  be done with such single-minded dedication that th ere is no 
thought of moksha in the mind; then moksha  itself will seek you on its own 
accord. Let the seeker be totally immersed in his sadhana . The Lord had 
already said, ‘ मा ते संगो S᭭᭜वकमᭅिण ’ /f028‘You should not covet the state of akarma , or 
moksha ’). Now He is again saying in the end, ‘ अहं ᭜वा सवᭅपापे᭤यो मोᭃिय᭬यािम मा 
शुचः   ।’ (‘I shall release you from all sins; be not grieved .’)4—‘I, the bestower of 
moksha is here; forget about moksha  and be concerned about your sadhana .’ 
 Sadhana  will attain perfection when you forget moksha , and then moksha will 
itself be attracted to you.  Moksha-Lakshmi  garlands him who is not concerned 
about her and is fully absorbed in his sadhana without any thought of  moksha in 
his mind.5 
22. When sadhana reaches its zenith, the moment of fulfillment comes . If a 
man in a forest wants to reach home, but just keeps  sitting under a tree in the 
forest, chanting ‘home, home’ all the while, the ho me will remain away. If he 
succumbs to the temptation of rest, he will miss th e ultimate rest. He should 
keep on walking; eventually he will find his home r ight in front of him. If I lose 
myself in dreaming about moksha  and relax, slacken my sadhana , moksha will 
remain distant. The surest way to attain moksha  is to fling away any aspiration 
for it and concentrate on  sadhana . One must not hanker after the ultimate 
rest, after the state of akarma .  Be fully absorbed in your sadhana , stick to it Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 256  with love and then moksha  will be yours without fail. You cannot solve a 
problem by shouting for the answer; you should rath er stick to the correct 
method and that will step by step lead you to the a nswer. How can you reach 
the end before the completion of the process?  How can you have an answer 
without following the method fully?  How can you at tain the state of liberation 
when you are still a seeker?  When one is strugglin g for life in a flooded river, 
will it do if he thinks of the pleasures awaiting h im on the other bank?  At that 
time, all the attention should be riveted on swimmi ng, all the strength should 
be applied to inch towards the other bank.  Sadhana  should be carried to the 
end; the ocean should be crossed, and you will find  moksha  there waiting for 
you. 
 
107. The Triple State Of The Realised One  
23. All the activities drop off in the final stage of a  jnani . But this does not 
mean that in the final state there would necessaril y be complete absence of 
activity; activities may take place or they may not . This final state is extremely 
fascinating and sublime. The jnani is not concerned about what is taking place 
in this state. That would invariably be pure, good and beneficial. The jnani  
stands at the zenith of sadhana . There he would be untouched by all the 
actions even while doing them. He may even destroy,  and yet he is not the 
destroyer; and even if he does good, he is not the doer of the good. 
24. The final state of moksha  is the zenith of sadhana . In this state, sadhana 
becomes natural and effortless. Then there is not e ven the thought that ‘I am 
doing something.’ This final state of realisation ( Siddhavastha ) is not a state of 
morality. A child speaks truth, but it is not a mor al act, as he has no idea of 
untruth. To speak truth while being aware of untrut h is a moral act. In the final 
state, untruth does not exist; truth alone exists. So there is no question of 
morality. What is forbidden, what is worth abjuring  comes nowhere in the 
picture. Ears do not hear what should not be heard;  eyes do not see what 
should not be seen. Only that gets done which ought  to be done; one does not 
have to do it consciously. One need not have to avo id consciously what is worth Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 257  avoiding, but it does get avoided. It is in this cu lmination of sadhana , when it 
has become natural, amoral—or you may call it supra -moral—that morality 
reaches its supreme height. We may call this a stat e of sattvik sadhana wherein  
sattva has been transcended. 
25. How is one to describe such a state?  Just as one g ets indications of the 
coming eclipse, there are indications in this state  that moksha is to follow the 
death of the body.  Experiences of the state of moksha begin even while the 
physical body is still in existence. Words fail, la nguage falters while describing 
this state. Howsoever violence a man in this state commits, he does nothing. 
How to judge his actions?  Whatever is done at his hands will be nothing but 
sattvik karma . Even when he no more does any activity, he shows the right 
path to all in the world. This grand vision makes o ne speechless. 
26. This final state is three-dimensional. One of them is the state in which we 
find sage Vamadeva. His declaration is famous: ‘All  that is there in this 
universe, that am I.’ A jnani becomes completely egoless. He loses any sense of 
identification with the body. His activities cease.  Then he attains a special 
state of consciousness. In this state he is no more  confined to a single body. 
This state is not a state of activity. It is a stat e marked with intense and 
pervasive emotions and feelings. All of us can have  experience of this state on a 
small scale. A mother takes upon herself the virtue s as well as vices of her 
child. The child’s sorrow makes her sad and his hap piness makes her happy. But 
this state, this experience of identity in the case  of a mother is limited to her 
child. She takes upon herself the child’s faults. A  jnani takes upon himself the 
faults of the whole world. He becomes a sinner by t he sins of the world and the 
virtues of the world make him virtuous. And yet he is absolutely untouched by 
the merits and the sins of the world. 
27. In the Rudra Sukta in the Veda, the sage says, ‘ यवाशच मे ितलाशच मे गोधूमाशच 
मे’ /f028‘Give me barley, give me sesame, give me wheat.’)  He is continually 
demanding something or the other. How big is his st omach?  But then he, who 
was demanding all this, was not one contained in a single physical body 
measuring three cubits and a half; his Self had bec ome one with the whole Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 258  universe. I call this ‘Vedic  vishwatmabhava ’ (The Vedic attitude of 
identification with the whole universe) as we find this sense of identity at its 
height in the Vedas. 
28. Narsi Mehta, the Gujarati saint, says, while singin g the Lord’s praise, 
‘बापजी पाप मᱶ कवण कᳱधां हशे, नाम लेतां तारऊ ं  िनᮤा आवे ’ /f028‘O Lord! What sin have I 
committed, that I should feel sleepy while chanting  your Name?’). Was Narsi 
Mehta feeling sleepy?  No, it was those who had ass embled to listen to him who 
were sleepy. But Narsi Mehta had identified himself  with them; he was in a 
particular state of consciousness. This is the stat e of the jnani . The jnani , in 
this state, may be seen doing all conceivable virtu ous and sinful acts, and he 
would himself concede it. Does not the Vedic sage s ay, “I have done a lot of 
things that should not have been done, I am doing s uch things, and will 
continue doing them.” When such a state of consciou sness is attained, the Self 
begins to soar high in the sky like a bird. It tran scends the limitations of earthly 
existence. 
29. Just like this state of consciousness, the jnani has also a state of activity. 
What sort of activities will the jnani do naturally?  Whatever he will do will be 
nothing but sattvik . Although he is still bound by the limitations of the human 
body, his whole body, all of his organs have become  sattvik ; so all his activities 
are bound to be sattvik . If you look at it from the point of view of pract ical 
affairs, his behaviour will reflect the ultimate pe rfection of the sattvik  nature; 
if you look at it from the point of view of vishwatmabhava , he appears to be 
doing all the sinful and the virtuous deeds in the universe, and still he is 
untouched by them. It is so because he has peeled o ff and flung away the body 
stuck to the Self. It is only when one flings away this worthless body that one 
attains the state of identification with the whole universe. 
30. Besides the state of consciousness and the state of  activity, the jnani has a 
third state too. That is the state of jnana , the state of knowledge. In this state, 
he can neither bear with sin nor virtue and flings aside everything quickly. He is 
ready to set fire to the whole universe. He is not prepared to undertake any Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 259  action. Its very touch repels him. In the final sta ge of sadhana  or in the state of 
moksha, these three states are conceivable for the jnani.  
31. How is one to imbibe this state of no activity, thi s last state?  The way is to 
train ourselves not to take upon our shoulders the burden of being the doer of 
the actions we do. We should keep reflecting, ‘I ju st happen to be 
instrumental. I am not really the doer of actions.’  We should first assume this 
stand with humility. This, of course, will not imme diately result in the 
complete eradication of the sense of being the doer . It can happen only 
gradually. Let us first feel that ‘I am nothing, I am just a puppet in His hands. 
He is moving me.’ The next step is to feel that ‘th e activities do not touch the 
Self; they are of this body. But I am not this tran sient and mortal body; I am 
full of divine consciousness.’ And, meditating over  this feeling, you should 
remain completely untouched by the fetters of the b ody. When this happens, 
the state of jnani  will be attained wherein connection with the body is as if 
completely severed. This state will be three-dimens ional as we have already 
referred. In the state of activity, wholly pure and  perfect activities will be 
done at the hands of the jnani . In the state of consciousness, he will have the 
feeling that he is the doer of all the sins and the  virtuous deeds in the universe; 
yet he will remain untouched by them. In the third state of jnana , he will not 
let any karma touch him  and will burn it down. A jnani can be described in 
terms of all these three dimensions of the final st ate. 
 
108. ‘Thou Alone......Thou Alone’  
32. Having said all this, the Lord then asks Arjuna, “H ave you listened to all 
this carefully?  Now ponder over it fully and then do what you think right.” The 
Lord thus magnanimously gave complete freedom to Ar juna. This is a unique 
feature of the Gita. But then compassion welled up in Him and He took back 
that freedom. He told Arjuna, “Give up your will, y our sadhana ; give up 
everything and come to Me; take refuge in Me.”  Wha t this means is that you 
should not have any independent self-will; you shou ld do what He wills you to 
do. Let His will prevail. With full freedom, you sh ould feel that you need have Talks on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 260  no freedom. Reduce yourself to zero. Let there be t he Lord, and the Lord 
alone, in the universe. The goat, while alive, blea ts ‘मी.....मी ’  that is, ‘I....I....’ 
But when it is dead and its guts are made into stri ngs for carding cotton, the 
strings, as saint Dadu says, give the sound ‘ तुही......तुही ’ (‘Thou alone....Thou 
alone....’).  Now there is nothing but ‘Thou alone. ....Thou alone.....’  
(19.6.32)  
 
References:  
1. King Janamejay performed a yajna  named sarpasatra , involving sacrifice, and thus 
killing, of all snakes as a snake had killed his fa ther, King Parikshit.  The snake chief 
Takshak then took refuge with Indra, the King of th e gods, who was immortal.  Along 
with Takshak, Indra too was then offered in sacrifi ce. 
2. Swadeshi  has been defined by Mahatma Gandhi as 'that spirit  in us which restricts us 
to the use and service of our immediate surrounding s to the exclusion of the more 
remote.' 
3. Ashram  here means a stage or period of life.  Four such s tages had been prescribed: 
Brahmacharya  (roughly, first 25 years of life when one is suppo sed to remain celibate 
and concentrate on his studies), Garhasthya  (next 25 years of life when one is 
supposed to carry out the duties of a householder a nd discharge family 
responsibilities), Vanaprastha  (next 25 years of life when one is supposed to ret ire 
from the family responsibilities, keeping the role of an advisor and devote oneself to 
the service of society) and Sannyasa  (when one should completely renounce worldly 
life). 
4. Gita, 18.66  
5. Please refer Chapter 3.1  