 
The Story of Gandhi
 
 
Written by: Rajkumari  Shankar
 
 
 
 
First Published : 1969 
 
 
 
Rs. 45/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I recognize no God except the God that is to be found in the hearts of the dumb 
millions… And I worship the God that is Truth… through the services of these 
millions. 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by : Children's Book Trust
Nehru House, 4 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,
New Delhi 110 002, India.
 The Story of Gandhi  
Rajkumari  Shankar  
I recognize no God except the God that is to be found in the hearts of the dumb 
millions… And I worship the God that is Truth… through the services of these 
- Mahatma Gandhi
Published by : Children's Book Trust
Nehru House, 4 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,
New Delhi 110 002, India.  
© CBT, 1969 I recognize no God except the God that is to be found in the hearts of the dumb 
millions… And I worship the God that is Truth… through the services of these 
Mahatma Gandhi  
Published by : Children's Book Trust  
Nehru House, 4 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,  The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2  
NEHRU ON GANDHI 
And then Gandhi came, He did not descend from the to p: 
he seemed to emerge from the millions of India, speaking 
their language and incessantly drawing attention to them 
and their appalling condition. Get off the backs of these 
peasants and workers, he told us, all you who live by 
their exploitation; get rid of the system that produces 
this poverty and misery. Political freedom took new 
shape then and that produces this poverty and misery. 
Political freedom took new shape then and acquired a new content. Much that 
he said we only partially accepted or some times did not accept at all. But all 
this was secondary. The essence of his teaching was fearlessness and truth and 
action allied to 6these, always keeping the welfare of the masses in view. The 
greatest gift for an individual or a nation, so we had been told in our ancient 
books, was abhaya, fearlessness, not merely bodily courage but the absence of 
fear from the mind. Janaka and Yajnavalkya had said, at the dawn of our 
history, that it was the function of the leaders of a people to make them 
fearless. But the dominant impulse in India under British rule was that of fear, 
pervasive, oppressing, strangling fear; fear of the army, the police, the wide-
spread secret service; fear of the official class; fear of the laws meant to 
suppress and of prison; fear of the landlord's agent; fear of the money lender; 
fear of unemployment and starvation, which were always on the threshold. It 
was against this all-pervading fear that Gandhi's quite and determined voice 
was raised; be not afraid. Was it so simple as all that? Not quite. And yet fear 
builds its phantoms which are more fearsome than reality itself, and reality, 
when calmly analysed and its consequences willingly accepted, loses much of 
its terror. 
So, suddenly as at were, that black pall of fear was lifted from the people's 
shoulders, not wholly of course, but to an amazing degree. 
Jawaharlal Nehru  
(The Discovery of India) 
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3  
01. BIRTH & CHILDHOOD 
In a small, white-washed house in Porbandar, on the coast of Kathiawad in 
western India, Mohandas Gandhi was born on October 2, 1869. His parents were 
Karamchand Gandhi and Putlibai. He was small and dark, and looked no 
different from the millions of other children born in India. Yet this was no 
ordinary child. He was to fight and overcome a great empire and, without 
taking to arms, set his country free. He was to be called the Mahatma, the 
Great Soul. Having led his people to freedom, he was to lay down his life for 
their sake. 
Porbandar is an old sea-port, overlooked by the distant Barda Hills. Even in 
ancient days ships from far off lands went there to trade. It was the ancestral 
home of the Gandhi's. The grandfather and father of Mohandas were famous for 
their ability and for their upright character. 
Grandfather Uttamchand Gandhi, who belonged to a humble family of 
merchants, become the Dewan of Porbandar. He was succeeded by his son, 
Karamchand Gandhi popularly known as a Kaba Gandhi. Karamchand had very 
little formal education, but his knowledge and experience made him a good 
administrator. He was brave and generous. He had, however, one fault a bad 
temper. 
Putlibai, Karamchand Gandhi's wife, was deeply religious. Every day she 
worshipped at the temple. She was a lovable and strong willed woman, widely 
respected for her wisdom and good sense. People often sought her advice on 
various matters. 
Mohandas was the youngest of the six children of Kaba Gandhi. He was the 
favourite child of the family and was called 'Moniya' by his fond parents and 
their friends. Moniya adored his mother. He loved his father too, but he was a 
little afraid of him. 
As a child, Moniya seldom liked to stay at home. He would go home for his 
meals and then run away again to play outside. If one of his brothers teased The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4 him or playfully pulled his ears he would run home to complain to his mother. 
'Why didn't you hit him? She would ask. 
'How can you teach me to hit people, mother? Why should I hit my brother? Why 
should I hit anyone? 'Would be Moniya's prompt reply. 
His mother wondered where her little son got such ideas. 
Moniya was just seven years old when father left 
Porbandar to become the Dewan of Rajkot. Moniya missed 
Porbandar, and he missed the blue sea and the ships in the 
harbour. 
At Rajkot he was sent to a primary school. He was shy and 
did not mix easily with the other children. Every morning 
he went to school in time, and ran back home as soon as 
school was over. His books were his sole companions and 
he spent all his free time alone reading.  
He had one friend, however, a boy named Uka. Uka was a 
sweeper-boy and an untouchable. One day Moniya was given some sweets. He 
ran at once to Uka to share them with him. 
'Don't come near me little master,' said Uka. 
'Why not?' asked Moniya, greatly surprised.  'Why can't I come near you?' 
'I am an untouchable master,' Uka replied. 
Moniya took hold of Uka's hands and filed them with sweets. His mother saw 
this from a window, and she ordered Moniya to come in at once. 
'Don't you know that high caste Hindu should never touch an untouchable? She 
asked sternly. 
'But why not, mother?' asked Moniya. 
'Because our Hindu custom forbids it,' she said. 
'I don't agree with you, mother. I find nothing wrong in touching Uka. He is not 
different from me, is he?  
Mohandas at the age 
of Seven  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5 His mother had no answer. She angrily told him to go and have a bath and say 
his prayers. 
Karamchand Gandhi loved all his sons, but he was specially fond of the 
youngest. He often said to him: 'You must go to high school and college and 
take up a profession.' 
Moniya worked hard, and did his lessons carefully. But he did not learning by 
heart and was therefore weak in Sanskrit. Geometry he liked best because it 
involved reasoning. 
Once Moniya happened to read the story of Shravana. Shravana's parents were 
old and blind, and he always carried them with him in two baskets slung on a 
yoke. Moniya was deeply touched by Shravana's devotion to his old parents. 'I 
must be like Shravana,' he resolved. 
At about this time he also saw a play about Harishchandra, a King who was 
famous for his love of truth. 
'Why shouldn't we all be truthful like Harishchandra?' he constantly asked 
himself. 
Mohandas was only thirteen when he was told that he was soon to be married. 
His parent has already chosen his bride. She lived in Porbandar and her name 
was kasturbai. She and Mohandas were about the same age. 
The wedding day approached. Mohandas was dressed in new clothes. Everyone 
was gaily dressed and the house was decked with flowers and banana leaves. 
The bridegroom, accompanied by the wedding party, left for Porbandar. 
In the Bribe's home it was a day of great celebration. There was singing and 
dancing and music. At the auspicious hour the bridegroom and party arrived. 
Kasturbai, dressed in red and wearing elegant jewellery, was shy but 
attractive. Amidst great rejoicing, Mohandas was married to Kasturbai. 
The celebrations lasted a whole week and then the bride left her home in 
Porbandar and went with her husband to Rajkot. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6 Kasturbai was a pretty and lively girl. Mohandas and she often played together. 
Mohandas and she often played together. Sometimes Mohandas tried to teach 
his young wife, but she could never concentrate on books, though she was quick 
to learn the household work. 
One day Mohandas met Sheik Mehtab, a friend of his elder brother. Sheik had a 
bad reputation. Mohandas knew this, yet he was much impressed by Sheik 
because he was strong and tall.   
Sheik was a meat-eater and he often told Mohandas 
that if he ate meat he would also grow tall and 
strong. 
There was also at that time a reform movement for a 
change in the orthodox ways of life. Mohandas 
himself had heard that many well-to-do people had 
started eating meat, so he tried meat. He did not 
like the taste of meat but as time went on h e 
started to like meat curries. 
Whenever Mohandas had a meat meal outside, he 
had to give his a mother some excuse for not eating his dinner. He knew that 
his parents would not forgive him if they knew he had eaten meat. He was not 
against eating meat then, but he was against telling a lie to his mother. This 
feeling was gnawing at his heart and finally he decided not to touch meat 
again. 
Mohandas has also taken to smoking with Sheik, his brother, and another 
relative. He had to pilfer small amounts of money here and there with which to 
buy cigarettes. 
One day, in order to pay off a debt which his brother had incurred, Mohandas 
stole a piece of gold. Stealing was a great sin. He knew that he had committed 
a great crime. He resolved never in his life to steal again. He wrote down a 
confession of his crime and handed the paper to his ailing father. His father, Karamchand 
Gandhi 
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7 Karamchand Gandhi read the confession. He tore up the paper without saying a 
word. The bits of paper fell to the floor. He sank back on his bed with a sigh. 
Mohandas left the room, tears streaming down his face. 
From that day, Mohandas loved his father more and more. Every day he hurried 
home from school to wait on him. His father's condition grew worse and at 
length he died. The house was filled with sorrow. 
Mohandas was only sixteen when his father died. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8  
02. PREPARATION FOR ENGLAND 
After passing his high school 
e
xamination, Mohandas joined the 
Samaldas College at Bhavnagar. As he 
did not find the classes interesting, he 
returned home after the first term. 
There a big surprise awaiting him. His 
eldest brother and family friend 
suggested that Mohandas should go to 
England to study and become a barrister. 
Mohandas was thrilled. Here was a 
chance for him to see the world. 
But his mother did not like the idea of 
his going to England. She did not want 
her youngest son to stay away from her. There was also the problem of money. 
Moreover, she feared that Mohandas would lose his caste if he crossed the 
ocean. The family friend assured her that there would be no much difficulty 
and everything would be all right. But his mother was still opposed to the idea. 
'I know many reasons why it is dangerous for a Hindu to leave India,' she 
explained to him. 'You will have to eat meat. They drink wine there and you 
will be tempted to drink wine. Then you might fall into bad company, and 
there are many other temptations which may spoil you.' 
'No, mother,' said Mohandas. 'I am no longer a child. I can look after myself.' 
He pleaded with her to allow him to go, and he took a vow not to eat meat, not 
to drink, and not to touch a woman. 
Putlibai at last gave in and allowed him to go to England. When he left Rajkot 
for Bombay, because he had to leave behind his mother, his wife, and his son 
who was only a few months old.  
With his brother - Laxmidas  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9 On September 4, 1888, Mohandas left Bombay for England. Dressed in western 
style, he stood on the deck as the ship slowly steamed out of the harbour. He 
was sad, but he was also excited. 
Mohandas never forget his first morning on board. He wore a black suit, a white 
shirt, a stiff collar pinched him. It was quite a job to knot his tie property. The 
tight, short coat also made him ill at ease. He thought that Indian dress was 
much more comfortable. Yet a glance in the mirror made him feel proud of 
himself. He thought he looked very impressive. 
Mohandas was shy. He rarely left his cabin. He even ate his food there alone. 
He was not sure of all those unknown dishes served on the shop. He thought 
they might contain meat. He did not wish to break his vow to his mother, so he 
lived mainly on the sweets he had taken with him. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  
03. IN ENGLAND 
On landing at Southampton he looked around. He saw t hat all the people were 
in dark clothes, wearing bowler hats and carrying overcoats flung over their 
arms. Mohandas was embarrassed to find that he was the only one wearing 
white flannels. 
In London he stayed at first at the Victoria Hotel. Dr. P.J. Mehta, a friend of 
the Gandhi family, was the first to meet him. Mohandas was impressed with Dr. 
Mehta's silk top hat. Out of curiosity, he passed his hand over it and disturbed 
the pile of the silk. Dr. Mehta then gave him his first lesson in European 
manners. 
'Do not touch other people's things,' he said. 'Do not ask questions as we do in 
India when we meet someone for the first time. Do not talk loudly. Never 
address people as "sir" whilst speaking to them, as we do in India. Only servants 
and subordinates address their masters in that way.' 
Young Gandhi found everything around him strange. He was homesick. He 
almost starved until he discovered a vegetarian restaurant. Struggling to learn 
westerners and customs, he rented a suite of rooms. He bought well-tailored 
clothes and a top hat. He spent a lot of time before the mirror, parting his 
straight hair and fixing his tie. He took lessons in dancing, but soon gave it up 
as he had no sense of rhythm. He tried his hand at playing the violin, but 
failed. He took lessons in French and elocution, but went to sleep. 
His attempt to be an Englishman lasted about three months. Then he gave up 
the idea. He converted himself into a serious student. 
'I have changed my way of life,' he told a friend. 'All this foolishness is at an 
end. I am living in one room and cooking my own food. Hereafter I shall devote 
all my time to study.' 
His meals were simple. He avoided expenditure on transport and went on foot 
everywhere in London. He started to keep an account of every penny he spent. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11 Mohandas joined the London Vegetarian Society and soon found himself in its 
executive council. He wrote articles for the magazine Vegetarian. 
The bar examination did not require much study and Gandhi had ample time to 
spare. Oxford or Cambridge was out of the question because it meant a long 
course and much expense. 
He therefore decided to appear for the London matriculation examination. It 
meant hard work, but he liked hard work. He passed in French, English, and 
chemistry but failed in Latin. He tried again, and this time passed in Latin too. 
Meanwhile he progressed in his study of law; and in November 1888 was 
admitted to the Inner temple. 
It was the tradition of the Inns of Court for the students to dine together at 
least six times each year. The first time Gandhi dinned with his fellow students, 
he felt shy and nervous. He was sure that the boys would make fun of him for 
refusing meat and wine. When wine was offered, he said,' No, thank you.' 
When Gandhi replied that he never touched wine, the boy shouted to his 
friends,' By Jove, fellows, we are in luck to have this chap sitting with us. That 
gives us an extra half bottle.' 
'You can have my share of roast, too,' Gandhi told them, looking quite content 
with his bread, boiled potatoes, and cabbage. He was pleasantly surprised to 
find that his queer habits did not make him unpopular. The next time he went 
for the dinner, he had a pile of law books with him. He was taking the books to 
his room to study. 
'Gandhi,' said the student, 'you are not really going through this stuff, are you?' 
'Look, you chaps,' he cried he is 
Actually reading Roman law in Latin! 
The students laughed. One of them said,' Let me tell you, Gandhi, I passed the 
last examination in Roman law by spending two weeks on a printed summary. 
Why do you slave at it like this?' The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12 Gandhi explained to his light-hearted friends that he worked so hard for sheer 
interest in the subject, and that he wanted to acquire knowledge for its own 
sake. 
After a short trip to France, he prepared for the final law examination. The 
results were soon declared. He had passed with high marks. On June 10, 1891, 
he was called to the bar. He was admitted as a barrister and the next day was 
formally enrolled in the High Court. The following day, June 12, he sailed for 
India. 
Gandhi's three-year stay in England was eventful. Those were days of great 
intellectual activity, and there was tolerance for every school of thought. The 
country as a whole was a living university. As Gandhi sailed for home on the s.s. 
Assam, he felt that, next to India, he would rather live in England than in any 
other place in the world. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13  
04. BACK IN INDIA 
As his ship steamed into Bombay harbour, Gandhi saw 
h
is brother waiting at the quayside. He ran down the 
gangway to meet him. As they exchanged greetings, 
Mohandas noticed that his brother looked sad. 
'You have bad news for me?' he asked. 
'Yes,' his brother replied with tears in his eyes. 'We did 
not want to disturb you during your examination. Our 
dear mother. She died a few weeks back.' 
Mohandas was shocked. His mother had meant so much to him. He had come 
back to tell her that he had kept the promises he had made before he went 
abroad, but now she was no more. What a sad home-coming! 
At Rajkot, he set up practice as a barrister. Soon however, he was disgusted 
with the greed and pettiness that he found among the lawyers. Gandhi realized 
that it was difficult for the poor and the humble to get justice from the courts 
of law. He was not happy with his life at Rajkot and he longed to get away. 
It was then that an offer came to him to go to South Africa on behalf of Dada, 
Abdullah &co. who owned big business concerns there. They had filed a suit 
against another firm for four hundred thousand dollars. They wanted Gandhi to 
take up the case because he spoke English well and knew English law. In 
addition to arguing their well and knew English law. In addition to arguing their 
case, they wanted him to handle the firm's correspondence in English. His 
services were required for one year and the company promised to pay a 
handsome fee and the first-class return fare. 
The opportunity to see a new country and new people excited Gandhi and he 
accepted the offer. 
It was painful for him to be parted from Kasturbai again so soon, but he was 
determined to go. In April 1893 he left Bombay for South Africa. As a barrister in 
Johannesburg  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14  
05. IN SOUTH AFRICA 
It was a long journey from India to South Africa. Ga ndhi reached the port of 
Natal towards the end of May, 1893. The first thing he noticed was that the 
Indians there were treated with little respect. Within a week of his arrival in 
Durban, he visited the court with Abdulla Seth of Dada, Abdulla &Co. 
No sooner had sat down than the magistrate pointed his plump finger at him. 
'You must remove your turban,' he said sternly. 
Gandhi was surprised. He looked round and saw several Mohammedans and 
Parsees wearing turbans. He could not understand why he was singled out to be 
rebuked. 
'Sir,' he replied, 'I see no reason why I should remove my turban. I refuse to do 
so.' 
'You will please remove it,' the magistrate roared. 
At this Gandhi left the court. 
Abdulla ran after him into the corridor and caught his arm. 
'You don't understand,' he said. 'I will explain why these white-skinned people 
behave like this.' 
Abdulla continued: 'They consider Indians inferior and address them as 'coolie' 
or sami'. Parsees and Mohammedans are permitted to wear turbans as their 
dress is thought to be of religious significance.' 
Gandhi's dark eyes flashed with anger. 
'The magistrate insulted me, 'he said. 'Any such rule is an insult to a free man. I 
shall write at once to the Durban press to protest against such insulting rules.' 
And Gandhi did write. The letter was published and it received unexpected 
publicity. However, some papers describe Gandhi as an 'unwelcome visitor'. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15 After a week in Durban, he left for Pretoria to attend to the case for which he 
had been engaged. With a first class ticket he boarded the train. At the next 
stop an Englishman got into his compartment. 
He looked at a Gandhi with contempt, called the conductor, and said: 'Take this 
coolie out and put him in the place where he belongs. I will not travel with a 
coloured man.' 
'Yes, sir,' said the conductor 
He then turned to Gandhi. 'Hey sami,' he said, 'come along with me to the next 
compartment.' 
'No, I will not,' said Gandhi calmly. 'I was sold a first class ticket and I have 
every right to be here.' 
A constable was called in and he pushed Gandhi out with bag and baggage. The 
train steamed away leaving him on the platform. He spent the night shivering in 
the dark waiting-room. 
Gandhi took this experience to heart and resolved that, whatever the cost 
might be, he would fight all such injustices. He sent a note of protest to the 
General Manager of the railway, but the official justified the conduct of his 
men. 
Further trouble was in store for Gandhi on this journey to Pretoria. He had to 
travel by stage-coach from Charlestown to Johannesburg. Though he had a 
first-class ticket, the white conductor would not allow him to sit inside the 
coach. 
'You barrister coolie,' he sneered, 'you can't sit inside with the white 
passengers. Ticket or no ticket, sit outside on the coach-box. That is my usual 
place but I will give it to you and take your seat inside.' 
Gandhi was enraged at this insult, but with a heavy heart he climbed up to the 
seat behind the driver. He was in no mood for a fight just then. 
When the stage coach stopped to change horses, the conductor came up to 
Gandhi again. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16 'Hey sami, you sit below. I want to smoke up here,' he said. 
And he spread a dirty sack on the step below for Gandhi to sit on. Gandhi flared 
up at this. 
'I had a first class ticket which entitled me to sit inside,' he said. 'You made me 
sit here, now you want me to sit at your feet! No, I will not do so.' 
'You will have to,' yelled the conductor, and he began to punch Gandhi and 
tried to drag him down. Gandhi resisted. He held on to the rail, but another 
blow nearly knocked him down. 
Some of the passengers in the coach began to shout. 
'Stop that! Leave him alone, conductor,' they cried. 
'He is in the right. Let him come here with us.' 
The conductor was forced to let him alone. 
Gandhi reached Johannesburg the next night, shaken by the incidents on the 
way. He had address of the Muslim merchant's house there, but as it was rather 
late at night he took a cab to the Grand National Hotel. 
The hotel manager took a good look at him and said 'sorry, there is no room 
vacant tonight.' 
Gandhi knew that he was denied a room only because of his dark skin. Now 
there was no alternative but to go to the merchant's house, so he went there to 
spend the night. 
The next day he bought a first-class ticket and continued his journey by train to 
Pretoria. 
The only other passenger in the compartment was a well dressed Englishman. 
As Gandhi entered, the newcomer, and continued reading. A little later the 
conductor came in. Gandhi quickly showed him his first-class ticket. 
'Your ticket does not matter, sami,' growled the conductor. 'Go to go the third 
class at once.' The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17 Before Gandhi could reply, the Englishman flung down his paper and glared at 
the conductor. 
'What do you mean by harassing this gentleman?' he said vehemently. 'His ticket 
gives him a right to be here.' Turning to Gandhi he said, 'Make yourself 
comfortable just where you are,' 
Thanking him warmly, Gandhi settled down with a book. 
It was late in the evening when the train pulled into Pretoria. There was 
nobody to meet Gandhi at the station, so he had to spend the night in a hotel. 
The next day a friend moved Gandhi to a house where he lived as a lodger. 
There he began his study of the Abdulla law suit. Even while he was engaged on 
it, he found time to call a meeting of the Indians in Pretoria. 
This he did with the help of Tyeb Haji Khan Muhammad, an influential Indian 
merchant. Only a handful of Indians attended it. It was the first time Gandhi 
had addressed a meeting. 
'There was too much division among us,' he said. 'Why should we be kept apart 
by differences in birth, family, caste, and religion? Let us form a league, 
representing every group, and keep the government informed of our difficulties 
and our needs.' 
The audience listened to him with great interest. It was decided to hold regular 
meetings of all the Indians in Pretoria. 
Meanwhile, Gandhi was entrusted with the task of translating into English all 
the correspondence exchanged between Dada, Abdulla &Co. and the rival 
party. After studying all the facts, he was convinced that this clients' claim was 
just. He knew, however, that if the case was taken to court it would drag on 
for a long time, so he called together representatives of both parties. 
'Why don't you choose a good man, whom you both trust, to arbitrate between 
you?' he said. 
The representatives listened to him with great attention. They were astonished 
at this new idea he put forward. This young man was not the kind of lawyer The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18 they were familiar with, but they appreciated his stand and agreed to his 
suggestion. 
An arbitrator was appointed, and he gave his award in favour of Gandhi's 
clients, Dada, Abdulla &Co. 
Although they had won, Gandhi persuaded his clients to be lenient with their 
opponent. They agreed not to accept payment in easy installments spread over 
a long period. Both parties were happy over the settlement. 
Gandhi's first success as a lawyer was not a crushing victory over an opponent, 
but the triumph of good sense and humanity. 
In the Orange Free State, Indians had been deprived of all their rights by a law 
enacted in 1888. They could stay there only if they did menial work. Traders 
were sent away with nominal compensation. 
Under the law passed in 1886, Indians who wanted to live in the Transvaal were 
forced to pay an annual poll-tax of pound 3 per head. There they were not 
allowed to possess land except in locations set apart for them. They had no 
franchise. If they wanted to go out of their houses after 9 p.m., they had to 
carry a permit with them. They were not allowed to remove their grievances. 
He often went out for an evening walk with an English friend, Mr. Coates and 
he rarely reached home before 10 p.m. He had obtained a letter from the state 
Atorney allowed him to be out of doors at any time without police interference. 
One evening Gandhi was alone, walking at his usual brisk pace, when he was 
suddenly attacked and knocked down. He was injured. He struggled to his to 
face a police constable. 
'That will teach you to obey the law,' shouted the policeman.  'No Indian has 
the right to walk past the President's house. Didn't you know that?' The 
policeman kicked him. 
‘Gandhi, are you hurt?’ asked a familiar, friendly voice. It was Mr. Coates. He 
happened to be passing that way when he saw Gandhi being attacked. Mr. 
Coates warned the policeman. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19 ‘This man is my friend a distinguished lawyer,’ he said. ‘If he brings a 
complaint against you, I shall be his witness.’ 
Then he turned to his friend and said, ‘I am very sorry, Gandhi, that you have 
been so rudely assaulted.’ 
‘You need not be sorry,’ said Gandhi. ‘How is the poor man to know? All 
coloured people are the same to him. I have made it a rule not to go to court in 
respect of any personal grievance.’ 
‘Just like you,’ said Coates, who was still very angry at the policeman’s 
behavior. 
Coates turned again to the policeman and said, ‘You should tell an Indian 
politely what the regulations are not knock him down.’ 
‘Never mind,’ said Gandhi. ‘I have already forgiven him.’ 
Now that the Abdulla case had been settled, Gandhi thought there was no need 
for him to stay on the South Africa. Towards there was no need for him to stay 
on in South Africa. Towards the end of 1893 he went back to Durban to book his 
passage in India. Abdulla arranged a farewell party in his honour. 
While going through the newspapers that day, Gandhi was surprised to read 
that a bill was pending before the Natal Legislative Assembly which would 
deprive Indians of the right to elect members to the Assembly. Here too they 
would be disfranchised. He brought this to the notice of the people gathered 
there for the party. 
‘What do we understand about such matters?’ Abdulla Seth said. ‘We only 
understand things that affect our trade.’ 
‘This bill, if it passes into law, will make our lot extremely difficult,’ Gandhi 
said gravely. It is the first nail in our coffin. It strikes at the very root of our 
self-respect.’ 
The Indians now realized what was at stake; but they were unable to decide 
what to do. They requested Gandhi to postpone his departure and help them. 
He agreed to stay on for another month and organize resistance to the new bill. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20 Late that night the Indians held a meeting in Abdulla Seth’s house under the 
president's hip of Seth Haji Muhammad, the most influential Indian merchant 
there. They resolved to oppose the Franchise Bill with all their strength. 
Telegrams were went to the speaker of the Assembly and discussion on the bill. 
The Speaker promptly replied that the discussion would be put for two days. 
The Natal Indians then drew up a petition to the Legislative Assembly pleading 
against the bill. This was followed up by another petition to Lord Ripon, the 
then Secretary of State for the Colonies. This was signed by more than ten 
thousand Indians. Copies of the petition were circulated in South Africa, 
England, and India. There was much sympathy for the Natal Indians' plight, but 
the campaign had started too late to stop the bill becoming law. 
However the campaign did do some good. For the first time, the people of India 
came to know of ht conditions in Natal. An even more important result was the 
new spirit that now awakened the Indians in South Africa. 
The Natal Indians pressed Gandhi to remain and guide them for a little longer. 
Gandhi told them that he was prepared to stay on if the Indian community 
would provide him with sufficient legal work. They gladly agreed to do this. 
Twenty merchants turned over all their legal business to him. 
When Gandhi applied for enrolment as an attorney to argue cases in court, the 
entire bar, composed of white lawyers, strongly opposed him. The Supreme 
Court of Natal overruled the objection, however, and he was allowed to 
practice. 
Soon Gandhi became one of the busiest lawyers in Durban; but to him law was a 
subordinate occupation. His main interest was his public work. He felt that 
merely sending in petitions and protests would not help the Indians much. A 
sustained agitation was necessary. 
So he proposed the formation of a permanent organization to safeguard the 
interests of Indians. A meeting was called to discuss this matter. The spacious 
hall in Dada Abdulla's house was packed to the full. It was there, on that 
occasion, that the Natal Indian Congress was formed. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21 In 1894 the Natal Government sought to impose an annual poll-tax on the 
indentured Indians. These were laborers who had been recruited from India on 
a five-year contract, but on starvation wages. Under the contract they could 
not leave their employer. They were treated practically as slaves. 
These men lad been taken to South Africa to help the white colonizers in 
agricultural work. The Indians did more than had been expected of them. They 
worked hard, purchased land, and started cultivating their own fields. Their 
enterprise did not end there. They soon built houses and raised themselves far 
above the status of labourers. The white people did not like this. They wanted 
the Indian workers to return to India at the end of the contract period. To 
make things much harder for them, the Government now imposed an annual 
poll-tax of Pound 25. 
The Natal Indian Congress started a strong agitation this. Later, at the 
intervention of lord Elgin, then viceroy of India, the tax was reduced to 
pound3. Still Gandhi considered it an atrocious tax, unknown anywhere else in 
the considered it an atrocious tax, unknown anywhere else in the world. The 
Natal Indian Congress continued its agitation, but it was twenty years before 
the poll-tax was finally withdrawn. 
Gandhi had spent three years in South Africa. He was now a well-known figure. 
Everyone recognized his frockcoat and turban. And his practice was well 
established. He realize that was in for a long stay. He knew that the people 
there wanted him with them, so in 1896 he asked their permission to go home 
and bring his wife and children to South Africa. Besides, a visit to India would 
be useful In gaining more support for the Indians in South Africa. He had 
arranged his work so well that he could look forward to six months' leave. 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22  
06. IN INDIA 
In the middle of 1896 Gandhi sailed for India, and a fter twenty-four days landed 
at Calcutta. From there he went to Rajkot. It was a happy family reunion when 
kasturbai welcomed him their two sons. 
But the plight of the Indians in South Africa was so much on his mind that the 
could not be content to enjoy domestic bliss in peace. He therefore launched a 
campaign to acquaint the people of India with the real condition of the Indians 
in South Africa. 
He met the editors of influential newspapers and important Indian leaders, 
including Lokamanya B. G. Tilak, the hero of Maharashtra, and Gopal Krishna 
Gokhale who, like Gandhi, was already famous at the age of twenty-seven. 
Wherever Gandhi went, he tried to make the people aware of the lot of their 
compatriots reached South Africa long before Gandhi returned there. 
Meanwhile, plague broke out in Bombay and threatened to spread to 
neighboring areas. In Rajkot Gandhi volunteered to join a group who tried to 
educate the people about the need for sanitation and other measures to 
prevent the spread of the disease. 
At the end of November, however, Gandhi received an urgent message from 
Natal asking him to return immediately there were some developments which 
required his presence there. So Gandhi set sail for South Africa once more, 
taking with him Kasturbai and their two sons and also the only son of his 
widowed sister. 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23  
07. BACK IN SOUTH AFRICA 
The Europeans in South Africa heard about Gandhi's r eturn. They had also heard 
about his propaganda in India against the Natal whites. Meetings were held to 
discuss how to deal with him when he came back. 
In the meantime there were rumors that Gandhi was coming back with two 
shiploads of Indians to settle down there. It was true that some Indians were 
going to Natal and that they were in two ships, but he had nothing to do with 
them. 
Gandhi's ship cast anchor off Durban on December 18. The passengers were not 
allowed to land before a thorough medical examination had been made, for 
they dad arrived from Bombay where there was plague. The ship was held in 
quarantine for five days.  
The whites in Durban had been agitating for the repatriation of Gandhi and 
other Indians, and this agitation further delayed the landing. Gandhi was 
accused of having excited anti-European sentiment in India. At last, after a 
delay of twenty-three days, the ship was permitted to enter the harbour. 
However, a message reached Gandhi advising him not to land with the other's 
but to wait until evening, as there was an angry mob of whites at the dock. 
Kasturbai and the children were sent to the house of Gandhi's Parsee friend, 
Rustomji. Later, accompanied by Mr. Laughton, the legal adviser of Dada, 
Abdulla & Co., Gandhi went ashore. 
The scene looked peaceful, but some youths recognized him and shouted, 
'Look, there goes Gandhi!'. 
Soon there was a rush and much shouting. As Gandhi and his friends proceeded, 
the crowd began to swell until it was possible to go any further. 
Suddenly Laughton was pushed aside and the mob set upon Gandhi. 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  
They pelted him with stones sticks, bricks, and 
rotten eggs. Someone snatched away his turban, 
others kicked him until the frail railing of a house. 
The fury of the whites was unabated and they 
continued to beat him and kick him. 
'Stop, you cowards!' cried a feminine voice. 'Stop 
attacking him!' 
It was the wife of the Superintendent of Police. 
She came up and opened her parasol and held it 
between Gandhi and the crowd. This checked the 
mob. Soon the police arrived and the crowd was 
dispersed. 
Gandhi was offered shelter in the police station, but he declined the offer. 
'They are sure to quieten down when they realize their mistake,' he said. 
Escorted by the police, he reached Mr. Rustomji's house, where a doctor 
attended to his injuries.  
Late in the evening, the whites surrounded the house. 
'We must have Gandhi,' angry voices demanded. 
The mob was getting more and more threatening.  
'Give us Gandhi or will burn down the house,' they shouted. 
Gandhi knew that they might carry out their threat. To save his friend's house, 
he slipped out in disguise, eluding the crowd. 
Two days later a message came from London. Joseph Chamberlain, then 
Secretary of State for the Colonies, asked the Natal Government to prosecute 
every man guilty of attacking to Gandhi. The Natal Government expressed their 
regret to Gandhi for the incident and assured him that the assailants would be 
punished.  
In Johannesburg, 1900  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25 When Gandhi was called upon to identify the offenders, however, he would not 
do so. 
'I do not want to prosecute anyone,' he told the Natal Government. 'I do not 
hold the assailants to blame. They were misled by false reports about me and I 
am sure that when the truth becomes known they will be sorry tort her 
conduct.' 
Gandhi's statement suddenly changed there atmosphere in Durban. The press 
declared Gandhi innocent and condemned his assailants. The Durban incident 
raised Gandhi's prestige and won more sympathy abroad for the Indians in South 
Africa. 
As the struggle in South Africa continued a change4 was coming over Gandhi. 
He had begun with a life of ease and comfort, but this was short lived. As he 
became more and more involved in public activated, his way of life became 
simple. He started cutting down his expenses. He took to washing and ironing 
his own clothes, and he did I to badly became quite an expert at this and his 
collars were no less stiff and shiny than theirs. 
Gandhi once went to English barber in Pretoria. The barber insolently refused 
to cut a 'black' man's hair. Gandhi at once bought a pair of clippers and cut his 
own hair. He succeeded more or less in cutting the front part but spoilt the 
back. He looked very funny and his friend s in court laughed at him. 
'What's wrong with your hair, Gandhi? Have rats been gnawing at it?' they asked. 
'No,' said Gandhi proudly, 'I have cut my hair myself.' Then Gandhi tried changes 
in his food. He started taking uncooked food. He believed that if a man lived on 
fresh fruits and nuts he could master his passions and acquire spiritual strength. 
He made many experiments with his diet. He even came to the conclusive that 
fasting increased one's will power.  
While he was thus experimenting with himself, the Boer war broke out. The 
Boers were South Africans of Dutch origin. They were fighting the British. 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26  
Neither of these two white 
nations had treated the Indians 
well. Gandhi did not want to 
support either of them, but his 
loyalty to the British made him 
organize an Indian ambulance 
corps to help them. To his 
puzzled followers, he said: 
'India can achieve complete 
emancipation only through development within the British empire. Therefore 
we must help the British.' 
The British won the war and the ambulance corps was disbanded. The 
newspapers in England praised the services rendered by the Indians. The 
relations between the Indians and the Europeans had now become more 
cordial, and the Indians believed that their grievances would soon be removed. 
It was now 1901; six years after Gandhi had brought his family to Durban. Now 
he felt that his future activity lay no tin South Africa but in India. Also, friends 
in India were pressing him to return home. When he announced his decision to 
his co-workers, however, they again pressed him to stay on. 
After much discussions they agreed to let him go, but only on condition that the 
would come back to South Africa if the Indians there needed his help. He 
agreed to this. There were farewell meetings and presentations of gifts. 
The gifts were so many and so valuable that Gandhi felt he should not accept 
them. He wanted to give them back to the people who had presented them, 
but they would not allow him to do so. He then prepared a trust deed, and all 
the gifts were deposited with a bank to be used for the welfare of the Indian 
community. 
 
 With the Indian Ambulance Corps, Boer War, 1899  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27  
08. INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 
On his arrival in India, Gandhi went on a tour of th e country. The annual 
meeting of the Indian National Congress was being held in Calcutta under the 
president ship of Dinshaw Wacha. Gandhi attended the session. It was his first 
contact with the Congress which he was to lead so gloriously in the future. 
The Indian National Congress was the only organization which gave the people 
of India a chance to express their political views. It was an influential body as 
many important Indians were members, but its decisions had little effect on the 
Government. 
At the Calcutta session in 1901 Gandhi had an opportunity to meet Congress 
Leaders like Sir Pherozeshah Mehta, Lokmanya B. G. Tilak, G. k. Gokhale, and 
others. 
He was not impressed with the way the Congress was functioning. He noticed a 
lack of unity among the delegates. Moreover, while they spoke English and 
affected the style of westerners in their dress and talk, they did not seem to 
bother about essential things like good sanitary facilities in the camp. Gandhi 
wanted to teach them a lesson. On his own he quietly started cleaning the 
bathroom and latrine. No one volunteered to join him. 
'Why do you undertake an untouchable's job?' they asked. 
'Because the caste people have made this an untouchable place,' replied 
Gandhi. 
From Calcutta Gandhi traveled round India by train. As he moved from place to 
place, he was shocked to see the life of the common people the famished 
ignorant and neglected masses. His heart was filled with sadness and anger. 
Gandhi settled down in Bombay and started practice as a lawyer. He did well, 
much better than he had expected. In December 1902, however, a cable 
reached him from South Africa requesting him to return as promised. Joseph 
Chamberlain, the Colonial Secretary, was arriving from London on a visit to 
Natal and the Transvaal, and the natal Indian Congress wanted Gandhi to 
present their case to him. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  
09. AGAIN IN SOUTH AFRICA 
Gandhi kept his promise. He reached natal in time to  lead the Indian 
deputation, but the Colonial Secretary gave the deputation a cold reception. 
The Indians felt disheartened. From Natal, Mr. Chamberlain proceeded to the 
Transvaal. The Indians there also wanted Gandhi to present their grievances to 
him. 
Before the Boer war, Indians had been free to enter Transvaal at any time, but 
now they had to obtain a permit from the newly created Asiatic Department. 
The new rule was designed to separate Indians from the whites. To get a permit 
was no easy matter. 
The officers of the Asiatic Department did their best to prevent Gandhi from 
entering the Transvaal but he had his way in the end. He got a permit and went 
to Pretoria. He was not allowed, however, to lead a deputation and present the 
memorandum he had drafted. Gandhi now decided to stay in the Transvaal and 
fight the colour bar which was taking such ugly shape there. He realized that 
now he would not be able to leave the country, as he had hoped to do. He 
therefore settled down and prepared to do his utmost for the cause of the 
coloured people, particularly his countrymen. 
He was enrolled in the Supreme Court at Johannesburg. He rented a place and 
established his office. He made good earnings from his practice, but his heart 
was his office. He made good earnings from his practice, but his heart was in 
the service of the people. 
Meanwhile, he continued his experiments with vegetarianism. He gave up all 
luxuries and pleasure pleasures. His idea was to tune his physical body to his 
spiritual self. 
It was at this time that a friend, Madanjit, came to Gandhi with a proposal to 
start a journal called Indian Opinion. Gandhi liked the idea and in 1904 the 
journal was launched. Mansukhlal Naazar was the editor. Gandhi helped the The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29 journal generously, contributing money from his own earnings. He also 
organized the work and wrote the editorial column. 
The journal published every week in Gujarati and 
English, reflected his ideals and gave the Indians 
readers a liberal education. With absolute 
frankness Gandhi pointed out to them their 
failings and prejudices. Indian Opinion also gave 
the Europeans a correct picture of the difficulties 
faced by the Indians in South Africa.  
After the rains in 1904 there was a sudden 
outbreak of plague in one of the gold mining areas 
near Johannesburg. It soon spread to the Indian 
quarters. Gandhi rushed to the spot and organized 
preventive measures. With the help of friends, he set up improvised hospitals 
and looked after the sick. 
Another thing that happened that year was that Gandhi met H.S.L. polka, then 
a sub-editor of The Critic. The two soon became fast friend as there outlook on 
life was similar. 
Polak presented to Gandhi a copy of a book by John Ruskin called Unto This 
Last. This book on economics presented many new ideas, and it influenced 
Gandhi a great deal. He then hit upon the idea of starting a farm and founding 
a community with a true sense of brotherhood. His friends supported the 
project enthusiastically. 
About a hundred acres of land were acquired at a place called Phoenix near 
Durban, and a farm was set up. In the beginning six families were settled there. 
Indian Opinion was moved to Phoenix, complete with press and office. Members 
of any race could freely go and live there, cultivating the soil or working at the 
press. 
Gandhi, however, could stay in the Phoenix settlement only for brief periods. 
His headquarters were at Johannesburg where he continued his practice as 
lawyer. He knew that it would not be possible to return to India in the near  
With his office colleagues in 
Johasnnesburg  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30 future, so he decided to send for Kasturbai and the children. They soon joined 
him. 
Whenever he found time he undertook the task of educating his three sons. He 
also pursued the experiments with his diet. 'I intend to be the ruler of my 
body,' he would say, 'the spirit can only rule me if I free of earthly wants.'  
'Coffee and tea were given up. Milk went next. Sometimes he would fast, taking 
only water. Kasturbai watched all this silently. She knew it was useless to argue 
with her husband on such matters. 
In 1906, the Zulu 'Rebellion' broke out in Natal. It was a no-tax campaign. The 
Zulus were only asserting their rights, but the whites got panicky and declared 
war against the Zulus. 
Gandhi's sympathies were with the Zulus, but they were fighting against the 
British and Gandhi believed that the British Empire existed for the welfare of 
the world. He considered it his duty to help the British. He offered to form an 
Indian Ambulance Corps. The authorities accepted the offer. 
The Indian Ambulance Corps was formed. It consisted of a squad of twenty-four 
men, and was in active service for six weeks, nursing and looking after the 
wounded. 
Gandhi realized that the whites were determined to enforce the tax on the 
unwilling Zulus. They wanted to put down all resistance and deny the coloured 
people their rights in their own land. 
The Zulu 'Rebellion' was finally over and Gandhi returned to Johannesburg. His 
presence was needed there to look after of oppression from the white settlers. 
 
  
Medals awarded to Gandhi for his services during two wars in South Africa  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31  
10. ASSAULT 
In August 1906 an ordinance was issued by the Transv aal Government requiring 
all Indians-men, women, and all children to register themselves and obtain a 
personal certificate bearing name and thumb impression. This card was to be 
carried by all individuals at all times and must be shown on demand. Anyone 
failing to produce the certificate was liable to be fined, imprisoned, or 
deported. The police even had orders to enter private houses and check 
certificates. 
‘This is too much to bear,’ Gandhi told his co-workers, ‘If we meekly submit, it 
will spell absolute ruin for us in South Africa. We must take action immediately 
if we are to live here.’ 
The Indians decided not to submit to this humiliating and insulting measure. 
They must fight it. But how? 
Gandhi saw here the need for passive resistance or Satyagraha. First, he said, 
they must be prepared to observe absolute non-violence. The authorities would 
take all measures to put down the agitation. They might use violence, arrest 
people, and send them to jail, but all must faced without resistance. 
‘Merely disobeying the Government’s laws will not be enough.’ Gandhi said, 
‘You must have no hatred in your hearts. And you must cast away all fear.’ 
The Government ignored all Indian protests against the ordinance and it came 
into force. The Indian decided to disobey the provisions of the ‘Black Act’. 
Hundreds of Indians were arrested, tried, and imprisoned. They all pleaded 
guilty and went to jail without putting up any defence. 
Gandhi too was imprisoned. Then one day he was taken out of prison and sent 
to Pretoria to see General Smuts. 
‘This movement you have started,’ Smuts said, ‘must obey the law.’ 
‘I would rather die than submit to the law,’ Gandhi replied. ‘It is meant to 
humiliate the Indians.’ The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32 After some argument, however, they reached a compromise. Gandhi promised 
to end the Satyagraha if the ‘Black Act’ was repealed and the prisoners 
released. Smuts agreed to do this provided the Indian would register of their 
own accord. On this agreement, they parted. 
Back in Johannesburg, Gandhi called a meeting of the Indians. 
‘We must now register voluntarily to show that we do not intend to bring a 
single Indian to the Transvaal by fraud,’ he said. ‘If we show our goodwill by 
prompt registration, General Smuts will see that the “Black Act” is repealed.’ 
Most of the Indians agreed with Gandhi, but a Pathan named Mir Air Alam 
shouted at him: It was you who told us that finger-prints were required only 
from criminals. It was you who said must disobey the “Black Act”. How does all 
that fit into your attitude today? 
Early the next morning Gandhi, with his fellow Satyagrahis, set out for the 
registration office. But on the way Mir Alam attacked him with a heavy stick. 
Gandhi fell down unconscious. Mir Alam and his associates went on beating him 
until he was rescued by some friends. When Gandhi recovered consciousness, 
he found himself on a coach in the house of an Englishman whom he hardly 
knew. 
Struggling to sit up, Gandhi said in a weak voice, ‘Do not 
blame Mir Alam, for he did not understand.’ 
Then he insisted that a clerk from the registration office 
should come to take his thumb impression and make out his 
certificate, in this way Gandhi was duly registered. Many 
Indians followed Gandhi by registering voluntarily. 
But General Smuts did not repeal the ‘Black Act’. 
The Indians disappointed at the Government’s attitude, 
demanded a return of their applications for the voluntary 
registration. 
Still the Transvaal Government did not budge.  
As a Satyagrahi in 
South Africa  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33 Gandhi, who had by then recovered from his injuries, gave an ultimatum: ‘If 
the “Black Act” is not repealed before a fixed date, the certificated collected 
by the Indians will be burnt.’ 
When he found that the Government ignored this threat, Gandhi started 
another Satyagraha movement. A big bonfire was lit and more than two 
thousand certificates were burnt. Many Indians openly crossed the border into 
the Transvaal, where their presence was illegal. Gandhi and many of his 
compatriots were imprisoned several times in the course of the agitation. When 
Gandhi came out of jail for the third time, the Indians held a meeting and 
decided to send a deputation to England to acquaint the British Government 
with the real situation in South Africa. Gandhi and Seth Haji Habib were asked 
to go to London and present the grievances of the Indians. Accordingly they 
went, but the mission was a failure. They returned with grim determination to 
fight to the bitter end. 
Gandhi then made a big decision. He gave up his practice as a lawyer. He felt 
he could not go on earning his living by law when he was defying it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  
11. TOLSTOY FARM 
Hermann Kallenbach, a white farmer, was so impressed  with the peaceful way 
of life at Phoenix that he offered Gandhi his own big farm near Johannesburg to 
start another colony. He suggested that all those who had lost their jobs and 
homes by their participation in the Satyagraha could be settled there. 
The new colony was established in 1910 and named ‘Tolstoy Farm’, after the 
great Russian writer whom Gandhi much admired. Here people who were 
different in nationality, religion, and colour lived together like one family. 
They worked hard and shared the fruits of their labour. 
Gandhi spent much of his time at Tolstoy Farm. He was engaged in teaching the 
children and in other constructive activities. 
Gandhi’s efforts to persuade General Smuts to change the attitude of the 
Government towards the Indians had failed. Meanwhile, the struggle continued 
against the ‘Black Act’ and the poll-tax. And now hundreds of Indian women, 
including kasturbai, joined the movement. 
There had been a recent court decision in South Africa holding that Indian 
marriages were not recognized by law. The women could not brook this attack 
on family ties. 
They openly broke the law and were imprisoned in large numbers. In the coal 
mines at Newcastle, in Natal, Indian workers went on strike protesting against 
the repression. 
The arrests, the deportation of passive-resisters, and the untold sufferings of 
Indian families angered the people of India. A large amount of money was 
collected for the relief of the victims. 
Many satyagrahis were beaten and flogged and some were even killed. Gandhi, 
who felt intensely the humiliation his people suffered, took a triple vow of self 
suffering. He decided to dress like a poor laborer, to walk bare-foot, and have 
only one meal a day, till the poll-tax and other injustices were abolished. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35 Gandhi found the Government relentless. There was no solution in sight. He had 
to take further measures. 
In October 1913 Gandhi organized a march of over 6,000 Indian workers from 
the Natal mining area into the Transval, although crossing into the Transvaal 
without a permit was not allowed by law. 
Gandhi said, ‘We are going to march peacefully together across the border into 
the Transvaal. The Government will arrest us and put us in prison. We are to 
remain peaceful. This is the non-violent way of protesting against the poll-tax, 
against government’s decision not to recognize our marriages, and against all 
the laws that are made against us. We are fighting for just causes, we will not 
harm anyone.’ 
He then cried to the people, ‘Are you ready to 
face arrest and harsh treatment, remaining always 
non-violent?’ 
Roars of assent assured him to everyone’s support. 
They were ready to follow Gandhi anywhere. And 
so the march into the Transvaal began. 
Late in the evening Gandhi was roused from sleep 
by several uniformed men. 
‘I know,’ he said,’ you have come to arrest me. I 
am ready.’ Gandhi and many other Indians were 
imprisoned. The mines were surrounding with 
barbed wire and converted into temporary jails. 
The satyagrahis were beaten and flogged to force them to go back to work, but 
without success. The authorities could not make them return to work. Gandhi 
had aroused in them the spirit of quiet, dignified resistance. 
Soon the movement of passive resistance, or Satyagraha, spread all through 
Natal and the Transvaal. The Government did not know what to do, because 
none yielded to their cruel treatment. The prisons were overflowing. At last  
With Kasturbai in South Africa, 
1913 
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36 General Smuts was obliged to act. He appointed a Commission to study the 
situation. 
In December 1913 Gandhi was released, but he would not give up the struggle. 
Gandhi threatened Smuts that he would start another march if his demands 
were not met. That march, however, never took place. 
The European employees of the railways in the Union went on strike, and this 
made the Government’s position extremely difficult. Gandhi decided to drop 
the idea of the march at such a critical time as he did not wish to embarrass 
the Government further. 
Gandhi ordered every Indian to go back to work, at least for the time being. His 
decision created a good impression on the Government and even General Smuts 
recognized this courtesy. 
The Inquiry Commission reported in favour of all the essential reforms 
demanded by the Indian leaders. The Indians’ Relief Bill was at last passed and 
signed by the Governor. It abolished legal all Indian marriages, and removed 
penalties for crossing from one state to another. 
Gandhi had won. And so had the Satyagraha movement.  
Gandhi had been active in South Africa for twenty-one years and had 
contributed much to the welfare of the Indians in South Africa. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37  
12. RETURNED TO INDIA 
Gandhi now felt that his mission in South Africa was  over and he wanted to 
return to India. 
At that time Gokhale was in England. He wanted Gandhi to meet him in London 
before returning to India. Gandhi promised to do so. 
Gandhi announced his decision to Kasturbai. 
‘You are going to London with me,’ he said. ‘From England we will go back to 
India.’ 
Gandhi with Kasturbai and kallenbach, sailed for England on July 18, 1914. On 
August 4, two days before he reach London, the First World War was declared. 
On arrival in London, Gandhi heard that Gokhale had gone to Paris for reasons 
of health. Communications were cut off between London and Paris because of 
the war. Gandhi was disappointed. He did not want to return to India without 
seeing Gokhale, so he stayed on in London. 
The war was on. What could Gandhi do in England? The war was on. What could 
Gandhi do in England? At the suggestion of some Indian friends, a meeting was 
called of the Indians in England. Gandhi expressed the view that Indian s 
residing in England ought to do their bit in the war. English students had 
volunteered to serve in the army and Indians should do no less. 
There were objections to his views and many Indians were of the opinion that 
the war provided an opportunity to get freedom for India and that Indians 
should assert themselves and claim their rights. 
Gandhi felt that England’s difficulty should not be turned into India’s 
opportunity. He insisted on rendering all possible help to England. He organized 
an ambulance corps which, in spite of all difficulties, helped the British in their 
time of need. 
After some time Gokhale returned to England. Gandhi and Kallenbach went to 
see him often and they talked together about the war and other matters. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38 Then Gandhi had an attack of pleurisy and Gokhale and his friends were 
worried. Dr. Jivraj Mehta treated Gandhi but there was little relief. Gandhi was 
still ill when Gokhale returned to India. 
As the pleurisy still persisted, Gandhi was advised to go back to India as soon as 
possible. He accepted the advice and returned to India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39  
13. ESTABLISHMENT OF SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM 
Gandhi was back in India after twelve long 
y
ears. 
A great reception awaited him in Bombay. 
Gandhi was overwhelmed by the great love 
shown to him by the people. Gokhale was in 
Poona and was in poor health, so Gandhi 
went to see him. He was received with 
great affection. Gandhi told Gokhale that his plan was to have an ashrama 
where he could settle down with his Phoenix family. They had already reached 
India and were at Santiniketan. Gokhale approved of the idea and promised 
whatever help he could give. 
Gandhi went to Rajkot and Porbandar to meet his relatives and then went on to 
Santiniketan. The teachers and students gave him a loving welcome. There 
Gandhi met Tagore for the first time and also C.f. Andrews who was there too. 
During his short stay at Santiniketan Gandhi heard the sad news that Gokhale 
had passed away. He immediately left for Poona, C.F. Andrews accompanying 
him as far as Burdwan. 
 ‘Do you think,’ Andrews asked Gandhi, 
‘that a time will come for satyagraha in 
India? If so, how soon will it be?’  
‘It is difficult to say,’ replied Gandhi. ‘For 
one year I am to do nothing. Gokhale made 
me promise that I would travel in India for 
one year to gain experience, and that I 
would express no opinion until I had finished 
this period of probation. So I do not think 
there will be any occasion for satyagraha for 
five years. With Kasturbai at a reception in 
Ahmedabad  
 
With Tagore and C. F. Andrews  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40  
After attending the shraddha ceremonies of Gokhale, Gandhi met the leaders of 
the Servants of India society. Out of respect for Gokhale he would have joined 
the Society, but there was opposition from a certain section of the members. 
Gandhi visited Rangoon for a short period and on his return he went to Hardwar 
during the time of the Kumbha Fair. About seventeen hundred thousand people 
attended the Fair. Volunteer corps from difficult organizations had gone to 
Hardwar to be of service to the big crowds that were flowing in. Gandhi was 
invited to go there with the Phoenix party to help the volunteers. The Phoenix 
group went there and Gandhi joined them. Gandhi was pained at the many 
happenings and shortcomings at the great religious fair. There was corruption. 
There was cheating, and many other unsocial activities. Scant care was taken 
about sanitary arrangements. 
All this made Gandhi feel very sad. He thought a great 
deal about the problem of how to improve the Indian 
character. 
In May 1915 an ashram was established in a village near 
Ahmedabad. Ahmedabad was an ancient centre of 
handloom weaving and Gandhi thought the place was 
suited for the revival of the cottage industry of hand-
spinning. 
‘Our creed is devotion to truth, and our business is the 
search for and insistence on truth,’ he said. 
A simple uniform style of clothing was worn by all who were there. They took 
their food together in a common kitchen and strove to live as one family. 
Gandhi told the members: ‘If you want to serve the people it is essential to 
observe the vows of truth, ahimsa, celibacy, non-stealing, non-possession, and 
control of the palate.’  
With Kasturbai, 1915  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41 One day Gandhi said to the members of the ashram, ‘I have received an 
application from an untouchable family who want to join us here. I am replying 
that they are welcome.’ 
This created quite a flutter. To live with untouchables! Even Kasturbai had he 
misgivings. Gandhi’s mind was made up, however, and there could be no 
objection from the members of the ashram. But the patrons of the ashrams did 
not like the idea they stopped their monetary help. 
The ashram was faced with a financial crisis, but help came unexpectedly. A 
rich man came to the ashram and gave Gandhi Rs. 13,000. Gandhi was surprised 
at this great gesture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42  
14. BANARAS SPEECH 
In February 1916, Gandhi was invited to speak at the  laying of the foundation 
stone of the Banaras Hindu University. The Viceroy and many of the most 
important people of India were there. 
Gandhi clad in a Kathiawadi long coat and turban, rose to speak. The police 
arrangements, and also the pomp and luxury around him, hurt him deeply. 
Turning to the audience he said, ‘I want to think audibly and speak without 
reserve.’ 
His first words froze the audience. 
‘It is a matter of deep humiliation and shame for us,’ he said, ‘that I am 
compelled this evening under the shadow of this great college, in the sacred 
city, to address the shadow of this great college, in the sacred city, to address 
my countrymen in language that is foreign to me.’ 
It was a bomb-shell. Nobody had ever dared to speak against the English 
language. The British officers, their friends, and the important Indians who had 
gathered there were breathing heavily in anger. 
But Gandhi went on, “His highness the Maharaja who presided yesterday over 
our deliberations spoke about the poverty of India. But what did we witness? A 
most gorgeous show an exhibition of jewellery. There is no salvation for India 
unless you strip yourselves of this jewellery and hold it in trust for your country 
men in India.’ 
Gandhi gave a long speech, covering many topics. His speech was full of 
outspoken criticism. 
Mrs. Annie Besant, who was one of the organizers of the function, was horrified 
and urged Gandhi to sit down. But Gandhi went on. Some people went red with 
rage, but others listened to Gandhi with the greatest interest. 
‘Here at last is a man telling the truth,’ they thought, ‘he is the man to raise 
India from the mire.’ The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43 They applauded him and shouted joyfully. 
Gandhi turned to them and said, ‘No amount of speeches will ever make us fit 
for self-government. 
Finally Gandhi, the man who three times had supported the British in their war 
efforts, said,’ If I found it necessary for the salvation of India that the English 
should retire, that they should have to go, and I would not hesitate to declare 
that they would have to go, and I hope I would be prepared to die in defense of 
that belief. 
The people were amazed at Gandhi’s frankness. It was Gandhi’s first great 
political speech in India. 
Years later Jawaharlal described what the coming of Gandhi meant to the 
Indian people. 
He said, ‘We seemed to be helpless in the grip of some all-powerful monster; 
our limbs were paralysed, our minds deadened what could we do? How could 
we pull Indio out of this quagmire of poverty and defeatism which sucked her 
in?  
‘And then Gandhi came. He was like a powerful current of fresh air that made 
us stretch ourselves and take deep breaths, like a beam of light that pierced 
that darkness and removed the scales from our eyes, like a whirlwind that 
upset many things, but most of all the working of people’s minds.’ 
Several conferences demanding Home Rule were held in India during the latter 
half of 1916. They marked a new wave of political life under the leadership of 
Tilak, Mrs. Besant, and Jinnah. 
The annual meeting of the Congress was held in December year in Lucknow. 
The Congress was divided. There were the moderates and there were the 
extremists, but at Lucknow the congress met without tension between the two 
wings. 
The presidents Ambika Charan Mazumdar, spoke in terms of Swaraj, which 
previous leaders had demanded. A resolution was passed appealing to His The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44 Majesty’s Government and demanding that a definite step should be taken 
towards Indian self-Government by granting the reforms contained in the 
scheme prepared by the All India Congress Committee and adopted by the All-
India Muslim League. 
In Lucknow the Congress and the Muslim 
league came to a agreement. This was 
afterwards known as the Lucknow Pact. For 
the sake of the unity of India the Congress 
conceded many points demanded by the 
Muslims. 
For two years Gandhi had traveled 
extensively and had talked at different 
places. He now wanted to start some work 
connected with labour. He now wanted to start some work connected with 
labour. His interest first centered in the problem of indentured labour, the 
system under which poor, ignorant labourers were enticed away India to work 
in the British colonies. He had fought this system in South Africa and he wanted 
to see it abolished. The Viceroy Lord Hardinge that His Majesty’s Government 
had agreed to abolish the system ‘in due course’. 
Gandhi however wanted a definite date before which the system would go. 
So now Gandhi started a great agitation on this issue. He went to Bombay and 
consulted all the Indian leaders there. They fixed May 31, 1917 as the last date 
for the abolition of indentured labour. He then went round the country to get 
support for this view.  
Meetings were held in all important places. Everywhere there was a great 
response. Even Gandhi said that he had not expected so much public support. 
As a result of the agitation, the Government announced that the system of 
indentured labour would be stopped before July 31, 1917. 
 
 In Darjeeling, 1925 (C. R. Das is in 
the centre, behind)  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45  
15. CHAMPARAN SATYAGRAHA 
Now Gandhi heard about an obnoxious system of agricu ltural labour prevailing 
in Bihar. 
In the Champaran district of Bihar, the cultivators were forced by Europeans to 
grow indigo, a blue dye, and this imposed on them untold sufferings. They 
could not grow the food they needed, nor did they receive adequate payment 
for the indigo. 
Gandhi was unaware of this until an agriculturist from Bihar, Rajkumar Shukla, 
met him and told him of the woes of the people of Champaran. He requested 
Gandhi to go to the place and see for himself the state of affairs there. Gandhi 
was them attending the Congress meeting at Lucknow and he did not have time 
to go there. Rajkumar Shukla followed him about, begging him to come and 
help the suffering villagers in Champaran. Gandhi at last promised to visit the 
place after he had visited Calcutta. When Gandhi was in Calcutta, Rajkumar 
was there too, to take him to Bihar. 
Gandhi went to Champaran with Rajkumar early in 1917. On his arrival the 
District Magistrate served him with a notice saying g that he was not to remain 
in the district of Champaran but must leave the place by the first available 
train. 
Gandhi disobeyed this order. He was summoned to appear before the court. 
The magistrate said, ‘If you leave the district now and promise not to return, 
the case against you will be withdrawn.’ 
‘This cannot be.’ replied Gandhi. ‘I came here to render humanitation and 
national service. I shall make Champaran m y home and work for the suffering 
people.’ 
A large crowd of peasants was outside the court shouting slogans. The 
magistrate and the police looked nervous. Then Gandhi said, ‘I shall help you to 
calm these people if I can speak to them.’ The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46 Gandhi appeared before the crowd and said, ‘You must show your faith in me 
and in my work by remaining quiet. The magistrate had the right to arrest me, 
because I disobeyed his order. If I am sent to jail, you must accept that as just. 
We must work peacefully. And violent act will harm out cause.’ 
The crowd dispersed peacefully. The police stared at Gandhi in admiration as 
he went inside the court. 
The Government withdrew the case against Gandhi and allowed him to remain 
in the district. Gandhi stayed there to study the grievances of the peasants. 
He visited many villages. He cross-examined about 8,000 cultivators and 
recorded their statements. In this way he arrived at an exact understanding of 
their grievance and the causes underlying them. 
He came to the conclusion that the ignorance of the cultivators was one of the 
main reasons why it was possible for the European planters to repress them. 
Gandhi therefore set up voluntary organizations to improve the economic and 
educational conditions of the people. They opened schools and also taught the 
people how to improve sanitation. 
The government realized Gandhi’s strength and his devotion to causes. They 
themselves then set upon a committee to enquire into the grievances of the 
cultivators. They invited Gandhi to serve on that committee, and he agreed. 
The result was that within a few months the Champaran Agrarian Bill was 
passed. It gave great relief to the cultivators and land tenants. 
Gandhi could not stay longer in Bihar. There were calls from other places. 
Labour unrest was brewing in Ahmedabad and Gandhi was requested to help 
settle the dispute. 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47  
16. AHMEDABAD MILL-WORKERS SATYAGRAHA 
Gandhi hurried back to Ahmedabad. 
B
efore taking up the Labour dispute Gandhi wanted to move his ashrama. The 
Satyagraha Ashrama was in a village near Ahmedabad, but the surroundings 
were not clean and plague had broken out. It had spread there from 
Ahmedabad. 
A rich merchant of Ahmedabad, who was closely associated with the ashrama, 
volunteered to procure a suitable piece of land. Gandhi went about with him 
looking for land and at last they chose a place on the bank of the Sabarmati 
Ashrama was started. 
In Ahmedabad there were many textile mills. Prices had gone up and the mill 
workers were demanding higher wages. The mill owners would not agree. 
Gandhi sympathized with the workers and took up their cause. He launched a 
struggle and resorted to peaceful resistance. The workers proudly followed 
Gandhi and pledged their full support to him. They paraded the streets with 
large banners, and said they would not go back to work until a settlement had 
been reached. 
Days passed. The mill owners were adamant. The strikers were getting 
impatient for they were faced with starvation. Their discipline became weak. 
Gandhi feared that some workers would break their pledge and go back to 
work. That would be a great moral defeat. 
One morning he called the workers and said, ‘Unless the strikers rally and 
continue the strike till a settlement is reached. I will not touch any food.’ 
The workers were shocked. 
‘Not you, but we shall fast,’ they said. ‘Please forgive us for our lapse; we shall 
remain faithful to our pledge.’ 
Gandhi did not want anybody else to fast. His fast was not against the mill 
owners, but against the lack of co-ordination and unity among the workers. The The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48 fast lasted only for three days. It influenced the mill owners so much that they 
came to an agreement with the workers. 
Hardly was the mill workers’ strike over, when Gandhi had to plunge into the 
Kheda Satyagraha struggle. 
The Kheda district of Gujarat was on the verge of famine owing to failure of the 
crops. The yield had been so low that the cultivators, especially the poorer 
section, were unable to pay the revenue. But the government insisted that the 
yield had not been so bad and that the cultivators should pay the tax. Gandhi 
saw the justice of the cause of the cultivators and advised them to offer 
Satyagraha by not paying their taxes. 
Many leaders, like Vallabhbhai Patel, Shankarlal Banker, Mahadev Desai and 
others, took an active part in this struggle. The campaign came to an 
unexpected end. There had been signs that it might fizzle out, but after four 
months’ struggle there came an honourable settlement. The Government said 
that if well-to-do cultivators paid up the poorer section would be granted 
suspension. This was agreed to and the campaign ended. 
The Kheda Satyagraha marked the beginning of an awakening among the 
peasants of Gujarat, the beginning of their true political education. In addition 
it gave to the educated public workers the chance to establish contact with the 
actual life of the peasants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49  
17. ROWLETT ACT 
During this time the war had entered a critical phas e. Britain and France were 
in a difficult position. In the spring of 1917 Germany had inflicted crushing 
defeats on both the British and French troops in France. Russia’s war effort had 
broken down and the Revolution was threatening its Government. Though 
America had entered the war, no American troops had yet reached the battle 
front. 
The Viceroy of India Lord Chelmsford, invited various Indian leaders to attend a 
War conference. Gandhi was also invited. He accepted the invitation and went 
to Delhi Gandhi was not happy that leaders like Tilak or the Ali brothers had 
not been invited to the conference, so he felt unwilling to attend. After 
meeting the Viceroy, however, he attended the conference. 
The Viceroy was very keen that Gandhi should support the resolution on 
recruiting. 
Gandhi spoke only one sentence: ‘With a full sense of my responsibility I beg to 
support the resolution.’ 
Gandhi had supported the government’s resolution on recruiting! Many of his 
friends were taken aback. 
Some said, ‘You are a votary of ahimsa, how can you ask us to take up arms?’ 
Others said, ‘What good has the Government done to India to deserve our co-
operation?’ 
Even some of his best friends could not understand how he could reconcile his 
war effort with his campaign for ahimsa. 
But Gandhi stuck to the belief he held at that time that ‘absolutely 
unconditional and whole-hearted co-operation with the government on the part 
of educated India will bring us within sight of our goal of Swaraj as nothing else 
will’. 
Gandhi had made his decision and he now set out to implement it. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50 The response to recruitment was not in any way encouraging, but Gandhi was 
determined to carry out his mission. He held meetings. He issued leaflets asking 
people to enlist in the forces. His steady work began to bear fruit. Many men 
were recruited and he hoped to get a bigger response as soon as the first batch 
had been sent. 
Gandhi nearly ruined his health during the recruiting campaign. He worked very 
hard. He could not take his food at regular times, nor could he take enough 
nourishment to keep up his energy. 
He had an attack of dysentery. He refused to take medicine and his condition 
became worse and worse. Friends tried their best to advise him but he was 
beyond all advice. He passed restless days and nights and he himself felt at 
times that he was near death’s door. 
It took him a long time to regain his health, but before then the news came 
that the war was over. Germany had been completely defeated. 
There was now no need for any further recruitment.  
Friends and doctors advised him to go away for a change and recover his 
health. He went to Matheran, but the place did not suit him. 
He went to Poona, where a doctor as consulted. He advises him to take milk to 
rebuild his body, and he also advised him to have a few injections. Gandhi 
agreed to have the injections but he would not agree to take milk, for he had 
given up milk years before. 
But Kasturbai said,” Your objection was to cow’s milk and buffalo’s milk. You 
cannot object to taking goat’s milk. 
If you will take goat’s milk it will be good enough,” said the doctor. 
Gandhi returned to Ahmadabad. He was recouping his health there when he 
read in the papers the Rowlett Committee’s report which had just been 
published. 
This report recommended the introduction of amendments to the criminal law. 
These recommendations startled Gandhi. He described them as” unjust, The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51 subversive of the principles of liberty and justice, and destructive of the 
elementary of individuals.’ 
Friends approached Gandhi for guidance. 
“Something must be done,” he said to them. “If the proposed measured are 
passed into law, we ought to offer Satyagraha.” 
Gandhi was sorry he was in poor health; otherwise he would have given battle 
against the amendments alone. From his sick-bed he wrote articles for the 
Indian papers explaining that the proposed bill was an act of tyranny. No self-
respecting people could submit to it. 
Gandhi thought that the only possible step against the Government’s proposal 
would be to start the Satyagraha movement in right earnest. A meeting of some 
of the leaders was called at the ashram and a Satyagraha pledge was drafted. It 
was signed by all those present there. 
Gandhi did not believe that the existing institutions could handle such a noble 
weapon, so a separate institution named Satyagraha Sabha was formed. Its 
headquarters were in Bombay. 
There were agitations everywhere against 
Rowlett Committee’ report. But the 
Government was determined to give effect 
to its recommendations, and in 1919 the 
Rowlatt bill was introduced. When the bill 
was debated in India’s Legislative Chamber 
Gandhi attended as a visitor. 
In spite of all opposition from national-
mined people the bill was passed and it 
became law. 
Gandhi was still in a weak physical condition 
when he received an invitation to go to 
Madras. He took the risk and went to Madras with Mahadev Desai. With Rajagopalachari, 1937  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52 It was there that he first met C. Rajagopalachari, who impressed him very 
much. 
A small conference of leaders was held and Gandhi explained to them the 
implications of the Rowlatt bill. While these discussions were being held news 
was received that the Rowlatt Bill had been published as an act. 
It was also in Madras that Gandhi first conceived the idea of an all-India hartal 
as the beginning of the Satyagraha movement. The leaders at once took up the 
suggestion and gave much publicity to the forthcoming hartal. The date was 
first fixed for March 30, 1919, but was subsequently changed to April 6. The 
people had received only   short notice for the hartal, but it turned out to be 
most successful. 
That was the great awakening of India in her struggle towards independence. 
Gandhi left Madras went to Bombay to join in the hartal there on April 6. 
Meanwhile in Delhi, Lahore, and Amritsar, the Hartal had been observed on 
March 30. In Delhi the police did not allow free movement to the demonstrators 
and there was firing, causing a number of casualties. Gandhi was requested to 
go to Delhi and he replied that he would do so after the hartal in Bombay on 
April 6. 
In Bombay the hartal was a great success. Not a wheel turned in any factory. 
Not a shop was kept open. 
All over India the hartal was observed. Gandhi had asked the people again and 
again to be peaceful and not to be provoked to violence by the Government’s 
actions. In spite of this, violence broke out in many places. There were 
disturbances in Ahmedabad and also in the Punjab and he decided to go to 
these places to propagate non- violence. 
On the way to the Punjab he was arrested at a wayside station called Palwal 
and sent back to Bombay. The news of his arrest inflamed the entire population 
of Bombay. There was an enormous crowd awaiting his arrival there. When he 
reached Bombay he was set free. The crowd was getting important. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53 ‘Only you can control the crowd,’ said a friend to Gandhi. ‘Come, I shall take 
you to the spot.’ 
The crowd greeted Gandhi with frenzied joy. A huge procession started but the 
police barred its progress. A troop of mounted police was ordered to charge. 
Piercing screams and cries from women and children filled the air as the horse 
men plunged forward with lowered lances. People ran to escape the fury of the 
police. 
Gandhi was shocked. He went and met the Commissioner. He found him boiling 
with rage. 
‘We, the police, know better than you the effect of your preaching on the 
people. If we had not taken drastic measures the situation would have passed 
out of our hands. I have no doubt about your intentions, but the people do not 
understand them. They only follow their natural instincts.’ 
‘The people are not by nature violent, but peaceful,’ said Gandhi. 
‘You wanted to go to the Punjab,’ said the Commissioner. ‘Do you know what is 
happening in Ahmedabad, the Punjab, and Delhi? You are responsible for all 
these disturbances.’ 
Gandhi was pained to hear of the disturbance and said that he would certainly 
take the responsibility upon himself if he was convinced that it was his. 
Gandhi went to Ahmedabad. On the way he learnt in detail about the 
happenings there. Ahmedabad was under martial law. 
A police officer was waiting for him at the railway station to escort him to the 
Commissioner. This Commissioner too was in a rage. Gandhi expressed his 
regret for the disturbances and promised complete co-operation in restoring 
peace. 
Gandhi then asked for permission to hold a public meeting in the grounds of 
Sabarmati Ashrams. The proposal appealed to the officer. 
At the meeting Gandhi announced with great sorrow the suspension of civil 
disobedience. He said he would fast for three days as a penance and he The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54 appealed to all the people to fast for one day. He asked those who were guilty 
of violence to confess their guilt. He expressed his regret at having started civil 
disobedience too early without giving sufficient training to the people. 
‘I have made a Himalayan miscalculation,’ he said. 
Many people a jeered at Gandhi for saying that. Many of his friends and 
followers were furious at his stopping Satyagraha. 
Gandhi then started teaching people the true meaning of Satyagraha and how it 
should be conducted. Through writing and speeches he wanted to drive home 
to the people the essence of his new creed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55  
18. JALLIANWALA BAGH MASSACRE 
In the Punjab the situation was very critical. It wa s true that there were 
disturbances on the part of the people, but the measures adopted by the 
Government to check the disturbances were too severe. 
The leaders were trying to keep the people peaceful, but the stern measures of 
repression taken by the authorities had few parallels in history. 
In Amritsar the people were not allowed to move about freely. A proclamation 
was issued forbidding all gatherings and meetings. Only a few had the chance 
to know about the proclamation, however, because it was not announced 
widely, and it was made only in English. 
It was announced that a meeting was to be held in a garden called Jallianwala 
Bagh, to make a protest against the Government’s actions. 
General Dyer took no measures to prevent the meeting. He reached the place 
soon after the meeting began and he took with him armoured cars and troops. 
Without giving any warning he ordered, ‘Fire till the ammunition is exhausted.’ 
 
The Jallianwala Bagh massacre  
(from a painting in the library of the Golden Temple, Amritsar)  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56 The garden was surrounded by walls and buildings and had only one exit. At the 
first shot the exit was jammed and there was no hope of escape for the crowd. 
There were between six and ten thousand people there. The soldiers fired over 
sixteen hundred rounds into that unarmed mass of people. 
Once a garden, it was now a scene of merciless massacre. Hundreds of men, 
women, and children were butchered, though the official figures given were 
only 379 killed and 200 wounded. Leaving the wounded and dying on the 
ground, the troops marched away. The words ‘Jallianwala Baugh became a 
synonym for massacre. 
Bad as this was, there were other even more shameful deeds done all over the 
Punjab. Indians were ordered to crawl on their hands and knees. In addition 
General Dyer ordered that in certain areas all Indians were to alight from 
vehicles and salaam whenever they passed a British officer. Furthermore, at 
certain places men were stripped naked and flogged. Students and children to 
walk miles for roll call, to attend parades, and salute the British flag. Then 
there was the stripping and flogging of marriage parties, the censorship of 
communications, and cutting of water and electricity supplies to Indian 
families. The administration of General Dyer’s martial law created a reign of 
terror in the Punjab. 
C.F. Andrews, who had already reached the Punjab, wrote to Gandhi and 
begged him to come at once. Gandhi wanted to go, but his repeated requests 
for permission to visit the place were turned down by the Government. Finally, 
in October that year, the Viceroy permitted him to visit the Punjab, and Gandhi 
went. 
On his arrival at Lahore railway station, Gandhi found that almost the entire 
population of the city was there waiting for him. 
The Congress had appointed a committee to enquire into the atrocities 
committed in the Punjab. On his arrival in Lahore he was requested to join the 
committee. He started a slow but methodical investigation of the incidents in 
the Punjab. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57 Jawaharlal Nehru, who was also there in the Punjab, realized that Gandhi was 
the leader of the masses. People were drawn to him because of his thoughts 
and deeds. Nehru saw the scientific accuracy with which Gandhi was 
conducting the enquiry. 
Gandhi’s report of the atrocities showed that efforts were being made by the 
government to shield certain persons. Gandhi was never interested in taking 
revenge on anybody but he was shocked at the way the Government sat silent 
when its own report was published. 
Gandhi was very much moved by the sufferings of the people in the Punjab. He 
knew the extent of the atrocities which had been committed on the defenseless 
people. 
Gandhi now advised the people to non-co-operate with the Government in 
every possible way. He advised them not to accept any of the honours offered 
by Britain, and requested those who had already received honours to return 
them. He wanted people to start a movement to boycott goods. He wanted 
every effort to be made to persuade Indians not to serve the Government in any 
capacity. He called out students from the educational institutions. 
Gandhi’s influence on the Indian people was steadily growing. The old leaders, 
many of them with liberal policies, were vanishing from Indian politics. By the 
close of 1920 Gandhi was the undisputed leader and head of the Indian National 
Congress. 
The Congress was fighting for immediate Home Rule. Its method of fighting was 
non-violent non-co-operation with the Government, and defying carefully 
selected laws at suitable times. 
Gandhi was very interested in Jawaharlal Nehru and his socialistic views. He 
was most impressed with the account given by Jawaharlal of his contacts with 
the peasants. Jawaharlal explained the difficulties the peasants were 
experiencing, particularly the high taxes they had to pay. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58 The political situation in India grew worse. The Government became nervous. 
There was tension everywhere and amidst the suppressed people there was the 
danger of violence. 
In spite of the hard attitude of the 
Government, Gandhi believed that England 
would soon right the wrong before it was 
too late. Jawaharlal was of the opinion 
that England would not change her policy 
unless she was forced to do so. Jawaharlal 
was right. Soon the Government started 
arresting the leaders and imprisoning them. The British were afraid to loosen 
their grip on India. 
On August 1, 1920, in a letter to Lord Chelmsford, the Viceroy, Gandhi gave the 
signal for a non-co-operation campaign. Along with it he returned the Kaiser-i-
Hind gold medal which had been awarded to him in 1915. In the columns of 
Young India Gandhi wrote in detail in defence of non-violent non-co-operation. 
With other leaders he traveled extensively, addressing huge meetings and 
preaching the essentials of Satyagraha. Everywhere the crowds welcomed him 
with great love and enthusiasm. Again and again he warned the people against 
violence. He abhorred mass fury. 
‘If India has to get her freedom by violence,’ he said, ‘let it be by the 
disciplined violence named war.’ 
At the end of August the Gujarat Political Conference passed a non-co-
operation resolution, and a special session of the Congress was held in Calcutta 
on September 4 to 9. The draft of the non-co-operation resolution had been 
prepared by Gandhi. 
Gandhi was not sure how much support he would get at the Congress session. 
When he moved the resolution he said that he knew the resolution envisaged a 
policy which was different from the policy hitherto followed. He knew that 
many leaders were dead against it.  
With Nehru at Sevagram  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59  
 ‘But,’ he declared, ‘knowing this I stand before you in 
fear of God and with a sense of duty to put this before 
you for your acceptance.’ 
The special Congress session adopted the non-co-
operation plan as a means of attaining Swaraj. 
During the latter part of 1920 Gandhi advocated a triple 
boycott. He wanted an absolute boycott of the 
Government and all government institutions, including 
schools, colleges, and courts. If the people were free of 
these they could easily have their own schools, colleges, 
and courts, and the power of the British would collapse at 
once. 
There was much laughter and ridicule from the moderates and the supporters 
of British rule. But Gandhi paid no attention to them. Gandhi’s activities made 
the Government panicky. They issued a warning that anyone who overstepped 
the bounds of law would be arrested and imprisoned.  
Gandhi thought that this warning was a victory for the campaign. He issued 
instructions which the people were to follow if he were arrested. 
On December 26, the Congress session was held in Nagpur. Though there were 
signs of opposition to Gandhi’s policies his resolution was passed with an 
overwhelming majority. 
The adoption of the new programme at Nagpur was the signal to start the mass 
movement. Gandhi felt that the complete boycott of all government 
organizations would give a chance to the Congress to set up a parallel 
organization, a State within a State which would lead India to Swaraj. 
The Duke of Connaught was sent to India in 1921 to try to pacify the Indians. He 
came to open the four legislatures in the country which had been introduced as 
a result of the reforms announced by the King. His coming and going passed off 
without any material change in the attitude of Indians towards Britain. Wearing the 'Gandhi' 
cap 
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60 Gandhi traveled far and wide, propagating the ideals of non-violence and non-
co-operation. Day by day the Indians were getting more and more excited over 
carrying out Gandhi’s programme. Many students left their institutions, many 
officers resigned their posts. The boycott movement gained momentum. 
As the people’s morale grew, the morale of the Government went down. 
Repression started. Gandhi advised the people to have patience, and he 
insisted on non-violence. He saw the weakness of Indians and he urged them to 
improve. He wanted social reforms and constructive work to be intensively 
followed. 
It was announced were arranged the Prince 
of Wales was to visit India. Functions were 
arranged at many places to enable him to 
meet his loyal subjects. 
Gandhi was indignant when he read the 
announcement in the newspapers. 
‘Do the British think we are children?’ he 
said. ‘Do they believe that parades for the Prince will make us forget atrocities 
in the Punjab or the perpetual delay in granting us Home Rule?’ 
On Gandhi’s advice the Congress declared that all parades, receptions, and 
celebrations in honour of the Prince were to be strictly boycotted. 
‘We have no grudge against His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales,’ said 
Gandhi, ‘but our ideas are against him as a symbol of oppression. We can show 
the world that such non-co-operation is just the reverse of the European 
doctrine of the sword. Let us act in accordance with the holy prophets of old. 
Non-co-operation without violence is the battle of the brave.’ 
Fearing that there would be disorder when His Royal Highness the Prince of 
Wales visited various places, the government began severe acts of suppression. 
Thousands of people were arrested. 
The Indians people were so agitated than in city after city bonfires burned and 
the bonfires were made with foreign cloth, especially British cloth.  
With Annie Besant, Shrinivas Shastri, 
and Satyamurthi  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61 On November 17, 1921, the Prince of Wales landed in Bombay. Loyal stooges of 
Britain went to greet the royal visitor. Those who were observing non-violent 
non-cooperation did not molest them. However, passion suddenly blazed out. 
Religious and political hatreds fanned the flames. Riots started, many were 
killed, much property was destroyed. There was panic in the city. 
Gandhi was in Bombay, and he rushed to the scene of disorder to stop the 
rioting. Order was finally restored. 
‘Every man has the right to his religion and his own political opinion. 
Satyagraha will never succeed until man understands that,’ Gandhi announced 
bitterly. 
In other cities the boycott of the Prince’s visit was peaceful. As the unfortunate 
Prince of Wales visited city after city, he was greeted with empty streets. Not a 
shop was open. The people remained behind closed doors and drawn curtains. 
This infuriated the British and they called upon the Government of India to act. 
Motilal Nehru, Jawaharlal, and other leaders were arrested and sentenced to 
various terms of imprisonment. Yet the determined courage of the people did 
not abate. They were ready to suffer any penalty for the cause of Home Rule. 
Demands had been made to Gandhi that he should start a mass movement for 
the attainment of Swaraj. 
Gandhi decided to act. Preparations were made to start Satyagraha in Bardoli. 
But Gandhi had to stop the campaign suddenly because of what had happened 
in Bombay and other places. 
In Chauri Chaura, near Gorakhpur in U.P., some policemen fired on a crowd 
which was holding a demonstration against the Government. This annoyed the 
demonstrators to such an extent that they became very violent. They chased 
the police. The police took refuge in the city hall. The angry mob surrounded 
the hall and set it on fire. Some policemen were burned to death. Others, 
trying to escape, were killed by the furious mob outside. 
Gandhi was very upset. He thought that it was clear that the people were still 
not prepared for satyagraha. He stopped the intended satyagraha at Bardoli. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62 His co-workers did not agree with him, but he was adamant. He wanted his 
followers to start constructive programmes. 
Many Indians were sorry for Gandhi’s action. They thought that Swaraj was now 
within their reach and the movement should therefore continue. 
The Government was playing a waiting game. Instead o thanking Gandhi for 
stopping the mass movement, they arrested him on charges of sedition and 
sentenced him to six years’ imprisonment. He was removed to Yeravda Central 
Jail in Poona. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63  
19. IN PRISON 
In prison Gandhi settled down to a regime of spinnin g writing, and meditation. 
The people were disappointed and the Government tightened its hold 
everywhere. Almost all the leaders were put in jail. 
Then, in 1924, Gandhi fell ill. He was suffering from appendicitis and was in 
great pain. The Government was alarmed. What would happen if Gandhi died in 
prison? An urgent operation was arranged, and Gandhi agreed. The operation 
was successful, but his recovery was very slow, The Government thought it best 
to release him, so he was set free. He went to Juhu, near Bombay, for his 
convalescence.  
The non-co-operation movement was at low ebb. Many Congress leaders were 
thinking of participating in the Municipal and Provincial Councils which Gandhi 
had advised them to boycott. Gandhi was not dismayed or discouraged. He 
decided to leave politics alone for the time being and spend his time in bringing 
about Hindu-Muslim unity and the removal of unsociability.  
So far nearly Gandhi had little to do with politics. But he wrote, he lectured, 
and he prayed. He travelled all over India. His influence among the people was 
steadily growing. Gandhi had not given up the idea of non-violent resistance to 
British rule. He was merely waiting for the right time. 
Jawaharlal Nehru joined Gandhi in many of his travels. Everywhere they were 
both greeted with great enthusiasm. Jawaharlal was the hope of the younger 
generation. 
In 1928 the Viceroy invited Gandhi to see 
him. He informed Gandhi of the 
appointment of an official British 
Commission, led by Sir John Simon, which 
would study Indian conditions and 
recommend political reforms.  
With Vallabhbhai Patel  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64 ‘Will there be any Indians on the commission? asked Gandhi. 
‘No,’ replied the Viceroy. 
‘That is absurd,’ said Gandhi. ‘We must boycott it.’  
Gandhi advised the people to boycott the Simon Commission, and when it 
arrived in Bombay a hartal was observed all over India. On its tour through the 
Indians cities the Commission was greeted with black-flag demonstrations. 
The people shouted, ‘Simon, go back!’ 
At many places there were lathi charges and shootings. 
The same year the peasants of Bardoli, in Gujarat, were agitated by the 
enhancement of land taxed. Gandhi made a study of their grievances and 
advised them to resort to satyagraha and the non-payment of taxes. They must 
be non-violent, he said. Vallabhbhai Patel took the charge of organizing the 
resistance. 
The Government tried all its usual measures to terrorize the people, but had to 
climb down. An enquiry into the grievances was ordered. Vallabhbhai 
demanded certain concessions.  Negotiations were going on when Gandhi 
arrived in Bardoli. Within a short period the Government came to terms with 
the organizers and a settlement was reached. 
Now political tension again gained momentum. People everywhere were 
preparing for a mass struggle. 
The Viceroy called a meeting of the Indian leaders. He made the announcement 
that India would get dominion status, similar to that of Canada. Gandhi wanted 
an immediate plan for the framing of the Constitution. 
‘Gentlemen,’ the Viceroy said, ‘I have no power to promise such things.’ 
Everybody then realized that England was still marking time and was not really 
willing to part with power. 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65  
20. SALT SATYAGRAHA 
A new determination to force the Government to 
a
ct filled the minds of the people. 
Jawharlal Nehru was elected President of the 
Congress at the instance of Gandhi. A Congress 
session was held in Lahore on December 31, 1929. 
A resolution announcing that full independence 
was India's goal was passed at this session of the 
Congress. Disappointed at her failure to get 
dominion status, India now demanded full 
independence. The whole country was excited. 
Everybody was waiting for the lead from Gandhi. 
After two months of suspense, a Salt Satyagraha was announced by Gandhi. 
This would be the beginning of a civil disobedience campaign in which laws 
made by the State would be broken. Civil disobedience would begin by breaking 
the salt law. 'Salt suddenly became a mysterious word, a word of power,' Nehru 
said. 
The Government had put an excise tax on salt which brought an enormous 
amount of money to the treasury. Moreover, the Government had the monopoly 
of manufacturing salt. 
The salt tax was to be attacked and salt laws were to be broken. The very 
simplicity of Gandhi's choice made the issue more dramatic. 
On March 2, 1930, Gandhi wrote a long letter to the new Viceroy, Lord Irwin, 
about the deplorable condition of India under British rule. 
British rule', he said, 'has impoverished the dumb millions by a system of 
progressive exploitation, and by ruinously expensive military and civil 
administration which the country can never afford. It was reduced us politically 
to serfdom. It has sapped the foundation of our culture.  
With Sarojini Naidu on the 
march to Dandi  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66 He requested the Viceroy to see him and discuss the matter with him in person. 
'But If you cannot see your way to deal with these evils,' he went on, 'and my 
letter makes no appeal to your heart, on the eleventh day of this month I shall 
proceed with such co-workers of the Ashram as I can take, to disregard the 
provisions of the salt laws. It is I know, open to you to frustrate my design by 
arresting me. I hope there will be tens of thousands ready in a disciplined 
manner, to take up the work after me. 
Lord Irwin did not answer Gandhi but sent a 
message through his secretary expressing 
regret that Gandhi had chosen a course 
which involved breaking the law of the land 
and which would be a danger to public 
peace. 
The whole of India was agitated over 
Gandhi's Salt Satyagraha. On March 12, at 6.30 in the morning, thousands of 
people watched as Gandhi started from his ashram with seventy eight 
volunteers on a march to Dandi, a village on the sea coast 241 miles away. 
There, it was announced, the salt law would be broken. Gandhi led the march 
through village after village, stopping at each place to talk to the peasants and 
advise them on the necessity of social reforms. 
For twenty-four days the eyes of India and the world followed Gandhi as he 
marched towards the sea. The Government did not take the risk of arresting 
Gandhi. With each passing day the campaign grew. Hundreds and thousands of 
people joined the procession. Men, women, and children lined the route, 
offering flowers and shouting slogans for the victory of the march. Newspaper 
reporters from every corner of the world were there to report the progress of 
Gandhi's march. 
The march ended on April 5 at Dandi village. Gandhi and his selected followers 
went to the sea-shoe and broke the salt law by picking up salt left on the shore 
by the sea. The march to Dandi, 1930  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67  
Gandhi then gave a signal to all Indians to 
manufacture salt illegally. He wanted the people 
to break the salt law openly and to prepare 
themselves for non-violent resistance to police 
action. 
All over India people swarmed to the nearest sea 
coast to break the salt law. Great excitement 
was created everywhere. Only a few people knew 
how to make salt, but the people soon found 
their own ways of making it. All that mattered 
was the breaking of the salt law. 
Gandhi and other leaders had made arrangements for the continuation of the 
agitation if they were arrested. A chain of leaders had been chosen, so that as 
each leader was arrested another would be ready to take his place. 
The Government waited for some time before taking any action, and then at 
last retaliation began. Gandhi was left at liberty, but many other leaders were 
taken into custody. Jawaharlal, Mahadev Desai, and Gandhi's son Devdas were 
the first to be sent to the jail. In dealing with the breakers of the salt law, the 
police resorted to their usual brutal methods. 
The Indian National Congress was declared illegal. Some newspapers which 
were threatened with censorship suspended publication. The people held 
hartals and demonstrations, and mass arrests were made. Soon the jails were 
filled to overflowing. The people remained non-violent, lest Gandhi should call 
off the movement. 
Gandhi then informed the Viceroy that the was going to raid the government 
salt works at Dharasana. 
Lord Irwin decided to act. Two English officers, with pistols, accompanied by 
many Indian policemen armed with rifles, arrived at Gandhi's camp in the 
middle of the night.  
Picking up salt to break the law  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68 They woke up Gandhi and said, 'You are under arrest.' Gandhi was taken to 
Yeravda Central Jail. 
So Gandhi was not there for the raid on the 
Dharasana salt deposits. 
The salt deposits were surrounded by the 
barbed wire fencing and protected by four 
hundred Indian policemen armed with steel 
shod lathis. A few British officers were in command of them. 
Gandhi's volunteers halt some distance away from the fencing. Then a selected 
group of them advanced towards the barbed-wire fence. Police officials 
ordered the volunteers to disperse but the police ignored the warning. 
Suddenly the police rushed at them and 
rained blow after blow on the 
defenseless men. Not one of the 
volunteers even raised an arm to stop the 
blows. They fell down, some with broken 
skulls, some with broken shoulders, arms, 
or legs. The waiting crowd groaned. 
When the entire first batch had been 
knocked down and carried off on 
stretchers, another batch advanced to 
meet the same fate. The campaign went 
on for hours. Finally, as the heat of the day increased, the volunteers stopped 
their activities for that day. Among the volunteers two had died and 320 were 
injured. 
Gandhi's arrest had created a great sensation in India and abroad. 
Representations were sent from all parts of the world to the British Prime 
Minister asking the Government to release Gandhi and make peace with India.  
Even those who were co-operating with the British demanded the release of 
Gandhi. In many parts of India people broke 
the salt law  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69 Gandhi proved to be more dangerous inside the jail than outside. While he sat 
quietly in Yeravda Jail, country wide outbreaks of civil disobedience were 
greatly taxing the British. The jails were full to overflowing. The Government 
was in distress and finally, in 1931, had to release Gandhi, Nehru, and other 
leaders. 
As soon as Gandhi was out of prison he asked for an interview with the Viceroy, 
Lord Irwin. The interview was immediately given. Gandhi and Irwin met, but 
the two men seemed to have come from 
two different worlds. 
Gandhi did not go to seek any favours. He 
wanted to negotiate on terms of equality. 
The meeting went ton for many days and 
finally the talks culminated in a treaty, the 
Gandhi Irwin Pact. It embodied 
compromises made by both sides. Irwin 
agrees to release all the political prisoners, 
and Gandhi promised to suspend civil 
disobedience and send a Congress representative to the round Table 
Conference. For at that time, in London, the British Government was holding a 
Round Table Conference on the future of India. 
The Gandhi Irwin Pact was a victory for non-violent resistance. But some of 
Gandhi's Congress followers thought that he had not gained much as result of 
the pact. 
Gandhi was designated as the sole reprehensive of the Congress to the Round 
Table Conference. In August 1931 he sailed for London with a small party. 
Gandhi went to England with the object of reaching an agreement with the 
British on affair Constitution for India and also of winning the hearts of the 
British people. In his first object he failed, and in the second he met with great 
success. 
  At Bombay before departure, with 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya, 
Sarojini Naidu, and Kasturbai  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70 Gandhi spent eighty four days in England and most of the time he was meeting 
and talking to people. Churchill refused to see him but Gandhi captivated the 
hearts of many. He had tea with the King and Queen. When a reporter asked 
him if he though t he had dressed well enough for such an august tea party, 
Gandhi replied, 'The King had on enough for both of us.' 
At the Round Table Conference nothing was conceded to India towards her goal 
of swaraj. The Conference played up the differences between Hindus and 
Muslims, and this only served to worsen communal tension in India. 
Gandhi returned with nothing except warm goodwill for India from the hearts of 
many English people. 
                      
  
On board the S. S. Rajputana  At the Round Table Conference  
  
At Marseilles, with C. F. Andrews,  
Miss Muriel Lester, Mahadev Desai, 
Miraben, and Pyarelal  With women workers in a Lancashire 
cotton mill 
 
 
 
 
 
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71  
21. SEVAGRAM 
At home Gandhi found that the Government 
h
ad returned to the policy of repression. 
There were widespread arrests and the 
Government seized the properties and bank 
balances of people and organizations who 
were hostile to their interests. 
Early in 1932 Gandhi wanted to meet the 
new Viceroy, Lord Willingdon, but the 
Viceroy made it clear that the days of negotiation were over. 
Gandhi informed the authorities that he was again starting a civil disobedience 
campaign. The Viceroy thought it was a threat. He had Gandhi arrested and 
imprisoned in Yeravda Central Jail. Several other leaders and many of Gandhi's 
followers were also arrested and sent to jail. 
In March the struggle entered a new phase. Gandhi had always insisted that the 
untouchables were a part of the Hindus and must be treated as Hindus. Now, 
however, it was announced that the British proposed to set up separate voting 
for the untouchables. That meant that untouchables could vote only members 
of their own caste. 
Gandhi regarded the Hindu religion as one and indivisible. He saw the game the 
British were playing. It was an attempt to weaken Hindu society. 
'Separate treatment of untouchables cannot be allowed,' declared Gandhi. 
'Here is an attempt to make unsociability last forever. Unless unsociability is 
destroyed we can never have self-government.' 
'But what can you do about this election law now?' asked a friend. 
'I can die,' was his proper answer. 'I will resist this evil provision with my life. 
Gandhi announced that he would soon start a fast unto death unless the plan 
for separate electorates was changed.  
Gandhi's Hut at Sevagram  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72 The public announcement of his intention threw the country into panic. The 
Indian leaders were shocked at Gandhi's decision. Even Jawaharlal Nehru 
thought that he was taking a drastic step on a side issue. 
During the time between the announcement and the day when Gandhi's fast 
was to begin, streams of visitors arrived at Yeravda Jail. The authorities, 
anxious to avoid any tragedy, allowed everyone to have free access to Gandhi. 
But all efforts to dissuade Gandhi from fasting were of no avail. The die was 
cast. Gandhi would fast. 
Tagore sent him a telegram: 'It is worth sacrificing precious life for the sake of 
India's unity and her social integrity. Our sorrowing hearts will follow your 
sublime penance with reverence and love.' 
Gandhi started his fast on September 20, 1932. The first day of the fast was 
observed all over India as a day of prayer and fasting. Many temples were 
opened to untouchables and meetings were held all over India urging the 
removal of unsociability. 
Outside the jail political activity boiled. Leaders of caste Hindus and 
untouchables met and discussed various measures to try to arrive at 
compromise that would satisfy Gandhi. Proposals were made counter-proposals 
were made and rejected. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the most powerful leader of the 
untouchables, met Gandhi and assured him that he would try his beat to find a 
solution which would save Gandhi's life. 
The fast went on into the third day, and Gandhi's condition caused anxiety to 
all his friends. He was a very weak and he had to be carried to the bath-room 
on a stretcher. His voice was feeble. His blood pressure was increasing. The 
authoritie4s grew panicky. They sent for his wife and they allowed all his 
friends and followers to be with him.  
The Indian people felt desperate. Gandhi might die and leave them leaderless. 
Other political leaders had failed, for they were unable to find a solution which 
would enable Gandhi to break his fast. The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73 Gandhi, however, would not accept this unless it had been ratified by the 
British. 
News came that the British had approved the pact; but still Gandhi would not 
break his fast until he saw the text of the approval. 
While Gandhi waited for the text to come, Tagore paid him a visit. The poet 
was so moved by Gandhi's weak condition that he put his head on Gandhi's chest 
and wept. 
The text of the British approval came. 
Gandhi accepted it, and the epic fast was at 
last over. Gandhi lived. 
Gandhi was released from prison in 1933. 
Shortly afterwards he suspended the mass 
civil disobedience movement, but 
sanctioned individual civil resistance to the 
Government's brutal policy. 
For the next seven years, Gandhi worked hard for the social and spiritual 
progress of his people. Many leaders, including Jawaharlal Nehru, did not 
approve of Gandhi's policy. 
'But' Nehru said, 'How can I presume to advise a magician?' the 'magician' 
continued to win Nehru's unstinted devotion. 
Sabarmati Ashrama had been seized by the Government during the Salt 
Satyagraha, so Gandhi now established a little retreat at Sevagram near Wardha 
in Maharashtra. This became his headquarters. 
New reforms sponsored by the Government got little support from the people 
of India. However, many people, including Congressmen, wanted to try them 
out as a means of furthering the cause of Swaraj. 
 
 
 Gandhi's room at Sevagram  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74  
22. CABINET MISSION PLAN 
In 1939 the Second World War broke out. England and France declared war on 
Nazi Germany. Without consulting Indian leaders, Britain declared India to be 
at war on the allies' side. 
Gandhi's sympathies were with the British, but the believed that all violence 
was evil and he would therefore have nothing to do with the war effort, 
although he gave England his moral support. 
The Indian National Congress wanted to 
help Britain and fight on the allies' 
side, but only as a free nation. But to 
grant India independence seemed 
ridiculous to Churchill and his 
Government. They had no intention the 
co-operation offered by the Congress. 
As a protest, all the Congress ministries in the provinces resigned. The 
Government took over the administration and they acted in such a way as to 
help their war effort. Acting on the goodwill and restraint taught by Gandhi, 
the Indian leaders showed no reaction. 
Events in Europe were having repercussions in India however. The Congress 
working Committee found itself unable to accept in its entirety Gandhi's 
attitude to the war. In particular 
they would not accept his view that 
the  
defence of India should not depend 
on armed force. 
The leaders met again and again in 
Gandhi's room at Sevagram and 
talked of their desire to start some  
With Subhash Chandra Bose, 1938  
With Tagore at Santiniketan, 1946  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75 action. Finally a proposal was put forward that all provincial Governments 
should join with the British authorities in the defence of India. The 
Government, however, rejected the offer. 
In September 1940, a meeting of All-India Congress Committee was held in 
Bombay. There as a protest against England's utter indifference to India's 
hopes, it was decided to launch individual civil disobedience against the 
authorities. It was also decided to hold meetings to protest against British 
imperialism. At that time such meetings were forbidden. 
Vinoba Bhave was the first to 
inaugurate individual satyagraha. He 
was arrested and so were hundreds 
of other who followed him. Nehru 
also was arrested. Within a few 
months over thirty thousand 
Congressmen were put in jail. 
Gandhi alone was not imprisoned. He 
devoted his time to spreading the 
gospel of truth and non-violence. In 
December 1941 the Government 
released all the satyagrahis. Then, in 1942, as the Japanese swept across the 
Pacific and went through Malaya and Burma, the British began to think of a 
settlement with India. Japan might even invade India. 
With the threat of invasion by Japan even Gandhi began to feel that his 
pacifism might stand in the way of India's future. So he made the proposal of a 
provisional Government's side in the struggle against the aggressors. But this 
proposal was ignored. 
In March 1942 Churchill announced that the war cabinet had agreed on a plan 
for India and that Sir Stafford Cripps had agreed to go to India to find out 
whether the Indian leaders would accept the plan, and whether they would 
devote all their thought and energy to the defence of India against Japan.  
With Sir Stafford Cripps, 1942  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76 Sir Stafford Cripps arrived in Delhi on March-22. He met Gandhi, Nehru, Azad, 
Jinnah and other important leaders. Cripps promised greater freedom than that 
which had been offered before. He also offered complete freedom after the 
war, if India wanted it. The leaders would perhaps have accepted this offer if it 
had come a year earlier, but now it was rejected. 
The Congress leaders did not trust the people of India sufficiently to give them 
any real power, and so the Indian leaders felt that they could not trust the 
British to hand over power after the war. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77  
23. QUIT INDIA 
In August 1942 the All India Congress met in Bombay,  and was presided over by 
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. Again the demand to set up a provisional 
Government was made. 
'We can no longer hold back our people from exercising their will,' Gandhi said. 
'Nor can we go on eternally submitting to the imperialist policy. The time has 
come for the English to go. Civil servants, army, officers, Government officers 
all of them should quite India.' 
The 'Quit India' resolution was drawn up and passed the meeting for 
presentation to the Government. Jawaharlal moved the resolution and Sardar 
Patel seconded it. 
The resolution also announced the starting of a mass struggle on the widest 
possible scale. 
Winding up the meeting, Gandhi said, 'I have pledged the Congress, and the 
Congress has pledged herself that she will do or die.' 
The Government did not wait for the mass movement to begin. Overnight 
Gandhi was arrested, and also many other leaders in various parts in India. 
Gandhi was interned in the Aga Khan's palace in Poona. Mahadev Desai, 
Kastubai, Mrs. Naidu, and Mirabehn were also taken there.  
But with the leaders in jail, India did not remain idle, movements everywhere. 
And there was great outburst of violence throughout the country. People 
started destroying government buildings and whatever else they considered to 
be symbols of British imperialism. 
Shortly after his detention in the Aga Khan's palace Ganhid suffered a grievous 
bereavement, Mahadev Desai, his faithful and able secretary, died of a heart 
attack. 
'Mahadev has lived up to the "do or die" mantra,' Gandhi said. 'This sacrifice 
cannot but hasten the day of India's deliverance.' The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78  
All over India there were strikes and 
disorder. Lord Linlithgrow, the Viceroy, 
attributed all this to Gandhi. Gandhi had 
invited violence, he claimed. In a long 
series of letters to Lord Linlithgow Gandhi 
tried to persuade him to retract this 
charge against him. 
Failing in this, Gandhi decided to 
undertake a fast as 'an appeal to the 
Highest Tribunal' against the unjust 
charges. Gandhi fasted for twenty-one 
days in February 1943. It was a great 
ordeal, but he survived the fast. 
Kasturbai nursed him back to health, but her own health was failing. She 
suffered two heart attacks. Gandhi tried his best to save her, but Kasturbai 
grew worse. One day she died quietly in Gandhi's arms. 
A few weeks later Gandhi was taken seriously ill with malaria. The Indian 
people demanded his immediate release and the authorities, believing that he 
was nearing death, released him. Gandhi was slowly resorted to health. 
The demand for Indian independence had now grown in to a world-wide 
question. Apart from India's own attitude, America and other countries pressed 
Britain to grant freedom to India. Churchill did not yield to any of these 
approaches. India had always been of help to British property and Churchill was 
the last man to think of giving up India and thus make Britain the poorer. 
Two months after Germany's surrender in May 1945, the Labour Party came into 
power in Britain and Attlee became the Prime Minister. 
After the defeat of Japan a few months later, the British Government 
announced that they expected to, grant self-government to India as soon as her 
internal problems could be solved.  
With Lord Pethick -Lawrence, 1946  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 79 This was a victory for India. It was for non-
violence. Britain, defeated by the peaceful 
revolution, would not hold on to India any 
longer. Britain agreed to a planned 
withdrawal from India, without bitterness 
and in friendship. 
All through his life Gandhi had worked for 
unity between the Hindus and the Muslims. 
But he had not had much success. There 
was a large section of nationalist Muslims 
in the Congress, but the heads of the 
Muslim League were drifting further and 
further away. Gandhi was not man to give up hope, however, and he pursued 
his efforts to bring about a settlement. On the other hand, Jinnah, the leader 
of the Muslim League, was hostile to the idea of unity. He demanded a separate 
Muslim State before freedom was given to India. 
The Viceroy invited all the leaders to Simla and tried to find a solution and 
bring about Hindu-Muslim unity, Jinnah would not agree to anything, however. 
He insisted on having a separate State to be called Pakistan. 
Britain announced an election in India and the election was held. The Congress 
won most of the Muslim seats. The deadlock continued. 
'We can settle the Indian problem in ten minutes if Mr. Gandhi agrees to the 
creation of Pakistan,' said Jinnah. 
'Cut me in two,' cried Gandhi, 'but do not cut India in two.' 
He spoke to deaf ears. British Government sent a Cabinet Mission India. It 
consisted of Lord Pethick Lawrence, Sir Stafford Cripps, and Mr. A.V.Alexander. 
The task of the Cabinet Mission was to study the situation and suggest what 
should be done. After careful consideration the Cabinet Mission issued a 
statement proposing the withdrawal of British authority from India. They had 
the idea of a united India. The Scientist  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 80  
24. HE RAM!!! 
On August 24, the Viceroy announced the formation of  an interim National 
Government to replace the Viceroy's Executive Council. 
Jawaharlal Nehru was the Vice-President of the Interim Government. 
The Muslim league declined to join it on the ground that it had not been given 
the right to nominate all the Muslim members. 
After the installation of the interim Government Gandhi was anxious to return 
to Sevagram, his ashrama near Wardha, but the Congress leaders prevailed on 
him to stay longer in Delhi because they wanted his advice. So Gandhi stayed 
on in Delhi. 
Then the Muslim League decided to 
join the interim Government and an 
announcement was made to that 
effect on October 15, 1946. Gandhi 
once again felt free to return to 
Sevagram. 
He was about to leave Delhi when 
news came of disturbances in Bengal. 
There was widespread communal rioting by the Muslims in Calcutta and in the 
Muslim majority district of Noakhali in East Bengal, with murder, arson, looting, 
forced conversions, forced marriages, and abduction. 
Gandhi was confused and grief-stricken. Instead of returning to Sevagram, he 
set out for Noakhali to try to bring peace there. 
The communal riots spread. There were similar riots in Bihar and the Punjab. 
Thousands were killed and thousands more were injured. Gandhi was greatly 
disheartened by these events. He tried to calm and reassure the people.   
In Noakhali, 1946  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 81 He walked from village to village and from house to 
house carrying his message of peace. Whenever he was 
there was peace, at least outwardly, but the general 
situation in India was worsening. Rioting spread from the 
towns to the went there to instil courage into the 
Muslim minority and to help them in their distress. 
The situation in India was so dreadful that the Congress 
leaders realized that the best way open to them was to 
accept Jinnah's demand for division of the country, and 
they reluctantly approved the formation of Pakistan. 
Nehru met Gandhi to inform him of this decision. 
Gandhi asked him, 'Is there no way out? No hope of a united India?' 
Nehru was sad and grave. 
'Bapuji,' he replied, 'unity is impossible. Dreadful as is the idea of a separate 
country within our borders, we have to accept it. Otherwise this deadly turmoil 
will never cease.'  
Gandhi bowed his head to hide his despair. On June 3, 1947, Attlee, the British 
Prime Minister, announced the plan for partition. The Congress and the Muslim 
League accepted it. 
For Gandhi it was a spiritual tragedy. With infinite sadness he said, 'All India 
must accept Pakistan in loving resignation. We have no choice. Hindus must 
lead the way to a friendly settlement.' 
Lord Mountbatten, the last British Viceroy, was anxious not to delay, the 
ushering in of independent India and independent Pakistan. He shortened the 
time limit for the British to quit India. The date for the declaration of Indian 
independence was fixed for August 15, 1947. 
Thus on August 15, 1947, India's long struggle and suffering for freedom was 
over. A new nation although split in two was born.  
With Lord and Lady 
Mountbatten  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 82 Lord Mountbatten hailed Gandhi as 'the architect of India's freedom through 
non-violence'. 
Gandhi had never given his approval to partition, but when it was done he 
accepted it and did everything possible for the attainment of Hindus-Muslim 
friendship. Yet the tension between 
Hindus and Muslims continued to 
increase.   
As a result of partition over seven 
hundred thousand Hindus, Sikhs, and 
other non-Muslims in Pakistan, 
fearing the Muslims, left their homes 
and other non-Muslims in Pakistan, 
fearing India. From India about the 
same number of Muslims, fearing the 
Hindus left their homes for Pakistan. 
The miseries attendant on this mass migration, one of the greatest in history, 
were manifold. Fifteen hundred thousand people on the move were exposed to 
starvation, disease, and massacre on the way. 
 Gandhi was on his way to the Punjab when he stopped in Delhi, hoping to quell 
the riots that had broken out there out there. He was very distressed at the 
inhuman way the Delhi Hindus were treating the Muslims. 
Gandhi's gospel of forbearance and forgiveness towards Muslims marked him as 
a traitor in the eyes of many Hindu extremists. In the face of fanatical 
oppositions, Gandhi redoubled his efforts and the major disturbances in Delhi 
subsided, but there were still disturbances here and there. 
Gandhi decided to do penance by fasting, which he thought would bring about a 
change in the attitude of the Hindus fanatics. 
The fast began on January 13, 1948. There was gloom all over India at the news 
of Gandhi's fast. Walking to the prayer -meeting on 29 
January 1948  
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 83 People thought that he would not be able to survive another fast. The whole 
world not be able to survive another fast. The whole world watched as Gandhi, 
seventy-eight years old, fasted to save his country from destruction. 
On January 18 a peace committee, representing all communities, met and 
signed a pact pledging unity and the protection of life, property, and faith to 
the Muslim minority. 
Gandhi was informed of the pledge and he broke his fast. Gandhi was staying at 
Birla House. Every evening he held a prayer meeting in the grounds. 
During his prayer meeting on January20, a bomb was thrown at him, but it 
missed its target. Gandhi continued his prayer-meeting as if nothing had 
happened. 
'Bapuji, a bomb exploded near you,' said a voice.  
'Really? Gandhi said. 'Perhaps some poor 
fanatic threw it. Let no one look down on 
him.' 
On January 30, after a midday nap, Gandhi 
woke up at 3.30p.m. The whole day he had a 
stream of visitors. Sardar Patel went to see 
him at 4 o'clock. Nehru and Azad were to 
come after the evening prayer. 
Gandhi left his room at 5 O'clock and went 
towards the prayer meeting. 
He passed through a cordoned off path, 
accompanied by Manu and Abha, his grand-
daughters. As he was walking along a youth 
came forward as if to seek his blessings. But he stood in front of Gandhi and at 
point-blank range fired three shots in quick succession. All the bullets hit him. 
Gandhi fell, uttering the prayer, 'Rama, Rama.' 
Gandhi was dead.  
The funeral procession, 31 January 
1948 
The Story of Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 84 The assassination gave the world a tremendous shock. 
Nehru told the country of Gandhi's death, his voice chocked with emotion: 
'Friend and comrades the right has gone out of our lives and there is darkness 
everywhere. I do not know what to tell you and how to say it. 
Our beloved leader, Bapu as we called him, the Father of the Nation, is no 
more. Perhaps I am wrong to say that. Nevertheless, we will not see him again 
as we have seen him for these many years. 
'The light has gone out, I said and yet I was wrong. For the light that shone in 
this country was no ordinary light. The light that has illumined this country for 
these many years will illumined this country for many more years, and a 
thousand years later that light will still be seen in this country, and the world 
will see it and it will give solace to innumerable hearts. 