 
This was Bapu 
One hundred and fifty anecdotes relating to Mahatma  
Gandhi 
 
 
Compiled by : R. K. Prabhu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I wish to acknowledge with gratitude my indebtednes s to all the persons 
and journals mentioned by me in connection with the  anecdotes of Mahatma 
Gandhi narrated in this work. 
My particular thanks are due to Acharya Kaka Kalelk ar for generously 
writing the Foreword and for permitting me to repro duce a brief chapter of his 
own reminiscences of Gandhiji entitled "An Ideal Pr isoner" which appears on 
page 128; to Shri. D. G. Tendulkar and Vithalbhai K . Jhaveri for their ready 
consent to the inclusion in this work of two contri butions—one of them by 
myself—which had appeared in their book of tributes  entitled  Gandhiji , namely 
"The Prince of Beggars" (p. 124) and "Lessons in Jo urnalistic Ethics" (p. 149); to 
Shri Gurdial N. Mallik for permission to reproduce his story "A Walk With 
Children" (p. 117) which had been originally contri buted by him to  Pushpa , the 
"Children's Own Magazine" published in Bombay; to S hri Pangal Manjunath Nayak 
and his daughter Dr. Nirupma Nayak for their courte sy in permitting me to 
reproduce in facsimile two of the letters which Gan dhiji had written to the 
latter two decades ago; and to Shri M. G. Kamath, E ditor,  Dharti-Ke-Lal , New 
Delhi, for his invaluable help in the initial stage  of the preparation of this work. 
A special debt of gratitude is due from me to the N avajivan Trust, on whose 
two journals,  Young India  and  Harijan,  I have freely drawn for the sources of a 
good many of the anecdotes of the Father of the Ind ian Nation related in this 
book. 
R. K. Prabhu 
 
 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3   
FOREWORD 
Shri Prabhu is an old and dear friend of mine. It i s more than forty years 
since we have known each other. A common friend, wh o introduced me to the 
poetry of the stars, also introduced me to Ramachan dra Krishna Prabhu as a 
kindred spirit. Prabhu was then working on Lokamany a Tilak's theory of 'the 
Arctic Home of the Aryans in the Vedas'. My patriot ic interest in the history of 
ancient Indian culture was greatly flattered when I  found that another scholar 
like Prabhu held the same view, that the Vedas were  thousands of years old and 
that we all migrated from the Polar Regions to Indi a which has been the home 
of the Aryan culture from prehistoric times. The co mmon interest in the life, 
work and teachings of Shri Aurobindo Ghose was yet another bond that brought 
us nearer. 
Being a lover of books Prabhu was then taking his t raining in Library Science 
under Borden whom Sayajirao Gaekwad of Baroda had i mported from America 
to organize and develop the Central Library in his capital. Prabhu gradually 
reverted to journalism and made it his life-work. H e had the good fortune of 
working with veteran journalists like Horniman and Belvi. During all these years 
he made a deep study of Mahatma Gandhi's life and t eachings. He has in his 
possession a vast collection of cuttings and extrac ts from Gandhiji's writings, all 
assorted under various heads. This will fill many v olumes. His one book, The 
Mind  of  Mahatma Gandhi 1, has done more to present a succinct but 
comprehensive idea of Gandhiji's teachings than the  host of similar books which 
have appeared in recent times.  The Conquest of Self  was the first of a series 
which Prabhu planned for giving an exhaustive surve y of Gandhiji's thoughts and 
conclusions on various contemporary Indian and worl d problems. I wish he 
would find time to complete the series. I need not mention the other books he 
has published on Gandhiji. I only wanted to show ho w eminently fitted Prabhu 
is to give us a collection of anecdotes about Mahat maji. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  Of all the prophets of humanity, Gandhiji seems to have been the .most 
fortunate. No other succeeded in his life time as G andhiji did, in spreading his 
ideas and working them out on a vast canvas. No pro phet succeeded so well as 
he did in choosing the fields of politics, national ism and internationalism for 
the practical application of his spiritual message.  Starting his career in the 
benighted continent of Africa, he sensed the racial  character of the world-
situation and its conflicts. He was led to form the reby the spiritual concept of 
human brotherhood', and the necessity of cultivatin g soul-force to oppose the 
might of empires based on racialism and armed with the powers of science, 
economics and worldwide organization. Gandhiji retu rned to India from South 
Africa at a juncture when Europe was locked in a gi gantic struggle of arms and 
India was groping in darkness arising out of a lack  of leadership and a sense of 
frustration. Gandhiji, the inheritor of the achieve ments of saintly India, the 
interpreter of India's synthetic culture of ages, a nd the prophet of a new 
humanism that embraced and appealed to the whole wo rld, assumed the 
leadership of the country and gradually collected a ll the scattered forces, 
spiritual, intellectual, economic and cultural, to guide them into a great 
national movement for the rediscovery and reasserti on of the soul of India. He 
unified India as no one else had done before, and g ave a determined fight to 
the powerful British Empire through non-violent mea ns. He saw the world in 
travail in two global wars, and by freeing India he  liberated a soul-force that is 
gradually influencing world-politics and world-aspi rations. 
Many persons started writing about the life and tim es of the Mahatma. The 
Christian minister Doke and Henry S. L. Polak made the first attempts at 
portraying his unique spiritual life. Friends like Pranjivan Mehta and Mrs 
Avantika Gokhale collected what they could of his w ritings. G. A. Natesan of 
Madras published an excellent volume of his selecte d speeches and writings. 
Mahatmaji himself found time, during his jail life in 1924, to write his 
autobiography and a detailed history of the Satyagr aha movement in South 
Africa. Since then writers / throughout the world h ave started writing about 
him from various angles. Romain Rolland, the gifted  genius of French letters, 
and Louis Fischer, the famous American journalist, have given illuminating This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5  pictures of Mahatmaji. Tendulkar has brought out a long and exhaustive bio-
graphy in eight big and sumptuous volumes, while Py arelal, who had the rare 
fortune of working as one of Mahatmaji's private se cretaries, is concentrating 
on what he loves to call a "full-dress biography", documented with authentic 
letters and inside knowledge of events. 2 
Mahatmaji was essentially a man of action. He had n o time to read and 
produce books. Yet his mission forced him to write from time to time, and 
continuously from week to week expressing himself o n the various topics 
concerning India and the world. He can also be said  to have been 'a man of 
letters' in the literal sense of the words. The num ber of letters that he wrote to 
friends, near and distant, and correspondents from all parts of the world on 
various matters is legion. They are being gradually  collected, edited, translated 
into and published in various languages. 
We have thus vast material dealing with Gandhiji's life and times. It is just 
beginning to come to light. The Westerners, always alert to new forces in the 
world, have given hasty, and sometimes imperfect an d irrelevant descriptions 
of Gandhiji and his message, and publishers have fo und it profitable to 
popularize them. It is not possible to give an adeq uate idea of the vast 
literature that is being produced, both in India an d abroad, about Gandhiji. 
Friends, colleagues and intimate Coworkers of Gandh iji have concentrated their 
attention on his life as they intimately knew it. I t is too early for them to write 
the political and cultural history of India during the Gandhian Era. In fact, the 
Gandhian Era has just begun showing its working on the canvas of all the 
continents of the world. And yet, it is not too ear ly for our people to record the 
events and cultural forces at work during the past one hundred years that may 
be said to belong to, as the precursor of, the Gand hian Era. It is a mistake to 
suppose that the Era began with the birth of Gandhi ji. It started a little before 
1857, and we should be able to interpret the histor y of the past 100 years as 
being one of pregnant preparation for the renaissan ce which expressed itself 
through the life and work of Mahatma Gandhi. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6  Anecdotes about Gandhiji will occupy a small but fa vourite corner in this 
vast literature about him, for it has its value in understanding his composite 
and complex personality. An English philosopher has  pithily said that "trifles 
make perfection and perfection is not a trifle." Th e same idea, in relation to 
Gandhiji, was expressed by Jairamdas Doulatram in t he following words : 
"The true greatness of a person lies more in small deeds than in big 
achievements. It is the small things that count mos t in a man's life and show 
the stuff he is made of. Thus, if anyone wants to k now and understand 
Gandhiji, his life and teachings, he must try to st udy and find out what true 
humanity is and how it worked in Gandhiji's everyda y life and teachings." 
Chandrashankar Shukla, one of the young  set of Mahatmaji's  private  
secretaries, has laid the world under  a debt by collecting incidents  from  the 
life of the Mahatma. His four volumes, published by  Vora &  Co.,  are a treat 
both for their human interest and as historical doc uments supplementing the 
various biographies of Gandhiji. G. Ramachandran wa s perhaps the first in the 
field with his sheaf of anecdotes about Mahatmaji. What he has given is 
interesting and significant, but one feels unsatisf ied at the paucity of material 
that makes up the sheaf. My own little collection,  Stray Glimpses of Bapu 3 was 
the result of after-lunch talks given to friends in  the Seoni Jail, which came to 
an abrupt close with my unexpected release. I have had no time since then to 
write down further similar incidents. 
And now my friend Prabhu has come out with his bril liant collection of about 
150 anecdotes. Most of these are not to be found in  any of the previous ones. 
The criticism that Horace Alexander levelled at my collection may apply 
equally to the present one of Prabhu. The stray gli mpses which I presented in 
the little booklet are "like lost sheep", says Hora ce Alexander. "They are not 
arranged chronologically; neither are they classifi ed into any appropriate 
headings." I could, with some effort, rearrange my glimpses into a chronological 
order; but I do not feel that it is necessary. Neit her do I feel that Prabhu's 
anecdotes would improve  by a similar treatment. He has followed the princi ple 
of the Buddhist  work,  Anguttara-nikaya.  Starting with very short anecdotes, he  This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  has gradually led up to incidents that cover long c hapters.  I think that  
psychologically this is a good arrangement. One is gradually led on  and on with 
increasing interest till one does not grudge the ti me required for finishing the 
entire book. 
Not anything and everything that is written about a  great man can pass 
muster as art  anecdote  or incident, but Prabhu has given the suggestive 
caption to his collection:  This Was Bapu.  Any incident or anecdote, to be worth 
the name ought to be significant. It must haunt you r mind long after you have 
read it. Most of those collected here are strikingl y significant. They are 
arresting and of sustained interest. They throw a f lood of light, even of 
searchlight, on the character of Mahatma Gandhi. Th ere are, however half-a-
dozen ones which are neither significant nor striki ng. Fastidious literary critics 
might wish that these were dropped. Devotees of Gan dhiji, however, would be 
grateful to Prabhu for having subordinated his sens e of literary aesthetics to 
the responsibility or  dharma of the chronicler in not dropping these incidents. 
Lives of great men have a knack of "growing" with t he passage of time. 
Anecdotes grow and grow in number and in variety ti ll it becomes difficult to 
distinguish between those which are true and those which are spurious. This 
happens even during the life time of the person abo ut whom the anecdotes are 
written. Human nature, specially in hero- worship, is prone to paint occasions 
according to its mood or taste. Take, for instance,  the anecdote 146 in this 
collection. It describes the little revolution brou ght about by Mahatmaji during 
his first appearance in Shantiniketan in January, 1 915. I was an honorary 
teacher there at the time and I had my own share in  the little revolution, which 
I have described in my  Stray Glimpses.  In the anecdote, as stated in the 
present book,  S. K. Roy has put the description, as from the mou th of the poet 
Tagore, that does not tally with the facts. 
"In the meantime, Gandhiji asked the scavengers not  to do any work for  a 
few days. The high-caste boys could never think of doing the work of  
untouchable scavengers. Life in the school became a lmost impossible with the This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8  odour of night-soil. Then Gandhiji himself carried the  pots on his own head . . . 
and buried the contents underground. 
This super-human act was contagious. Soon the boys of the highest castes 
and rich families were vying with one another to ha ve the honour of doing the 
work of the outcaste scavengers." 
This description is apocryphal and one of pure imag ination. Gandhiji did not 
ask the scavengers to give up their work, nor was t here a single day when the 
latrines were not cleaned. We, some of the teachers  and students, in our 
impatience did demolish a permanent latrine because  Gandhiji happened to 
remark that the structure was old- fashioned, insan itary and hopeless. He had 
neither the time nor the occasion to carry pots of the night-soil on his head. I 
do not mean to say that he would not have done it. He had done it on many 
occasions in jails in South Africa. He did it along  with us, inmates of the  
ashram, for long periods, but we never carried the pots  on our heads.  We had 
better methods. 
In the anecdote 25, the following sentence is attri buted to Gandhiji: 
"Whether it is my Gurudev or anybody, my eating goe s on." I think it unlikely 
that Gandhiji could have referred to Tagore as "my Gurudev". In Shantiniketan 
we all referred to the Poet as "Gurudev". Gandhiji loyally followed the practice 
and always referred to the Poet as "the Gurudev", j ust as the latter referred to 
him as "the Mahatma". "My Gurudev", just does not r epresent the natural 
attitude of Mahatma Gandhi. There is an element of irreverent familiarity and 
possessiveness in the word "my" which was foreign t o it. 
A friend from Bengal pointed out the inaccuracy of facts that had crept into 
one of the incidents recorded in my  Stray Glimpses.  One can, therefore, be 
never sure whether the incidents actually happened,  however scrupulously 
exact the writer may be in recording the version of  it as given to him. But the 
common mind loves a good story and does not hesitat e to invent one, if 
necessary, to magnify the greatness of the object o f one's worship though 
sufficiently great in itself it may be ! 
One is, therefore, filled with admiration and grati tude at the extreme care 
with which the followers of the Prophet of Islam co llected the anecdotes about This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  him and tested rigorously the veracity of each one of them. The best thing to 
adopt about the anecdotes regarding Mahatma Gandhi would be for his 
contemporaries to write down all that they know of him as authentic; authors 
and publishers to verify whatever comes to them; an d some time limit to be 
laid down for the collection of the anecdotes. Any appearing after that ought to 
be accepted with caution, the burden of proving the ir authenticity being 
thrown on those who produce them. 
I know a friend from Singapore, a great admirer and  devotee of Dr. Ananda 
K. Coomaraswamy, is "collecting typical anecdotes a bout Mahatma Gandhi 
which reflect the sense of humour as evinced by Mah atmaji throughout his life, 
specially in his contacts with non-Indians. For ins tance, take the anecdote 35, 
here, in which Gandhiji is said to have answered th e question regarding the 
secret of his power. It is not in consonance with t he characteristic nature of 
Gandhiji as I knew him. It is just possible that he  might have written some such 
thing in his early days. Somebody must trace out th is anecdote to its original 
source. I do not mean to imply that what is written  there is not the secret of 
Gandhiji's power. What I doubt is whether he would have explained it in that 
fashion. 
Some of the anecdotes collected in this book are si mply superb. Take, for 
instance, 33, about the postman whom Gandhiji descr ibes as a "man of letters" 
and Ramsay Macdonald as "one of the statesmen true to his class, always 
waiting till circumstances force them to move"; 46,  where he describes the 
loin-cloth as "minus fours", which has become class ic; 43 is more about the poet 
Iqbal than about Gandhiji, but as an anecdote it mu st be classed Al; 59 is 
specially important today (the whole of Japan as al so the rest of the world 
being uneasy at the effects of the atom bomb—and th e latest is the H bomb—
Gandhiji suggests that the power of the soul workin g through prayer is mightier 
than that of any atom bomb; and 125 shows the power  of Gandhiji in death as 
in life). 
Biographers of Gandhiji will do well to study and u tilize these anecdotes, 
because they express the various aspects of his lif e much more than long This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  dissertations. I have no doubt that some of the ane cdotes recorded here will 
find a place in school text-books, and in anthologi es of world's great 
apophthegms and of anecdotes about its great person alities. 
Let me thank again Shri R. K. Prabhu for serving th e reading public with 
such a delicious repast prepared with deep devotion  and hard labour of love. 
KARA KALELKAR 
 
 
1.  It should be stated here that this book as well as  The Conquest of Self  mentioned in 
line 5 from bottom, were jointly compiled by R. K. Prabhu and U. R. Rao. 
2.  Under this,  Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase Vol. I & II  have been published. Pub. 
Navajivan; price each vol. Rs. 20. 
3.  Published by Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad,  price Rs. 2, postage etc. 81 nP. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11   
THIS WAS BAPU  
A DREAM OF DEATH 
"I do not know if the sacrifice of Mr. Ganesh j Sha nkar Vidyarthi has gone 
in vain. His spirit always inspired me. I envy his sacrifice. Is it not shocking that 
this country has not produced another Ganesh Shanka r? None after him came to 
fill the gap. Ganesh Shankar's Ahimsa was perfect A himsa. My Ahimsa will also 
be perfect if I could die similarly peacefully with  axe blows on my head. I have 
always been dreaming of such a death, and I wish to  treasure this dream. How 
noble that death will be,—a daggar attack on me fro m one side; an axe blow 
from another; a lathi  wound administered from yet another direction and kicks 
and abuses from all sides and if in the midst of th ese I could rise to the 
occasion and remain non-violent and peaceful and co uld ask others to act and 
behave likewise, and finally I could die with cheer  on my face and smile on my 
lips, then and then alone my Ahimsa will be perfect  and true. I am hankering 
after such an opportunity and also wish Congressmen  to remain in search of 
such an opportunity." 
 
—Message sent by Mahatma Gandhi on the occasion of the celebration of 
the anniversary of the martyrdom of Shri Ganesh Sha nkar Vidyarthi, who was 
killed in the Hindu-Muslim riot at Kanpur in 1931. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12   
01. THE SALT OF LIFE 
"Do you think a sense of humour is necessary in lif e?" was a question put to 
Gandhiji by a visitor and his reply was : "If I had  no sense of humour, I should 
long ago have committed suicide." 
 
02. A PARTING GIFT 
A British journalist met the Mahatma shortly before  he died. "Have you 
anything for me, Mr. Gandhi?" he asked. "Not unless  you want my shawl," was 
the reply. 
 
03. THE LION AND THE LAMB 
Gandhiji was asked by  The Times of India  representative at Nagpur : "What 
will become of the British, if your Swarajya is est ablished within a year?" He 
replied : "The lion will lie down with the lamb." 
 
 
04. HIS RELIGION 
While he was engaged with Mahatmaji, a young Americ an missionary asked 
him what religion he professed and what shape the f uture religion of India was 
likely to assume. 
His reply was very brief. Pointing to the two sick persons in the room, he 
said, "To serve is my religion. I do not worry abou t the future." 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13   
05. WHEN G. B. S. VISITED GANDHIJI 
George Bernard Shaw, in describing his visit  to Gandhiji during the latter's 
stay in London towards the close of 1931, stated : "When I visited Gandhi I 
notice he was sitting uncomfortably on a huge uphol stered chair. I seized the 
situation at once. I said : Won't you sit  on the floor as you do at home?' I sat 
likewise and instantly we became friends." 
 
06. A BIRTHDAY MESSAGE 
Gandhiji sent the following reply to the organizers  of the World Fellowship 
of Faiths who had requested him to send them a 'mes sage' on the occasion of 
his birthday (2nd October, 1933) : 
"What message can I send through the pen, if I  am not sending any through 
the life I am living?" 
 
07. DRINK EVIL 
"Why are you so uncharitable to those  who  drink?" asked an English student 
of Gandhiji when the latter  was staying in London towards the close of 1931. 
"Because I am charitable to those who suffer from t he effects of the curse," 
Gandhiji replied. 
 
 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14   
08. THE BIRTHDAY PURSE 
"Supposing I don't present you the purse but walk a way with it, what will you 
do?" asked Shrimati Sarojini aidu, with her eyes on  the fat purse which had 
been collected to be presented to Gandhiji on his B irthday on 2nd October, 
1947. 
Gandhiji : "I know you are capable of doing that!" (Laughter) 
 
09. SECRET OF SUCCESS 
"Success attends where truth reigns," was the crypt ic message sent by the 
Mahatma on the inauguration by Shri B. G. Kher, Pre mier of Bombay, on the 7th 
October, 1947, of Gandhigram, an institution devote d to constructive work on 
lines laid down by Gandhiji, at the foot of Sirumal ai Hills, some 30 miles north 
of Madurai.' 
 
10. IS THE WORLD GETTING BETTER? 
"Is the world getting better or worse?" queried an interviewer. 
"So long as I believe in a benevolent God," replied  Gandhiji, "I must believe that 
the world is getting better even though I see evide nce to the contrary." 
 
11. "WHAT OF YOU ?" 
While Gandhiji was in Yeravda Jail in 1923, Kasturb a with some members 
of the Ashram interviewed him. Gandhiji amongst oth er things asked about 
Jamnalalji and Vinoba, and he was told that they ha d gone to jail. He was This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  exceedingly delighted with the news, but wondered w hy Kasturba herself was 
still free. 
"They do not arrest me. What can I do?" said Kastur ba. 
 
12. THE BLACK GAT 
An amusing story was told. by Mr. Lloyd George abou t Gandhiji's visit to his 
house at Churt in 1931. Just as Gandhiji settled in  his couch in the house, a 
black cat they never before had seen came through t he window and rested in 
Gandhiji's lap. When he left, the cat disappeared t oo and did not come back 
again. The same cat returned when Miss Slade (Mirab ahen) visited Mr. Lloyd 
George at Churt. 
 
13. BIRTHDAY MESSAGE TO TAGORE 
On his eightieth birthday Gurudeva Rabindranath Tag ore received the 
following message from Mahatma Gandhi : 
"Four score not enough. May you finish five. Love."  
Gurudeva's reply was as follows : 
"Thanks message but four score is impertinence, fiv e score intolerable." 
 
 
 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16   
14. MAHATMA AND THE CAPITALIST 
A big financier, a captain of business, put this qu estion to Gandhiji once : 
"Do you want me or my money to the Nation's cause?"  
"You," was the straight reply. 
"What task would you assign me if I left off busine ss and joined you?" 
"The Spinning Wheel," replied Gandhiji as he plied the Charkha. 
 
15.  "WILD MAN OF GOD" 
During his stay in London in connection with the se cond Round Table 
Conference in 1931 Lady Astor invited Gandhiji to a  luncheon party given by 
her. As he sat in shawl and loin cloth at her table , Lady Astor, always vivacious, 
characterized her distinguished guest as a "wild ma n of God". The reference 
amused him to laughter and he retorted, "And you ar e a wild woman of God!" 
 
16. GOOD-BYE TO TEA! 
"Gandhiji enjoyed his afternoon cup of tea — until one day I gave him a 
shock by asking him solemnly, though partly in jest , whether he could not do 
without regularly drugging himself. 'What do you me an?' he inquired a little 
anxiously. 'Well,’ I replied, 'isn't tea either a s timulant or a narcotic?' After a 
moment's reflection he said gravely : 'So it is.' A nd from that day tea was 
taboo." 
— Mr. H. S. L. Polak in  Vegetarian News. 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17   
17. IN BUCKINGHAM PALACE 
"The climax of Gandhiji's freedom from convention i n the matter of dress 
was reached when I saw him mounting the carpeted st airs of Buckingham 
Palace to greet the King and Queen, with his blanke t round his shoulders, at 
the Royal Party in honour of the Round Table Confer ence delegates and other 
visitors. I do not think the Palace had seen a visi tor in that costume before, nor 
is it easy to conceive that anyone else would have been allowed the same 
freedom." 
 — Sir Abdul Qadir. 
 
18. LIFE INSURANCE 
"Have you insured your life?" asked an Agra friend of Gandhiji. 
This was Gandhiji's reply ; "I did insure my life i n 1901 and a short time after I 
gave up the policy because I felt that I was distru sting God and making my 
relatives, in whose behalf the policy was taken, de pendent upon me or the 
money I might leave them, rather than upon God or t hemselves. The opinion 
arrived at when I gave up the policy has been confi rmed by subsequent 
experience."  
 
19. A CABINMAN'S RUSE 
During Gandhiji's journey from Bombay to Delhi in A pril 1946 when his 
special train arrived near Gangapur station on the Western railway line, a young 
Muslim cabinman on duty there had the train stopped  by not giving signal for 
the train to pass. The cabinman then rushed towards  Gandhiji's compartment 
for his Darshan. Addressing Gandhiji this young man  said, "Since all these years I This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  was eagerly waiting for your Darshan. My desire has  been fulfilled today. Please 
keep us in your mind in your mission at Delhi." 
 
20. THE POWER OF PRAYER 
When, during Mahatmaji's 21 days' fast undertaken i n September 1924 for 
bringing about Hindu-Muslim unity, the doctor, noti cing the extreme weakness 
of Gandhiji at the end of twelve days of the fast, spoke to the latter about the 
perishing of the body, Gandhiji, with a smile gleam ing in his eyes like sunshine, 
answered simply, "You have forgotten the power of p rayer." 
The power of prayer did, indeed, prevail, for Gandh iji survived the ordeal, 
as the world knows.  
 
21. “ASK BA” 
"Do you ever suffer from nerves?" asked Mrs. Eustac e Miles of Gandhiji 
when he was in London in connection with the Round Table Conference in 1931. 
"Ask Mrs. Gandhi," straight came the reply, leaving  her to admiring his 
humour still more, "she will tell you that I am on my best behaviour with the 
world but not with her." 
"Well," said Mrs. Miles, "my husband is on his best  behaviour with me." 
"Then," retorted Gandhiji, "I am sure that Mr. Mile s has bribed you heavily." 
 
22. HIS SENSE OF HUMOUR 
"One of the things that delighted many English peop le was the discovery 
that the great Mahatma had the same sense of humour  and laughter at the 
same things as ourselves. I had the honour of drivi ng him a little way in my car. 
On the way he asked me about my honorary degree. "W hat is this 'D. D.' that This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19  you have?" he said. I explained that it was the deg ree of a Doctor of Divinity, 
bestowed on me ( honoris causa)  by Glasgow University. "Ah," said he, "so you 
know all about divinity?"  
— Miss Maude Royden 
 
23. "THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD" 
An adult young man asked Gandhiji when the question  of uplifting the 
'untouchables' was being discussed, "Well, Sir, why  did you not force your way 
into the temple at Gape Gomorin, when they did not admit you? It was an insult 
you should not have put up with. You, Sir, are the light of the world and who 
were they to exclude you?" 
"Yes," said Gandhiji laughing, "Either I was not th e light of the world and 
they were justified in keeping me out; or I am the light of the world and I 
should not have forced my way into it." 
 
24. VIOLENCE PREFERRED TO COWARDICE 
Gandhiji always made it clear that his creed of non violence was of the 
brave. But where the choice was between cowardice a nd violence, he was 
definite that he would prefer violence to cowardice . "Thus, when my eldest son 
asked me what he should have done, had he been pres ent when I was almost 
fatally assaulted in 1908, whether he should have r un away and seen me killed 
or whether he should have used his physical force w hich he could and wanted 
to use and defended me, I told him that it was his duty to defend me even by 
using violence," wrote Gandhiji in  Young India.  
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20   
25. A LAUGH AT HIMSELF 
During his visit to Santiniketan in December 1940, Gandhiji was shown one 
of the photographs wherein he was sitting with Rabi ndranath in front of the 
room in which the world-famous  Gitanjali  was written. 
When Gandhiji was seeing this photograph, someone r emarked, "Bapuji, 
when this photograph was taken you were eating some thing." Gandhiji took the 
photograph in his hands, saw it for some time and g ave a hearty laughter and 
remarked: "Whether it is Gurudeva 1 or anybody, my eating goes on." 
 
1 In the first edition of this book, Gandhiji had b een made to say, "Whether it is my 
Gurudev or anybody". As pointed out by Shri Kaka- s aheb in his Foreword, it appears to be 
unlikely that Gandhiji referred to Dr. Tagore as 'm y Gurudeva', and, therefore, the word 
'my' before 'Gurudeva' has been omitted in the pres ent edition. 
 
26. "NOT AN F.T.S." 
Asked whether he had ever been a member of the Theo sophical Society, 
Gandhiji is reported to have stated that he had nev er been a member, but he 
was and had ever been in sympathy with its message of Universal Brotherhood 
and consequent toleration. 
He added : "I owe much to the Theosophical friends among whom I have 
many. Whatever critics may say against Madame Blava tsky, or Col. Olcott or Dr. 
Besant, their contribution to humanity will always rank high. What has been a 
bar to my joining the society is its secret side—it s occultism. It has never 
appealed to me." 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21   
27. HIS DAILY BILL OF FARE 
During the interview he gave to the Editor of  The Spectator  of London, 
who visited him in India in 1934, Gandhiji stated :  
“This is my daily bill of fare : for my breakfast a t eight o'clock I have 
eighteen ounces of goat's milk and four oranges; fo r my luncheon at 1 o'clock I 
again have sixteen ounces of milk, grapes, pears or  other fruit. My evening 
meal is between 5 and 6 o'clock. I eat a teaspoonfu l of almond paste, twenty or 
thirty dates, several tomatoes and a lettuce or oth er salad. This avoids 
indigestion. As you will note, I eat no starch and no cereals.” 
 
28. “PRICE OF FREEDOM IS DEATH” 
"The price of freedom is death" — this almost proph etic observation was 
contained in one of the letters written by Gandhiji  not long before his death to 
Dr. Gope Gurbux of Bikaner. Dr. and Mrs. Gope Gurbu x were inmates of 
Gandhiji's Ashram at Sevagram for a fairly long tim e and Gandhiji had been 
personally instructing and guiding them in spinning , latrine cleaning, cooking, 
etc. When leaving the Ashram they had received the following parting message 
from him : "Follow whatever commends itself to you in my life." 
 
29. "BANDE MATARAM" 
During his stay in Calcutta in August 1947 in of  his post-prayer speeches 
Gandhiji referred to Band Mataram which was sung ju st before prayers by a 
lady. As the song started, the vast gathering stood  up and reverently kept 
standing. 
Mahatma Gandhi was alone seated because, as he rema rked later, he had 
learnt that their culture did not require standing as a mark of respect when any 
national song or Bhajan was sung. It was an unneces sary importation from the This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22  West, he thought. After all, it was the mental atti tude that mattered, not the 
superficial appearance. 
 
30. LIKE THE TRUE YOGI 
During his Konkan tour Gandhiji happened to reach t he village of Lange at 
midnight. The villagers had been anxiously awaiting  his arrival for hours. In his 
address to them Gandhiji said, "I do not know wheth er I should pity you or 
myself for keeping you waiting until this hour. But  we have done what the Yogi 
of the Gita does : 'The night of sleep of the ordin ary mortals is a day of 
wakefulness for the Yogi.' I congratulate you on yo ur Yoga, but you will better 
deserve my congratulations if you show that you are  true Yogis by contributing 
for the poor and by purchasing our Khadi." There wa s pleased laughter at these 
witty remarks of Gandhiji. 
 
31. A RETORT COURTEOUS 
During his visit to the Sabarmati Ashram in January  1930 the Poet 
Rabindranath Tagore remarked to Gandhiji : "I am se venty now, Mahatmaji, and 
so am considerably older than you." 
"But," said Gandhiji, with a hearty smile, "When an  old man of 60 cannot 
dance a young poet of 70 can dance." 
"That is true," said the Poet, and added : "You are  getting ready for 
another arrest cure. I wish they give me one." 
"But," said Gandhiji, "you don't behave yourself," and there was a peal of 
laughter among the inmates of the Ashram who were l istening to the repartees 
of these two greatest sons of India. 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23   
32. "WELCOME" OR "UNWELCOME"? 
Gandhiji's sense of humour asserted itself unexpect edly on many an 
occasion. During his tour of the Central Provinces in November 1933 at Lanji, 
presents made to him were inscribed with the word ' Shubha-gamana' (‘Au 
Revoir') instead of 'Shubha-againana' ('welcome'), referring to which Gandhiji 
said, "Since you want me to depart I will be very s oon at Betul." 
The Municipal President read the address and was ab out to walk away with 
it when Gandhiji said, "You cannot take it away. It  is to be given to me." His 
remark caused a good deal of laughter in the audien ce. 
 
33. POSTMAN BEFORE PREMIER 
According to Mr. S. Winsten, author of  Days with Bernard Shaw,  who had 
become acquainted with Gandhiji during the latter's  visit to London in 1931, 
once Mr. Ramsay MacDonald, the then British Premier , arrived for an urgent 
consultation with Gandhiji, but a postman had walke d all the way from Bow to 
Knightsbridge because he wanted to pay his respects  to the great Indian leader. 
"I'll see the man of letters first," said Gandhiji decisively and then he explained 
to Mr. Winsten : "You see, a statesman can wait, fo r that is his job; he is always 
waiting till circumstances force him to move." 
 
34. A RACE IN PATERNITY 
At Kingsley Hall, where Gandhiji stayed during his visit to London in'1931, 
many came to hunt for his autograph. One such admir er of Gandhiji was an ex-
Navy man whose credentials presented to Gandhiji in cluded his having served 
Mirabahen's father for a number of years and that h is son-in-law was supplying 
milk to Gandhiji. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  "How many children have you?" Gandhiji asked 
him. 
"Eight, Sir, four sons and four daughters." 
"I have four sons," said Gandhiji, "so I can race w ith you halfway." And the 
whole house roared with laughter. 
 
35. THE SECRET OF HIS POWER 
What was the secret of Gandhiji's power? He himself  answered once : 
"The Secret? 
A clear heart, 
A clear conscience, 
A cool head, 
Regular communion with God, 
Abstention from carnal food and pleasure, 
No alcohol, smoking and condiments, 
A strict vegetarian diet, 
And love for all my fellow-men." 
 
36. MAN AND THE MACHINE 
The Bishop of Birmingham, who met Gandhiji during t he latter's visit to 
Birmingham in 1931, was loud in his praise for scie nce and machinery, which, 
he said, were made to free man from manual toil so that he might have all his 
time or the bulk of it for intellectual work. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25  Gandhiji reminded the Bishop that he could not trus t the average man to 
use all his spare time profitably on the Strength o f the old adage "Satan always 
finds some work for idle hands to do." But the Bish op demurred. 
"Look here," said he, "I do not do manual work for more than an hour a day. 
The rest of my time I give to intellectual pursuits ." 
"I know," said Gandhiji laughing, "but if all becam e Bishops, the Bishops 
would find their occupation gone." 
 
37. A MISSIONARY'S ZEAL 
Addressing a gathering of Christian missionaries at  Y.W.C.A. at Calcutta on 
28th July 1925, Gandhiji recounted his association with Christians both in 
London and South Africa. He said : 
"There was even a time in my life when a very since re and intimate friend 
of mine, a great and good Quaker, had designs on me  (Laughter). He thought I 
was too good not to be a Christian. I was sorry to have disappointed him. One 
missionary friend of mine in South Africa still wri tes to me and asks me : 'How is 
it with you?' I have always told this friend that s o far as I know it is all well with 
me." 
 
38. ORIGIN OF 'GANDHI CAP' 
Mr. H. S. L. Polak, who was closely associated with  Gandhiji in his South 
African campaign, explained some years ago the "ori gin" of the "Gandhi Cap" in 
a letter in The Manchester Guardian . He wrote: 
"There are surprisingly few people, even among Indi an Nationalists, who 
recall the origin of the so-called 'Gandhi Cap'. It  formed part of the uniform 
which Mr. Gandhi, as a non-White political prisoner , wore during the South 
African Indian passive resistance struggle of 1907 to 1914. He later used it This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26  when, on his return to India, he further developed his technique of non-violent 
Civil Disobedience." 
 
39. MAHATMAJI TICKLED TO LAUGHTER 
"As I entered I gave Mahatmaji an Indian salutation  with bowed head and 
palms of my hands close together in front of my che st. Now whether it was the 
sight of my large feet in their baggy socks or whet her I cut a comic figure as I 
saluted him I do not know, but the old gentleman fa irly chortled with laughter 
and his eyes shone like a schoolboy's behind his st eel-rimmed spectacles," wrote 
Mr. Robert Stimson of  The Times of India , reminiscing about Gandhiji. He 
continued: 
"That is the first thing one notices about Mahatma Gandhi, high spirit, his 
sense of fun, his ability to see the ludicrous side  of things. He is the exact 
opposite of severe and tight-lipped and 'saintly'— in the stained-glass window 
sense." 
 
40. HARIJAN SEVA 
Shrimati Rameshwari Nehru, writing in the Thakkar B apa Jayanti 
Commemoration Volume, relates that Gandhiji was onc e addressing in Wardha 
the members of the Harijan Sevak Sangh on how he ex pected them to discharge 
their duties by the Harijans. One of the Brahmana m embers of the Sangh, 
highly respected for his excellent services to the Harijans, asked the question 
what Gandhiji expected them to do besides what they  were doing already. 
Prompt came the counter-question, 'Are you married? ' On the member's replying 
in the affirmative, "Gandhiji's face brightened up, " says Shrimati Nehru, "and 
with great force he declared, 'Well then, you shoul d get your son married to a 
Harijan girl. Do you now understand what more I exp ect you to do?' " 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27   
41. THE MAHATMA AND THE MIRROR 
A French cartoonist by name Cabrol drew a cartoon o f Mahatma Gandhi 
after he had a casual look at the latter in the Bha ngi Colony in New Delhi after 
Gandhiji's public prayers. 
The cartoon was presented to Gandhiji by Prof. Fauc on of the Paris 
University, who had arrived there on a short visit.  Gandhiji looked eagerly at 
the cartoon and, apparently pleased at the workmans hip, remarked: "It is good 
but why has he drawn my ears so long?" 
The Professor replied : "Because your ears are so."  
Gandhiji smilingly said, "I never look into a mirro r. Therefore I do not know 
if my ears are so long." 
 
42. THE POOR MAN'S REMEDY 
Among the many problems the inmates of the Sabarmat i Ashram had to 
face one was that of malaria that visited the Ashra m every year after the 
monsoon. Doctors were consulted as to the cause and  means of protection, and 
one of the usual means suggested was the protection  from mosquitoes with 
mosquito curtains.  
"How can all afford a mosquito net? Is there no mea ns which the poorest 
can afford?" Gandhiji asked the doctors, who said t here was one. That was 
keeping the body properly covered, and smearing the  face with kerosene oil. 
Gandhiji generally used the mosquito net, but as so on as he saw that there was 
a poor man's remedy, he asked the net to be removed  and began smearing his 
face with kerosene oil before bed time. 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28   
43. IQBAL'S TRIBUTE 
Iqbal, the illustrious Muslim poet, was an admirer of Gandhiji, although he 
did not agree with him on certain issues. He used t o say that future generations 
of Hindus would worship Gandhiji as an Incarnation of Divinity. 
In 1921-22 when the Civil Disobedience and Khilafat  movements were 
surging ahead,  John Bull , an English paper, published a cartoon ridiculing 
Gandhiji. A beautiful ^ woman was shown, blindfolde d, following Gandhiji on a 
rock, beyond which was a stormy sea. She was called  "Mother India" whom 
Gandhiji was shown to be leading to inevitable deat h. 
When Iqbal saw this cartoon he wrote under it four lines in Persian and 
changed the entire meaning of the cartoon. The mean ing of these lines was : 
"Do not linger on the shores of the sea, for there 
The song of life is soft and slow: 
Plunge into the ocean and fight the waves  
Eternal life is achieved through struggle." 
 
44. ID GREETINGS TO QUIDE-I-AZAM 
In September 1944 while he was in Bombay Gandhiji s ent four  chapatis  to 
Quide-i-Azam Jinnah on the Id day along with his Id  greetings. Intimate talks 
between the two leaders were then proceeding at the  latter's residence with a 
view to solve the political problem which was getti ng more and more 
complicated on account of the extreme divergences b etween the Congress and 
League standpoints. When Gandhiji was walking down from the Quide-i-Azam's 
residence to Birla House a press correspondent made  the suggestion to him that 
he should invite the League President to the evenin g prayer. Gandhiji smilingly 
remarked in reply: "You are all influential people.  Why don't you ask the Quide-
i-Azam kindly to join my prayer?'' 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29   
45. A TRIBUTE TO BA 
The announcement by Gandhiji in May 1933 of a 21 da ys' fast "for the 
purification of himself and his associates" came li ke a thunderbolt to Kasturba 
and Mirabahen. The latter on behalf of Ba and herse lf sent the following 
message to Gandhiji on hearing the news: 
"Got news of fast only today. Ba wishes me say she is greatly shocked and 
feels decision very wrong but you have not listened  to any others, so you will 
not hear her. She sends her heart-felt prayers. I a m stunned but know it is the 
voice of God and in that sense rejoice even in the midst of anguish. Deepest 
prayers. Love Mirabahen." 
Gandhiji's eyes were wet with tears of joy as he wr ote out this telegram to 
them: 
"Tell Ba that her father imposed on her a companion  whose weight would 
have killed any other woman. I treasure her love. S he must remain courageous 
to the end. For you, I have nothing but only thanks  to God for giving you to me. 
You must prove your bravery by sustained joy over t his newest of God's 
decisions for me. Love." 
 
46. GANDHIJI'S MINUS FOURS 
Reuter wired that Gandhiji's first appearance at Ma rseilles in September 
1931, on his way to England to attend the Round Tab le Conference, had 
dissipated existing prejudice against him. His infe ctious smile had captured all, 
and he submitted himself humbly to volleys of quest ions from French 
journalists. Reuter added, "Gandhiji confessed that  he felt nervous on 
approaching England after an absence of seventeen y ears." But nervousness did 
not appear to have interfered with his ability to m ake jokes. When asked if he This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  would traverse the streets of London in loin cloth,  Gandhiji answered a French 
journalist, "You in your country wear plus fours, I  prefer minus fours." 
Nor did Gandhiji's nervousness prevent him from mak ing a declaration to 
the customs officer, "I am a poor mendicant. My ear thly possessions consist of 
six spinning wheels, 1 prison dishes, a can of goat's milk, six homespun loin 
cloths and towels, and my reputation which cannot b e worth much." 
Of course, the customs inspector passed him. 
 
1  Evidently Reuter's correspondent at Marseilles e rred in reporting that Gandhiji in his 
declaration to the customs officer had stated that he had in his possession six spinning 
wheels. As a. matter of fact, Gandhiji had carried only one spinning wheel with him to 
England. 
 
47. POWER OF SILENCE 
During his visit to Gandhiji at Sevagram in Decembe r 1938 Dr. John Mott, 
the great Christian evangelist, asked Gandhiji if h e had continued to find 
silence necessary in his spiritual quest. 
Answering the question Gandhiji said, "Only a littl e while ago I remained 
completely silent nearly two months and the spell o f that silence has not yet 
been broken. I broke it today when you came. Nowada ys I go into silence at 
prayer time every evening and break it for visitors  at 2 o'clock. I broke it today 
when you came. It has now become both a physical an d spiritual necessity for 
me. Originally it was taken to relieve the sense of  pressure. Then I wanted time 
for writing. After, however, I had practised it for  some time I saw the spiritual 
value of it. It suddenly flashed across my mind tha t that was the time when I 
could best hold communion with God. And now I feel as though I was naturally 
built for silence. Of course, I may tell you that f rom my childhood I have been 
noted for silence. I was silent at school, and in m y London days I was taken for 
a silent drone by friends." 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31   
48. GANDHI CIGARETTES 
A friend sent Gandhiji a label of a cigarette packe t bearing his portrait, 
and the cigarettes were called "Mahatma Gandhi Ciga rettes". Gandhiji's 
annoyance at such an abuse of his name could be see n from the remarks he 
made on the incident : 
"Of all the abuses to which my name has been put, I  know nothing so 
humiliating to me as the deliberate association of my name with cigarettes. A 
friend has sent me a label purporting to bear my po rtrait. The cigarettes are 
called "Mahatma Gandhi Cigarettes". Now I have a ho rror of smoking as I have of 
wines. Smoking I consider to be a vice. It deadens one's conscience and is often 
worse than drink in that it acts imperceptibly. It is a habit which is difficult to 
get rid of when once it seizes hold of a person. It  is an expensive vice. It fouls 
the breath, discolours the teeth and sometimes even  causes cancer. It is an 
unclean habit. No man has received my permission to  associate my name with 
cigarettes. I should feel thankful to the unknown f irm were it to withdraw the 
labels from the market or if the public would refus e to buy packets bearing 
such labels." 
 
49. A HUMILIATING SPECTACLE 
During the historical Dandi March in March 1930, Ga ndhiji delivered an 
introspective speech at Bhatgam (Dt. Surat), confes sing the lapses to which 
some of the pilgrims of the March had fallen. In th e course of the speech 
Gandhiji made a touching reference to a labourer wh o was made to carry a 
Kitson burner for the night marches : 
"We may not consider anybody as low. I observed tha t you had provided for 
the night journey a heavy Kitson burner mounted on a stool which the poor 
labourer carried on his head. This was a humiliatin g sight. This man was being 
goaded to walk fast. I could not bear the sight. I,  therefore, put on speed and This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32  outraced the whole company. But it was no use. The man was made to run 
after me. The humiliation was complete. If the weig ht had to be carried, I 
should have loved to see someone among ourselves ca rrying it. We would then 
soon dispense both with the stool and the burner. N o labourer would carry such 
a load on his head. We rightly object to  begar  (forced labour). But what was 
this if it was not  begar ?  If then we do not quickly mend our ways, there is no 
Swaraj such as you and I have put before the people . 
 
50. A PRESENT FROM MAULANA MOHAMMED ALI 
On 8th October 1924, the day Gandhiji broke his 21 days' fast at Delhi, he wrote 
to Maulana Mohammed Ali as follows acknowledging ti  ssent of a cow made to 
him by the latter as a token of Hindu-Muslim unity : 
"My dear Brother, 
You are more than a brother to me. I have seen the cow. My bed was lifted 
to enable me to see her. What love that has prompte d the act ! May the bond 
between you twins and me fructify into an indissolu ble bond between Hindus 
and Mussalmans for the good of our respective faith s, for the good of our 
country and for the good of humanity. Yes, God is G reat. He can work wonders. 
Yours ever, 
 M. K. Gandhi" 
[The letter was written by Gandhiji himself and sig ned in Urdu.] 
 
51. CHRIST RECRUCIFIED 
On his way back to India from the Second Round Tabl e Conference in 1931, 
Gandhiji halted for a day at Rome, where he was int roduced to Mussolini, the 
Dictator of Italy. He also paid a visit to the Vati can, where, on being shown the 
famous painting of the Crucified Christ, he appeare d to have been deeply 
moved after gazing at it. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  Referring to the picture he was reported to have , said later : "What would 
not I have given to be able to bow my head before t he living image at the 
Vatican of Christ Crucified ? It was with a wrench that I could tear myself away 
from the scene of living tragedy. I saw there at on ce that nations like 
individuals could only be made through the agony of  the Cross and in no other 
way. Joy comes not out of infliction of pain on oth ers but out of pain 
voluntarily borne by oneself." 
 
52. RETORT TO A SCIENTIST 
One afternoon to the Sabarmati Ashram came Dr. P. C . Roy, the renowned 
Bengalee scientist. "So you have given up taking mi lk?" he exclaimed as soon as 
he saw Gandhiji, and added something about the -nec essity of vitamins. 
"Not given up," said Gandhiji, correcting him, "but  only discontinued for 
the time being. But do you not remember your own wo rds about tooth powders? 
: 'We manufacture tooth powders in our Bengal Chemi cal Works only for fools; 
for myself I find chalk powder good enough?' Even s o it is with scientific 
theories; they are implicitly believed in by fools only, wise men take them with 
a grain of salt. Only today I was reading an articl e in which the vitamin theory 
was challenged." 
The Bengal savant found the joke too much after his  heart to contradict it, 
and passed on to other subjects. 
 
53. HIS “WOMANLINESS”  
Many who came in intimate contact with Gandhiji not iced that he was 
more womanly than most women they came across. Trib ute to this unique trait 
in his character has been borne by both Mr. and Mrs . H.S.L. Polak. 
Mr. Polak has remarked, "Gandhi has proved beyond d ispute the theory 
that the best men and the best women combine in the m the best qualities of This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  each other. No woman could excel him in patience or  endurance, none could be 
more long-suffering." 
Mrs. Polak has said, "Mahatma Gandhi has been given  the love of many 
women for his womanliness. I often see in imaginati on Mahatmaji as I 
frequently saw him in South Africa walking up and d own a room with young 
child in his arms, soothing it in the almost uncons cious way a woman does, and 
at the same time, discussing with the utmost clearn ess, pressing political 
questions." 
 
54. A CERTIFICATE FROM GOKHALE 
When Gopal Krishna Gokhale went to South Africa he had taken with him a 
scarf which was a gift from Justice Mahadev Govind Ranade. Gokhale treasured 
the memento with the utmost care and used it only o n special occasions. One 
such occasion turned out to be the banquet given in  his honour by the 
Johannesburg Indians. The scarf was creased and nee ded ironing. It was not 
possible to send it to the laundry and get it back in time. Gandhiji offered to 
try his art. 
"I can trust to your capacity as a lawyer, but not as a washerman,”; Gokhale. 
"What if you should soil it ? Do you know what it m eans to me?" With this he 
narrated to Gandhiji, with much joy, the story of t he gift. 
Gandhiji still insisted, guaranteed good work, got Gokhale's permission to 
iron it, and won his certificate. "After that," sai d Gandhiji, "I did not mind if the 
rest of the world refused me its certificate." 
 
55. "NOTHING TOO SMALL FOR HIM" 
Acharya Kaka Kalelkar, who was with Gandhiji in Bom bay at the time of the 
Congress Session there in 1915 relates the followin g story revealing how great 
the latter could be even in small things: This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35  One day I noticed him searching furiously for somet hing in an agitated 
mood. 
I asked him, "Bapu, what are you searching for?" 
"A small pencil," he answered. 
I took one out of my attache case to give him. 
"No, no. I want the small pencil I am searching for ," Bapuji said. 
"Use this for the moment, Bapuji, and I shall searc h for yours later," I 
replied. 
"You do not understand, Kaka," he said, "I should n ot lose that pencil. It 
was given to me in Madras by the young son of G. A.  Natesan. And with what 
affection he ran and gave it to me; and how can I a fford to lose it ?" 
We both searched the rogue of a pencil and Bapuji f elt at ease only after it 
was found. 
The pencil was hardly one inch long ! 
 
56. "ARE YOU A MAHATMA ?" 
A correspondent once sent Gandhiji a formidable lis t of questions. The first 
question was: 
"Are you really a Mahatma ?" 
Gandhiji's reply was: "I do not feel like being one . But I do know that I am 
among the humblest of God's creatures." 
Q. : If so, will you define the word Mahatma ? 
A. :  Not being acquainted with one, I cannot give you a ny definition. 
Q. : If not, did you ever tell your followers that you are not one ? 
A. :  The more I repudiate, the more it is used. 
Q. : Is it a fact that formerly you travelled third  class in railway trains and 
now you travel in special trains and first class ca rriages ? This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36  A.: Alas ! the correspondent is correctly informed. Th e Mahatma-ship is 
responsible for the special trains, and the earthy case for the degradation to 
the second class. 
Q.: In what relation do you stand to Count Tolstoy ? 
A.: As a devoted admirer who owes much in life to him.  
Q.: What will your own position be when Swaraj is o btained? 
A.: I would certainly like a prolonged and perhaps wel l-deserved holiday. 
 
57. LITTLE HEROINES OF INDIA 
During his "begging tours" in the cause of Harijan uplift, Gandhiji used to 
ask even little girls, who came to garland him or t o make presents to him, to 
part with the jewellery they had on their person. H e wanted the little ones not 
only to learn to do without costly and wasteful aid s to beauty but also to pass 
through the crucible of self- sacrifice so that the y might turn out in later life to 
be real heroines of whom their country might be pro ud. 
Thus, at Bhopal when a girl came to put flowers int o his hands he asked 
her, "Why don't you present your ring to the Harija n fund?" Saying that she 
would give the ring to him, the girl tried to remov e it from her finger. Gandhiji 
then told her that her parents might question her i f she parted with the ring, 
but the girl persisted in her decision to present i t to him. He still pressed her to 
keep the ring to herself, but this caused her so gr eat disappointment that 
Gandhiji felt the necessity of accepting the presen t. The ring, however, could 
not be removed from the finger easily and water had  to be fetched and applied 
to the finger before it could be taken off. The gir l was extremely pleased when 
at last the ring was removed and she was able to ma ke a gift of it to Gandhiji. 
At Vizag a small girl came to put a garland of Khad i yarn round his neck. He 
took the opportunity to catch hold of her hand and ask for the bangles she was 
wearing. When she looked in the direction of her fa ther for permission, the 
latter gladly gave it and she too was happy to make  the sacrifice. Her example This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37  was followed by another little girl of eight who ca me up to him and holding out 
her hand asked him to remove her bangle too. 
 
58. NO TEMPLE FOR GANDHIJI 
"It was my desire to dedicate a temple of Krishna t o Gandhiji. But when I 
broached the subject to Gandhiji (in May 1941) he b urst out laughing and then 
assuming a serious tone, said : 
'Yes, the suggestion is good, you wish to do this w ith all good intentions. 
You see I have been fighting all my life against al l kinds of superstitions which 
have corrupted our society and religion and pulled it down to the present level. 
Your building a temple in the Ashram and dedicating  it to me will in due course 
of time accrue round it new kinds of superstitions against which you will not be 
able to fight. So instead of creating unity among t he different castes and 
creeds you will, even without your meaning it, crea te a Gandhi caste. I do not 
want any such thing to be done. But if you believe in what I have lived for, I 
could suggest to you this. Allot a place for prayer  in your Ashram and plant 
round it good flower trees. Invite everyone irrespe ctive of caste, creed or 
religion to visit your place and pray there. The sh ower of flowers from the trees 
on the prayer ground and their refreshing and pleas ant odour when you 
assemble there for prayers will create a proper atm osphere for devotion.' 
This suggestion was so very sound that I gave up th e idea of building a 
temple. I planted flower trees around the prayer gr ounds in the Kripa-Ashram." 
- Bhikku Nirmalananda of Tiruvennainalur 
 
 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38   
59. PRAYERS AGAINST ATOM BOMBS 
One of the last foreign press correspondents to int erview Gandhiji before 
his death was Miss Margaret Bourke White of U.S.A. One of the questions she 
put to him was : 
"Americans are filled with foreboding, particularly  about atomic bombs. 
How could you use non-violence against atomic bombs  ?"  
Gandhiji answered : "How shall I answer that query?  Atomic bombs could be 
met by prayerful action.” 
Question : "Would you pray while planes are overhea d ?" 
Answer : "I would come out in the open and let the pilot see that I have not 
the face of evil against him. The pilot, of course,  cannot see my face at such a 
height, but that longing in my heart that he should  not come to harm would 
reach up to him and his eyes would be opened. If th ose who were done to 
death in Hiroshima by the atom bomb had died with t hat prayerful action and 
died openly with prayer in their hearts without utt ering a groan, the war would 
not have ended as disgracefully as it has. It is a question now whether the 
victors are really victors or victims. The world is  not at peace. It is still more 
dreadful." 
 
60. "MORE BEAUTIFUL THAN ALL ORNAMENTS" 
During his tour of Southern India in connection wit h the anti-untouchability 
movement, an incident took place in Badagara in Mal abar which visibly moved 
Gandhiji. In response to his appeal at the public m eeting there a girl named 
Kaumudi came forward and gave up her bangles. Altho ugh Gandhiji was 
satisfied with it the girl was not. She then took o ut her gold chain from her 
neck and gave it to him. Gandhiji thought that the presentation would end 
there. But the girl was not to be stopped. Her hand s almost unconsciously 
travelled to her ears and a pair of beautiful jewel led ear-rings were passed on 
to him. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39  This incident, said the Mahatma later, touched his heart and gave him fresh 
inspiration. He had tried to conceal his emotion, b ut he could not say how far 
he succeeded. Gandhiji asked if the girl had her pa rents' consent for this 
presentation. Her father was only pleased. All the girl asked for in return for 
the ornaments was an autograph, but Gandhiji was pr epared to give her much 
more than that. He wrote on a piece of paper in Hin di a sentence to the effect 
that more beautiful than all ornaments she had give n up was her willingness for 
sacrifice, and signed under it. The girl was very m uch pleased and she promised 
not to replace the ornaments. 
A Little Girl's Sacrifice  
When towards the close of his tour Gandhiji arrived  at Udipi, in South Kanara, 
an address in Hindi on behalf of the local Hindi Pr achar Sabha was presented  to 
him along with other public addresses. This Hindi addre ss  was read by a nine-
year old girl named Nirupama, daughter of a couple who were devoted 
Congress workers. She  had been taught by her parents from her childhood to 
speak, read and write in Hindi. When she had finish ed reading the address and 
was presenting the same to Gandhiji, she was asked by the latter whether she 
would give him the ornaments she was wearing along with the address. On this 
she removed the gold chain from her neck and handed  it over to him. "What 
about this thing ?" Gandhiji asked her, pointing to  the bangles on her wrists. 
She extended her hands for him to remove them, but while he began  to do so 
he noticed tears on her cheeks. He returned the ban gles to her, giving a gentle 
tap on her cheeks and saying, "I see you are weepin g. I cannot accept your gift 
with tears on." 
The girl's parents were not present on the occasion , being busy looking 
after the arrangements for Gandhiji's stay in the t own. When she, along with 
Gandhiji and others, arrived later at his residence , her mother, on hearing  of 
the incident, asked her daughter to give away the o rnaments. Nirupama then 
gladly removed the bangles from her hands and prese nted them to Gandhiji. 
She next started removing her ear-rings, but Gandhi ji stopped her saying, "Keep This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40  
it, that is for you. This is enough." He expressed his great pleasure at her 
sacrifice and asked her whether she would promise h im that she would not 
wear any ornaments on her person in future. She rea dily gave him that promise. 
It is full two decades since the incident took  place. Nirupama is now a 
practising doctor (M.B.B .S.). She has kept her word given to Bapu. You will not 
find  a single trinket on her  person. Bapu kept up correspondence with her for  
a while and two of his letters to her read as follo ws : 
 
  
 
An English translation of the Hindi letters is give n below : 
"Chiranjeevi Nirupama, 
I have received your letter. Your language is good.  Ornaments are 
unnecessary. They create in the girls a fascination  for outward beauty. In this 
land of poverty there should be a little (less, att raction for ornaments. That is 
why I am opposed to ornaments. 
23-5-'34 Bapu's blessings." 
 
This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41  " Chiranjeevi Nirupama, 
I got your letter. Against your tendency to cry the re is a remedy. You are 
still a child. For three or four years more you sho uld not speak in public. During 
this period you should practise speaking. When you have grown bigger, you will 
learn to speak automatically. This practice of cont rol will increase your ability. 
Wardha, 11-6-'35 Bapu's blessings." 
 
61. BAPU'S HUMANITY 
At the Gandhi Jayanti Celebrations held at Ranchi o n 2nd October, 1947  
Shri Jairamdas Daulatram, who was then the Governor  of Bihar, recalled two 
interesting incidents which took place in the Yerav da Jail, where, along with 
Gandhiji and others, he also was one of the prisone rs lodged in 1930. One day, 
said Shri Jairamdas, while out on a morning stroll with naked feet, a black ant 
got on Gandhiji's foot, and began sucking his blood . But Gandhiji would not 
brush it off lest he might hurt or kill it. He allo wed the ant to suck as much 
blood as it wanted to, though as a result of it he had to be in bed for a couple 
of days suffering from fever. 
Again, when a warder of the jail, in response to Ga ndhiji's request for two 
or three leaves of Neem to clean his carding bow, b rought to him a whole twig 
of that tree, Gandhiji felt that he had no claim on  Nature's products beyond 
what was absolutely necessary and he warned the jai l warder for having 
destroyed life unnecessarily. 
These were small incidents indeed, said Shri Jairam das, but the true greatness 
of a person lay more in small deeds like these than  in big achievements. "It is 
small things that count most in a man's life and sh ow the stuff he is made of. 
Thus, if any one wants to know and understand Gandh iji, his life and teachings, 
he must try to study and find out what true humanit y is and how it works in 
Gandhiji's everyday life and teachings." This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42   
62. “THEY OUGHT TO EXECUTE HIM” 
According to a writer [in  The Manchester Guardian (14-7-'47), the 
dismemberment of the Empire was prophesied as early  as 1922 by H.J. 
Massingham in conference with Lady Gregory and Mr. Bernard Shaw. 
Lady Gregory has recorded in her journal that Massi ngham expressed the 
opinion that if Britain wished to keep India subjec t they ought to execute 
Gandhi. Lady Gregory replied that another leader wo uld arise, which 
Massingham denied. "No," he said, "you can't so eas ily replace a saint." "G. B. S." 
then chipped in with the remark that they ought to have built a sort of Eiffel 
Tower and put Gandhi at the top, where he could not  be expected to address 
the people. 
Lady Gregory said that would have been as dangerous  as the Mahdi was in 
the grave from which he was dragged. She adds in he r journal : "Massingham 
hears from his authorities that India has no more u se for England, has learned 
all it has to teach; wants to be left alone. He and  G.B.S. agree that it will go, 
and the Empire is breaking up, and that Ireland has  taught her methods, 
invented by her so successfully, to the other count ries in revolt." 
 
63 "MY DARKEST HOUR" 
Satan, the evil in the human breast, is ever awake t find opportunities to 
tempt men and women with a view to test their power s of resistance. During 
his lifetime Gandhi ji too had to pass through more  than one such dark hour of 
temptation. What he regarded as the darkest hour of  his life was described by 
him to Dr. John Mott, the great Christian evangelis t who came to see him at 
Segaon in December 1936. Said Gandhiji: 
"My darkest hour was when I was in Bombay, a few mo nths ago. It was the 
hour of my temptation. Whilst I was asleep I sudden ly felt as though I wanted 
to see a woman. Well, a man who had tried to rise s uperior to the sex-instinct This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43  for nearly forty years was bound to be intensely pa ined when he had this 
frightful experience. I ultimately conquered the fe eling, but I was face to face 
with the blackest moment of my life and if I had su ccumbed to it, it would have 
meant my absolute undoing. I was stirred to the dep ths because strength and 
peace come from a life of continence. Many Christia n friends are jealous of the 
peace I possess. It comes from God who has blessed me with the strength to 
battle against temptation. 
Harijan , 26-12-'36 
 
64. DON'TS FOR RECEPTIONISTS 
The public functions that were arranged wherever Ga ndhiji went during his 
Andhra tour in 1929 were often too strenuous for hi m to bear. He wanted that 
those who were in charge of the arrangements of the  programmes should use 
their discretion and cut out all unimportant engage ments. For their benefit he 
issued a list of some "Don'ts". It ran as follows :  
Don't give the body more than six hours' work. 
Don't "make noises at meetings or anywhere else. 
Don't have processions. 
Don't go in for spectacular things. 
Don't have too many engagements per day. 
Don't take the body to places where there is no mon ey or no business in  
terms of the objects of the tour. 
Don't take it anywhere to satisfy anybody's whim or  pride. 
Don't take it to too many places. 
Don't make the mistake of thinking it is a mere lum p of earth; it is no doubt 
a lump of earth but it contains a very sensitive ti ny creature that notices 
everything done to the earthy case. 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44   
65. HIS LITTLE FRIENDS 
In spite of his preoccupations Gandhiji always foun d some time to mingle 
with children. When after a brief stay at the Sabar mati Ashram he was called to 
Calcutta on his political work, he bade the Ashrami tes goodbye, and his parting 
advice echoed his regrets that he could not be so f ree with the Ashram children 
as he had liked to be. He said: 
"In the end whilst I always shall recall this perio d of my stay in your midst 
with joy and satisfaction, my feeling is not free f rom a regret, and that is, that 
in spite of my being in your midst for all these da ys I have not been able to play 
with the children of the Ashram, to know them indiv idually by their names, to 
win their personal friendship and confidence as I w ould have liked to do. But 
what could I do? I was so hard pressed for work!" 
 
66. FLOORED! 
There was a Suppressed Class night school under the  Gujarat Vidyapith at 
Ahmedabad conducted by the students of the Vidyapit h. They used to take 
considerable pains over the school, which had a lar ge attendance of Dhed 
children. The teachers thought of the sweepers' chi ldren and induced the 
parents to send their children to the school, but a s soon as these came most of 
the Dheds withdrew their children from the school. The teachers, therefore, 
turned to Gandhiji to find a way out of the situati on. 
"So I went there," said Gandhiji, "very few Dhed ch ildren attended the 
meeting. One of them whom I tried to tackle said fr ankly taking his stand on 
the traditional religion : 'How may a Dhed touch a sweeper ?' 'But if the touch of 
the sweeper pollutes a Dhed, why should the higher classes touch the Dheds ?' I 
asked. 'We never ask them to do so,' he quickly rej oined, and floored me !" 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45   
67. NO USE FOR LOOKING-GLASS 
The United Press of India correspondent at Simla on ce elicited the 
following answers from Gandhiji to questions put to  him: 
Q : Why do you never look at your face in a looking - glass ?  
A. :  Since everyone who meets me sees my face, what nee d is there for me 
to employ a mirror ? 
Q. : Why do you sleep on the ground ? Why do you no t use a thick mattress? 
A. : I do all to merge myself into the poor million s of India. 
Q. : Why do you always travel third-class on the ra ilway ? 
A. :  The answer to this is embodied in the above. 
Q : Why do you not take salt and spices with your f ood ? 
A.: Why should I do anything which is not essential fo r my bodily need? 
 
68. A POOR WOMAN'S GIFT 
The women's response to Gandhiji's appeals for work  and money always filled 
him with hope and joy. To him it was the sincerity behind the action that 
counted. At a women's meeting at Tuni, an old manif estly poor woman, nearly 
75 years old, bent double with the weight of her ye ars, but with a benign face 
and carrying sparkling eyes, put into his hands fou r annas without any apology 
traceable in those never-to-be-forgotten eyes. Imme diately after, a Khadi-clad 
middle-aged woman put into his hands five rupees an d a copper. Gandhiji 
straightaway asked her : "Whose donation is greater , yours, or this old sister's?" 
Out came the bold decisive reply : "Both are equal. " This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46  "I was unprepared for this most intelligent and pen etrating reply. I was pleased 
beyond measure, and was glad to be nonplussed," sai d 'Gandhiji referring to this 
incident. 
 
69. IN DEFENCE OF NATIONAL DRESS 
To  The Pioneer , which was then owned and edited by Europeans and which had 
written deriding his national dress, Gandhiji wrote  as follows in its issue of 4th 
July, 1917 : 
"I wear the national dress because it is the most n atural and the most becoming 
for an Indian. I believe that our copying of the Eu ropean dress is a sign of our 
degradation, humiliation and our weakness, and that  we are committing a 
national sin in discarding a dress which is best su ited to the Indian climate and 
which for its simplicity, art and cheapness, is not  to be beaten on the face of 
the earth and which answers hygienic requirements. Had it not been for a false 
pride and equally false notions of prestige, Englis hmen here would have long 
ago adopted the Indian costume. . . . I avoid shoes  for sacred reasons, but I find 
too that it is more natural and healthier to avoid them whenever possible." 
 
70. THE GANDHI “TALISMAN” 
To a friend, who was tormented by doubts, Gandhiji wrote a letter. The 
letter was mislaid, but on a later occasion the wor ds were recalled to memory 
and transcribed. The following is the text of the l etter: 
"I will give you a talisman. Whenever you are in do ubt, or when the self 
becomes too much with you, try the following expedi ent: 
"Recall the face of the poorest and the most helple ss man whom you may 
have seen and ask yourself, if the step you contemp late is going to be of any 
use to  him. Will he be able to gain anything by it? Will it res tore him to a This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47  control over his own life and destiny? In other wor ds, will it lead to Swaraj or 
self-rule for the hungry and also spiritually starv ed millions of our countrymen? 
"Then you will find your doubts and yourself meltin g away. 
— M. K. Gandhi" 
 
71. A REBUKE TO STUDENTS 
At Sukkur the students presented Gandhiji with an a ddress. Gandhiji was 
asked to give his opinion on some ethical questions  that did not seem to be in 
keeping with the atmosphere. Upon cross-examination  the students admitted 
that they had not been consulted about the address before or after it was 
drafted. The unreality of the whole business hurt G andhiji. He described it as 
an unconscious untruth. 
"You have presented me with an address," he told th em, "whose contents 
you do not know. You have praised Khadi in your add ress but you have come 
dressed in foreign cloth. You have asked me questio ns which appear to be a 
mere pose. You wasted your good time which you coul d have much better 
utilized by sweeping clean the street of Shikarpur or doing some other piece of 
honest labour and giving the earning to the Lalaji Memorial Fund. Knowledge 
can be imparted to the  jijnasu  only. But seeing that you never knew the 
contents of the address, you could have no desire t o know the answers. I must 
therefore decline to take them seriously. If the fr amer wishes to have the 
answers he must seek another opportunity."  
 
72. THE ABODE OF HAPPINESS 
During his halt in Paris on his way back to India f rom the Round Table 
Conference in London in December 1931 Mahatma Gandh i addressed a public 
meeting of over 2,000 persons which had been arrang ed by local intellectuals. 
At the conclusion of his speech he answered a numbe r of questions most of This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48  which were put to him by his French audience. Among  the questions asked 
were: 
Q. : Does the happiness of man reside in knowledge or in ignorance? 
(laughter). 
A. :  In neither. It resides in each man himself and in the search of 
perfection and truth. 
Q. : Are all men capable of seeking perfection? 
A. : Yes, they have it in themselves. 
Q.  : A few years ago, I saw you dressed in European c lothes. Why have you 
abandoned them? 
A.  : I am poor, and like thousands of Indians, I do n ot allow myself to wear 
European clothes. First, because they are quite uns uited to the climate of our 
country and, lastly, because it provides work for o ur Indian workers if we  wear 
Indian clothes. 
 
73. KINDRED SPIRITS : 
"When I sent my book, which had just been published , to Gandhi," wrote 
Romain Holland, the well- known French savant, "I e xpressed the 1 fear that I 
may not always have grasped his thought and that I should like to correct any 
mistakes there may be, if he would point them out t o me. He replied to me 
from the sanatorium where he was completing his con valescence: 
‘Andheri, 
22 nd  March, 1924 
Dear Friend, 
I thank you for your kind letter. What does it matt er if you have, here "and 
there, made a few mistakes in your essay? To me the  wonder is that you ". have 
made so few, and that you have succeeded, though li ving in a distant and This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49  different atmosphere, in interpreting my ideas so c orrectly. It shows once again 
the essential unity of human nature, although it ma y be flowering under 
different skies. . . . 
M. K. G.’ 
 
74. “LIARS ALL” 
In the course of his Bengal tour in 1925, Gandhiji happened to visit 
Nawabganj. It had rained heavily all night, and the  school boys (of Haripad 
Bapu's National School), whom, Gandhiji wanted to m eet early morning before 
leaving, could not keep their time and were late. N ot more than five minutes 
could, therefore, be given them. "You all spin and wear Khaddar," said Gandhiji 
to them, "but tell me how many of you always speak the truth and never lie?" A 
few boys raised their hands. "Well, now tell me how  many of you occasionally 
happen to lie?" Two boys immediately raised their h ands, then three, then four 
and finally, almost all! 
"Thank you," said Gandhiji, bidding them good-bye, "there will be always 
hope for those of you who know and own that they oc casionally lie. The path of 
those who think they never lie is difficult. I wish  both success." 
 
75. HOW TO SERVE YOUR COUNTRY 
During his visit to England in the latter half of 1 931 in connection with the 
Second Round Table Conference, Gandhiji met a numbe r of his countrymen at 
the residence of Mr. and Mrs. Pardhi in Birmingham.  When someone among 
them asked him how best to be of service to India, his reply was: "Put your 
talents in the service of your country instead of c onverting them into £. s. d. If 
you are a medical man, there is disease enough in I ndia to need a11 your 
medical skill. If you are a lawyer, there are diffe rences and quarrels enough in 
India. Instead of fomenting more trouble, patch up those quarrels and stop 
litigation. If you are an engineer, build model hou ses suited to the needs and This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50  means of our people, and yet full of health and fre sh air. There is nothing that 
you have learnt which cannot be turned to account.”  
 
76. GANDHI AND THOREAU 
The view prevalent in some quarters that Mahatma Ga ndhi derived his idea 
of Civil Disobedience from the writings of Thoreau was declared by Gandhiji 
himself to be baseless. In reply to an enquiry he w rote a letter dated 10th 
September, 1935 to Shri P. Kodanda Rao, of the Serv ants of India Society, who 
was then in America, in the course of which he said : 
"The statement in that I had derived my idea of Civ il Disobedience from the 
writings of Thoreau is wrong. The resistance to aut hority in South Africa was 
well advanced before I got the essay by Thoreau on Civil Disobedience. But the 
movement was then known as Passive Resistance. As i t was incomplete I had 
coined the word Satyagraha for the Gujarati readers . When I saw the title of 
Thoreau's great essay, I began the use of his phras e to explain our struggle to 
the English readers. But I found that even Civil Di sobedience failed to convey 
the full meaning of the struggle. I, therefore, ado pted the phrase Civil 
Resistance. Non-violence was always an integral par t of our struggle." 
 
77. AN OBJECT-LESSON IN AHIMSA 
During his memorable walking tour of Noakhali Distr ict early in 1947 
Gandhiji halted for a few minutes at the house of a  Muslim villager, Asghar 
Bhuyan, at Dharampur. Gandhiji was given a warm rec eption and was garlanded 
by the Muslim villagers. Children of the house gath ered around Gandhiji, who 
patted them and said: "You are all my friends." 
Asghar Bhuyan showed Gandhiji one branch of a tree and said: "You see, 
Gandhiji, this branch has two kinds of leaves. Is i t not strange?" he asked. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51  Gandhiji gave a laughter and said: "There is nothin g strange about it. It is 
all God's creation. These two different kinds of le aves of one tree are like 
Hindus and Muslims of the same soil. But see how th ey are flourishing side by 
side in the same tree. They tell us that we should live as brothers in the same 
soil as these two leaves are living in the same tre e." 
The Muslim villagers were very much impressed at Ga ndhiji's answer and 
said that what Gandhiji said was perfectly right. H indus and Muslims should live 
like brothers of the same soil. 
 
78. AN INVITATION TO COMMIT HARAKIRI 
An English correspondent sent Gandhiji a cutting of  an article headed 
'Cheer Up', printed in  Britannia, (15-2-'29). The article contained detailed 
figures of Britain's conquered people, mercantile m arine, her exports, and 
boasted, "Ours, the greatest mercantile marine ever  known, carries more than 
a million pounds worth of machinery annually to Ind ia, from which country 
British shareholders, creditors and officials draw some thirty million pounds a 
year! 
The correspondent had written the following footnot es : 
"If Mr. Blinking Gandhi saw this lot, he'd probably  cut his throat on one of 
his own spinning wheels." 
On this letter this was Gandhiji's comment: 
"I have decided not to cut my throat yet for a whil e. I want to see the spinning 
wheel produce the whole of the billion yards of clo th that 'the greatest 
mercantile marine the world has ever known' carries  to India from England. 
Only India has to wake from her torpor." 
 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52    
79. A JAIL EXPERIENCE 
While Gandhiji was in Yeravda Jail, the prison Supe rintendent, Col. Dalziel, 
was anxious that Gandhiji should take butter. And t o take butter with, he 
issued a pretty large quantity of flour to Gandhiji . What transpired was related 
by Gandhiji after his release early in 1924. Gandhi ji wrote: 
"After some trial, I felt I needed neither flour no r butter. I asked that the 
flour may be removed from me, and the issue of the butter stopped. Col. 
Dalziel will not listen. What is issued is issued. I might feel tempted later. I 
pleaded that it was all waste of public money. I ge ntly suggested that I was as 
solicitous about the use of public money as I would  be about my own. There 
was an incredible smile. I then said, 'Surely it is  my money.' 
"How much have you contributed to the public treasu ry?' was the quick 
retort. I humbly replied, 'You contribute only a pe rcentage of the salary you get 
from the State, whereas I give the whole of myself,  labour, intelligence and 
all.' There was a loud burst of suggestive laughter . But I did not collapse for I 
believed what I said." 
 
80. RAMANAMA AS A CHARM 
“My nephew was ill. His relations did not resort to  medicine but to spells 
and charms for his cure. It cannot be said that the se did any good. Your mother 
too must have indulged in these things. Now, you ta lk of Ramanama. Is it not 
the same as spells and charms?" queried a correspon dent of the Mahatma and 
the latter's answer was: 
"I have, in one form or another, answered this ques tion before now. But it 
is well to do so again. My mother gave me medicines  so far as I remember, but 
she did believe in spells and charms. Learned frien ds have faith in them. I have 
not. And because I have no belief in such things I can say fearlessly that there is 
no connection between Ramanama of my conception and  Jantar Mantar. I have This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53  said that to take Ramanama from the heart means der iving help from an 
incomparable power. The power is capable of removin g all pain. It must, 
however, be admitted that it is easy to say that Ra manama must come from the 
heart, but to attain the reality is very difficult.  Nevertheless, it is the biggest 
thing man can possess." 
 
81. WHO ARE THE "UNCLEAN"? 
Mahatma Gandhi wrote the following letter in reply to the 'open letter' sent 
to him by Shri Tathachariar, son-in-law of the Ex-P resident of the Indian 
National Congress, Shri C. Vijayaraghavachariar of Salem. In this 'open letter' 
Shri Tathachariar had stressed the need for the 'pu rification' of the Harijans 
before they could be granted entry into the temples : 
"Dear Friend, 
What you have marked as an 'open letter' has been d uly received by me. I 
confess that your argument does not appeal to me. I  hold strongly the view that 
it is the caste Hindus who have to undergo purifica tion and do penance and not 
the Harijans, as even for their outward cleanliness  the caste Hindus are 
responsible. Internally, we do not know who is uncl ean, but we can infer from 
our past experience that the privileged and powerfu l are more unclean at heart 
than the down trodden and despised. 
Yours sincerely, 
M. K. Gandhi” 
 
82. GANDHIJI AND THE COMMUNISTS 
The Communists not only did not see eye to eye with  Gandhiji's creed, but 
also gave a good deal of trouble at Congress meetin gs in the third decade of 
this century. But as Gandhiji did not have any ill- will against them, he always This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54  tried to win them over. While at Meerut in 1929 he expressed his strong desire 
to see the Communist prisoners lodged in the local jail undergoing trial in 
connection with the famous Meerut Conspiracy case. 
And when he visited the jail, the prisoners were su rprised to see a visitor 
whom they expected the least. They greeted Gandhiji  with the words, "We 
frankly did not expect you to visit us." 
Gandhiji replied, "Of course, you did not. You do n ot know me. I may have 
my differences with you. You may even cause me trou ble at Congress meetings, 
but my creed teaches me to go out of my way to show  regard to my opponents 
and thus demonstrate to them that I can mean no ill  to them." 
 
83. "NON-VIOLENT" HONEY 
Once when Gandhiji made a reference to "innocent ho ney," which he was 
fond of advertising among his friends, one of them asked him what he meant by 
the expression. Gandhiji's answer was as follows: 
"Honey scientifically drawn by scientific bee-keepe rs. They keep the bees 
and make them collect honey without killing them. T hat is why I call it 
innocent or non-violent honey. That is an industry which admits of great expan-
sion." 
But can you call it absolutely non-violent? You dep rive the bee of its honey, 
as you deprive the calf of its milk," demurred the friend. 
"You are right," remarked Gandhiji, "but the world is not governed entirely 
by logic. Life itself involves some kind of violenc e, and we have to choose the 
path of least violence. There is violence even in v egetarianism, is there not? 
Similarly, if I must have honey, I must be friendly  to the bee and get it to yield 
as much honey as it will. Moreover, in the scientif ic bee-culture" the bee is 
never deprived of its honey altogether." 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55   
84. THE KALI TEMPLE 
Towards the close of 1928 a Khadi worker wanted Gan dhiji to accompany 
him to Calcutta. "If we could transform Calcutta we  should transform the whole 
of India," the worker argued. Gandhiji would have g one there and made it the 
centre of all his activities, but he gave out a sor rowful secret which he had 
harboured in his bosom for many past years. It was the Kali temple. "There lies 
my difficulty," he said, "I cannot bear the sight o f it. My soul rises in rebellion 
against the cold-blooded inhumanity that goes on th ere in the name of religion. 
If I had the strength I would plant myself before t he gate 0f the temple and tell 
those in charge of it that before they sacrificed a  single innocent animal they 
should have to cut my throat. But I know that for m e to do so would be unreal, 
a mechanical thing today because I have not complet ely overcome the will to 
live. And till I can do that I must bear the cross of my imperfect existence." 
 
85. "WORLD'S MOST COLOSSAL EXPERIMENT" 
"Gandhi gave us a scare. His was the most colossal experiment in history, 
and it came within an inch of succeeding." This con fession was made in private 
in 1922 —18 months after Gandhiji had been locked u p in jail under a sentence 
of six years' imprisonment — by Lord Lloyd, who was  Governor of Bombay from 
1918 to 1923, to Mr. Drew Pearson, the well-known A merican journalist, when 
the latter called on the former at Poona. A report of Mr. Pearson's interview 
with Lord Lloyd appeared in The Advertiser of Adelaide, Australia, wherein Mr. 
Pearson referred to the latter only as an "official "— "one of the highest in 
India". 
The ex-satrap refused point-blank permission to Mr.  Pearson to visit 
Gandhiji in prison, remarking, "The only way to goa l Gandhi is to bury him 
alive. If we allowed people to come here and make a  fuss over him he would 
become a martyr, and the goal would be a Mecca for the world. We didn't goal 
Gandhi to put a crown of thorns on his head." This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56   
86. BAPU AND BA 
When, soon after his return to India early in 1915,  Gandhiji, accompanied 
by Kasturba, paid a visit to Madras, they became th e guests of Shri G. A. 
Natesan, the veteran journalist. It would appear th at Shri Natesan, finding 
Kasturba in a discomforted mood on more than one oc casion, brought the fact 
to the notice of Gandhiji. According to Shri Natesa n, Gandhiji did not pause for 
a reply, but forthwith told him that "it was of her  own making," and added: 
"She wants me to give her money for buying costly c lothes for her 
grandchildren." 
On Shri Natesan jocularly observing that Gandhiji w as "a cruel husband", 
the latter quickly retorted as follows : "Look here , you are hard on me; it is a 
question of my forsaking my principles if I begin t o yield to her wishes in these 
and other matters. She knows full well my views and  is quite acquainted with 
my way of living. I have more than once implored he r to live away from me and 
save herself from the discomfort and live happily w ith her children. But she 
would not. She, like the faithful Hindu wife, insis ts on following me wherever I 
go." 
 
87. A MESSAGE TO MAULANA MOHAMMED ALI 
After his release from prison in 1923 Maulana Moham med Ali was torn 
between the Swarajist influences — most of the Swar ajists being his nearest 
and dearest friends— and his loyalty to Gandhiji wh o was still in Yeravda prison. 
So when Devadas Gandhi met him, he was anxious to k now whether Bapu had 
sent any message for him. There was a message and i t was to this effect: 
"I can send you no message because I am in prison. I have always 
disapproved of persons sending messages from prison . But I may say that I am 
deeply touched by your loyalty to me. I would, howe ver, ask you not to allow 
your loyalty to me to weigh with you, so much as yo ur loyalty to the country. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57  My views are very well known. I expressed them befo re I went to jail, and there 
has been no change in them since. I may assure you that if you choose to differ 
from me, it will not affect by one jot the sweetnes s of relations between you 
and me.” 
In a second the Maulana exclaimed, "Quite like Bapu ! I could have written 
it out before, I heard of it. He is the last man to  fetter anyone's liberty of 
thought and action, and that is why he is the fitte st man to be our dictator.” 
 
88. PUNISHES HIMSELF FOR OTHERS' SINS 
Gandhiji invariably punished himself, rather than i nflict any punishment on 
those under his care or those who professed to foll ow him, when the latter 
failed to keep up their pledges to him or sinned se cretly. His fasts both in the 
Phoenix Settlement in South Africa and at Sabarmati  Ashram for the moral fall 
of some of the inmates are well known. Swami Bhavan i Dayal, who lived with 
Gandhiji in the Phoenix Settlement for some years, relates a typical instance of 
such vicarious self-suffering on the part of Bapu. Once some young recruits, 
who had recently joined the Settlement after pledgi ng themselves to consume 
only salt less meals for a month, got so tired of t he simple dishes that they sent 
for spiced and delicious food from Durban and surre ptitiously partook of it. One 
of them, who had himself shared the food, informed Bapu of it. During the 
evening prayer, when Bapu questioned them one by on e, they all denied the 
charge and accused the informer as a liar. "At' thi s, Bapu," says the Swamiji 
"began beating his own cheeks with terrible force a nd said, 'It is not your fault 
in hiding the truth from me, I am to blame for it, because I have not attained 
yet the virtue of truth, the truth flees from me.' He continued striking himself. 
This was too much to bear and one by one the inmate s came forward and 
confessed the truth." 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58   
89. "PRISONER NO. 1739" 
When Mahatma Gandhi was a prisoner of the South Afr ican Government in 
November 1913 in Bloemfontein Gaol, his jail card, which is now in the 
possession of Shri Lokamal Gobindbux Malkani, bore the following among other 
details : 
No.: 1739. 
Name: Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi. 
Religion: Hindu. 
Age: 43. 
Trade: Solicitor. 
Date of Sentence: 11-11-'13. 
Date of Discharge: 10-11-'14. 
Sentenced: £ 20 or 3 months (on each of four counts ). 
Gandhiji was awarded 60 marks for good conduct. As he did not pay the 
fine, he had to serve the full sentence. The card b ears his thumb impressions. 
The card also bears the following remarks regarding  the prison diet which 
was supplied to him: "Allowed vegetable diet owing to religious scruples. Diet: 
12 bananas, 12 dates, 3 -tomatoes and 1 lemon-each,  2 ounces of olive oil and 
3 selected groundnuts.” 
 
90. PRESS FABRICATIONS 
When ex-Viceroy of India Lord Irwin (later known as  Lord Halifax) went out 
to the United States of America as the- British Amb assador, a writer in  Picture 
Post,  the London journal, indulged in the following bit of "story" telling: This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59  "He (Lord Irwin) went to India and remained five ye ars. He met Mohandas 
K. Gandhi and prevailed upon him' through greater r eligious fervour than ever 
India's scrawny little saint could muster." ' You can’t argue with Jesus-Christ' 
commented the Mahatma once, following a long confer ence from which he had 
emerged second best. 
"During one of Gandhiji's periodic hunger strikes L ord Halifax shrewdly 
remarked, 'Gandhi is now speaking in a language the  Indian people understand. 
If I were to get in the hallway of the Government b uildings at New Delhi, squat 
on the floor and refuse to eat a bit until the Indi an civil disobedience 
movement came to terms, the trouble would be over i n a few days. Of course, 
before those few could elapse, my Liberal, Conserva tive and Labour colleagues 
in London would send for me to come home and would have a padded cell 
waiting for me on my arrival.'" 
When Khwaja Ahmad Abbas, well-known Indian journali st, drew the 
attention of Mahatmaji' to the above, the latter wr ote to the former from 
Sevagram as follows: 
"The portion underlined by you is wholly false. So is the statement about 
Lord Irwin as he then was. Ours was a purely politi cal meeting." 
 
91. ORIGIN OF HIS LOIN CLOTH 
How Gandhiji came to discard his full dress which h e was till then wearing 
and took to wearing the loin cloth only was related  by him in the course of an 
interview. He said: 
"In 1921 Maulana Mahomed Ali was arrested at Waltai r whilst he and I were 
going on a tour to the South. He was torn from Begu m Mahomed Ali who was 
travelling with us. I was deeply moved. She bore th e separation bravely and 
attended meetings in Madras. I left her at Madras a nd went as far as Madura. 
On the way I saw in our compartment crowds that wer e wholly unconcerned This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60  with what had happened. Almost without exception th ey were bedecked in 
foreign fineries. I entered into conversation with some of them and pleaded for 
Khadi. For I had no other way open to me to secure the release of the Ali 
Brothers save through Khadi. They shook their heads  as they said, 'We are too 
poor to buy Khadi and it is so dear.' I realized th e substratum of truth behind 
the remark. I had my vest, cap and full Dhoti on. W hen these uttered only 
partial truth, the millions of compulsorily naked m en, save for their  langoti  
four inches wide and nearly as many feet long, gave  through their limbs the 
naked truth. What effective answer could I give the m, if it was not to divest 
myself of every inch of clothing I decently could a nd thus to a still greater 
extent bring myself in a line with ill-clad masses?  And this I did the very next 
morning after the Madura meeting." 
 
92. "THEY DESERVE THE CROWN" 
Replying to an address of welcome presented to him and Kasturba in 
Madras in April 1915 soon after his return to India  from South Africa, Gandhiji 
said: 
"Sir, if one-tenth of the language that has been us ed in this address is 
deserved by me and my wife, what languages do you p ropose for those who 
have lost their lives, and therefore finished their  work on behalf of your 
suffering countrymen in South Africa? What language  do you propose to use for 
Nagappan and Narayanswamy, lads of seventeen or eig hteen years, who braved 
in simple faith all the trials, all the sufferings,  and all the indignity for the sake 
of the honour of the Motherland? What language do y ou propose to use with 
reference to Valliamma, that sweet girl of seventee n years who was discharged 
from Maritzburg prison skin and bone, suffering fro m fever to which she 
succumbed after about a month's time? It is a misfo rtune that I and my wife 
have been obliged to work in the limelight and you have magnified out of all 
proportions this work we have been able to do. They  deserve the crown which 
you would seek to impose upon us." This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61  He continued: "These young men deserve all the adje ctives that you have 
so affectionately, but blindly lavished upon us. It  was not only the Hindus who 
struggled, but there were Mahomedans, Parsis and Ch ristians, and almost every 
part of India was represented in the struggle. They  realized the common 
danger, and they realized also what their destiny w as as Indians, and it was 
they, and they alone who matched the soul force aga inst the physical force." 
 
93. DUEL WITH A DOCTOR 
During his incarceration in the Aga Khan Palace Gan dhiji had contracted 
malarial fever, but the Delhi authorities would not  grant the request of the 
Bombay Government to place Gandhiji under the treat ment of Dr. B. C. Roy, 
the noted physician of Calcutta (and now Premier of  Bengal) who happened to 
be in Bombay at the time. After a great deal of cor respondence, permission 
was obtained for Dr. Roy to see Gandhiji at the Pal ace. 
Dr. Roy: "But, Mahatmaji, whom do you think I have come to treat? I have 
come to treat not Mohandas K. Gandhi, but the perso n who represents to me 
the 400 million. Because I feel that, if he dies, t he 400 million die; and if he 
lives the 400 million live." 
No reply was forthcoming. Gandhiji had no other alt ernative but to give in, 
and after a pause he said, "All right, Dr. Bidhan, you have won; so I have to 
place myself at your mercy. Give me whatever medici nes you like, and I will 
take them. But I wonder why did you not study law i nstead of medicine. You 
possess such a wonderful legal acumen." 
Dr. Roy proudly said, "God has made me a medical ma n because He knew 
that a day would come when it would be my privilege  to treat His most beloved 
son, our Mahatma Gandhi." 
"Nevertheless, you are arguing like a lawyer," Gand hiji said. 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62   
94. BAPU THE MISER 
"In the dining-shed in the Ashram at Sevagram there  hangs a board with 
this exhortation in Bapu's name: 'I hope all will r egard the property of the 
Ashram as belonging to themselves and to the poores t of the poor. Even salt 
should not be allowed to be served in excess of one 's needs. Water too may not 
be wasted.' I have been witness to this thrift ever  since I joined Gandhiji for 
the first time in June 1919 at Mani Bhavan in Bomba y. One of my duties then 
was to write letters as dictated or directed by him . Once after receiving his 
directions I took up note-paper and was about to be gin a letter. But Bapu, who 
had been observing my movements, promptly reprimand ed me with, 'Will not a 
card do?' And so it did. 
"Even before the war began, while paper was neither  dear nor scarce, Bapu 
would not allow paper written on only one side to b e thrown into the waste-
paper basket. All such  pastis  are carefully sifted out from his voluminous 
incoming correspondence. He utilizes the backside f or writing out drafts and 
other purposes. He cuts up one note-paper into half  a dozen tiny pieces and 
writes out as many separate personal letters to the  several Ashramites, 
dispatching them all in one cover. 
"Indeed, the Bapu, not only of the Ashramites but o f the famished millions 
of India, the votary of Daridra- narayan,  can  ill afford to waste even a particle 
of food or a drop of water," observes Shri Appasahe b Patwardhan, narrating the 
above-mentioned incident. 
 
95. GANDHIJI AT ADYAR 
In his reminiscences the late Shri G. A. Natesan ha s recalled an incident of 
the days during which Gandhiji stayed with him as h is guest in Madras soon 
after his return to India from South Africa in 1915 . Dr. Annie Besant had 
extended an invitation to Gandhiji to visit her hea dquarters at Adyar during his 
stay in Madras. When Gandhiji arrived at Adyar he w as received on the This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63  beautiful grounds of the Theosophical Society and e ntertained with gracious 
courtesy and charm. Gandhiji had the highest respec t and admiration for the 
venerable lady who had so completely dedicated her life to the service of this 
country. Dr. Besant conducted the distinguished gue st through the splendid hall 
and well furnished apartments and then led him on t o an unpretentious shed in 
the neighbourhood of which was the school foF the ' untouchables'. Dr. Besant 
was in a sense a pioneer in the matter of affording  facilities for the education 
of Panchamas, but to Gandhiji the contrast between the. palatial residence for 
one set of people and the mean quarters for another  was too much to be 
tolerated. 
He felt so poignantly that he decided on changing t he programme for 
staying there for the night and insisted on returni ng to his quarter in George 
Town. Shri Natesan says he remonstrated with Gandhi ji and pointed out that it 
would cause deep pain to Dr. Besant and that she wo uld be seriously annoyed 
with him also. Gandhiji was firm in his decision. L ate in the night, adds Shri 
Natesan, Gandhiji bade adieu to the quarters in Ady ar. 
 
96. THE WILL AND THE DEED 
The Congress Secretary at Kotri (Sindh), in present ing a purse of Rs. 200 to 
Gandhiji on the occasion of the latter's visit to t he town during his Sindh tour, 
apologized on behalf of the people for the paucity of the sum by expressing the 
hope that Gandhiji would not look at 'the sum but t he spirit behind it and 
accept the will for the deed. Gandhiji; commenting on it, said that one could 
accept the will for the deed only when the deed rep resented the maximum 
sacrifice that one was capable of. The 62 students of Kandiara who had 
presented Rs 65 could make that plea, but in their case they had paid nothing 
in proportion to their capacity to pay. He, therefo re, refused to accept their 
plea and hoped that they would still retrieve their  position by increasing their 
subscription. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64  The earnestness of the appeal obviously moved the a udience deeply, for 
they instantly responded by increasing their purse from Rs 200 to Rs 500. 
 
97. A NAMASHUDRA'S FAITH 
At Dacca an old Namashudra (an 'untouchable'), aged  about 70, was 
brought before Gandhiji during the latter's East Be ngal tour in 1925. He was 
wearing Gandhiji's photograph in his neck and as so on as he saw Gandhiji, he 
fell at his feet and crying profusely uttered his t hanks over and over again for 
being cured of chronic paralysis. He said that when  all other remedies had 
failed he took to uttering Gandhiji's name and one day found himself entirely 
cured. 
"It is not I, but God who has made you whole," said  Gandhiji. But, how 
could he believe? To him God had appeared in Gandhi ji's photograph. It was 
vain to argue with him. "But, my dear man," said Ga ndhiji, "will you not oblige 
me by taking that photograph off your neck?" That h e readily did, and quietly 
walked away with the name of God on his lips and pr obably convinced that the 
man who had refused to take any responsibility for having cured him could 
certainly not be 'The Gandhi Maharaj' who had cured  him! 
 
98. “THE STRANGE MAN FROM SOUTH AFRICA” 
Thus the late Shrimati Sarojini Naidu described her  first meeting with the 
Mahatma: 
It was on the eve of the First Great War that we he ard the rumour that a 
strange man was coming to England from South Africa . There was great interest 
in his coming. His name was Gandhi. 
I climbed the steps of a house in very unfashionabl e quarters in London and 
I stood on the threshold of an open door and I foun d a man seated on a black This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65  blanket on the floor with funny little boxes around  him, eating dreadful looking 
bits out of a wooden bowl, with a wooden spoon. 
He looked up and said: "O, is it you?" I said, "It is I." "Will you share my 
meal?" he asked. I said, "Certainly not, it looks d readful to me;" and so laughing 
we began a friendship that has lasted, grown, devel oped through all these 
many years. 
 
99. A PROMISE KEPT 
In 1921, during his Sindh tour, Gandhiji had promis ed to see the people of 
Naushahro and the neighbouring villages at the Padi dan railway station which 
he was to pass on his way to Hyderabad. But when th e train reached there late 
at night, he did not realize it was there that he w as to meet these good people. 
He was too tired to enquire nor did Shri Jairamdas Daulatram, who was in the 
same compartment with him, have the heart to tell h im that it was the same 
people whom he had promised to see. When Gandhiji d iscovered his mistake 
afterwards, he wired to the people of Naushahro exp ressing his regret for the 
mistake and promised to make a point of seeing them  when he next visited 
Sindh. He remembered his promise even after 8 years  had elapsed. At a public 
meeting at Naushahro (during his visit in 1929) Gan dhiji made a touching 
reference to this incident and thanked God that He had spared him so long to 
enable him to redeem his pledge. 
 
100. “WITH LOVE" TO DETECTIVES 
Gandhiji's last act prior to leaving Brindisi on hi s way back to India from the 
Round Table Conference in London in December 1931, was to give autographed 
photographs of himself "with love" to two burly Sco tland Yard detectives who 
protected him day and night throughout his three mo nths' stay in Europe. The 
sleuths, whose names are Mr. William Evans and Mr. William J. Rogers, were This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66  sent with Gandhiji as an act of courtesy by Sir Sam uel Hoare, Secretary of State 
for India, the Mahatma having expressed the wish fo r someone to protect him 
not from enemies but from his friends who, he decla red, tried to kill him with 
kindness. The two detectives, who became greatly at tached to Gandhiji, were 
deeply touched by his action in giving them autogra phed pictures of himself, 
but they were quite overwhelmed, when he promised t hem each the finest 
English lever watch from India bearing suitable ins cription.  
 
101. A PATAUDI STORY 
On the last occasion when the Nawab of Pataudi went  to pay' his respects to 
Gandhiji, the latter, says the Nawab, "wanting a ch ange from discussions on 
general topics of the day, suddenly decided to pull  my leg by telling me that he 
had made up his mind to challenge me at a single wi cket cricket match. Would I 
accept the challenge? I replied that I would on con dition that when the match 
was over he would allow me to challenge him in Poli tics. My proposal having 
been accepted, I proceeded to tell him with a serio us face that whereas I was 
certain he would beat me at cricket, I was equally certain I would beat him in 
Politics. Gandhiji laughed like a happy child and t humping me affectionately on 
the back said, 'Nawab Sahib,  apne to abhi se mujhe bowled ker diet  ('Nawab 
Sahib, you have bowled me out already'). What a gre at man! We shall not see 
his like again." 
 
102. SILENT SPEECH TO PRESS 
About the middle of June 1944 a group of pressmen, waited, on Gandhiji at 
Juhu, near Bombay, where he had come from Poona to recoup his health, 
shortly after his release from his internment in th e Aga Khan Palace. Gandhiji, 
however, would not speak to them, as it was his- da y of silence. This deeply This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67  disappointed the journalists. One of them then pres ented Gandhiji with a slip 
of paper scribbled on as follows: 
"We are not satisfied with this silent interview. W e are eagerly looking 
forward to the day when you are completely restored  to health and will speak 
to us as before. Not only we, but the whole of Indi a and a good part of the 
world are waiting to hear you.—Press." 
Without uttering a word, Gandhiji wrote as follows at the bottom of the 
slip and handed it back to the spokesman of the Pre ss: 
"Amen so help us God. The contract is that there' s hould be silence on both 
sides. You may read what you can from the silence."  
 
103. "A DELICIOUS LIE" 
"The papers say," said Sardar Vallabhbhai one day t o Gandhiji when the 
Sardar was staying with the latter at Sevagram, "th at Lord Linlithgow sent an 
advance copy of his speech to you. Was it for sugge stions or alterations?" 
"It is a delicious lie which needs no suggestions o r alterations, but a 
summary rejection." 
"But," said the Sardar, laughing, "you have a knack  of pleasing all gods. In 
the very article where you have a good word to say for the. Viceroy's speech, 
you have something nice to say for Jaiprakash and t he Socialists too !" 
"Oh, yes," said Gandhiji, joining in the laughter. "That was what my mother 
taught me. She would ask me to go to the Haveli (Vi shnu temple), and also to 
the Shiva temple, and you may be interested to hear  that when we were 
married we were taken to worship not only to all th e Hindu shrines but to a 
Fakir's shrine as well!" 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68   
104. HE WOULDN'T COPY 
When Mahatma Gandhi was at the high school in the f irst year, an incident 
occurred at the time of examination which is worth recording. Mr. Giles, the 
Educational Inspector, had come on a visit of inspe ction. He had set them five 
words to write as a spelling exercise. One of the w ords was "Kettle". 
Mohandas had mis-spelt it. The teacher tried to pro mpt him with the point 
of his boot, but he would not be prompted. It was b eyond him to see that the 
teacher wanted him to copy the spelling from his ne ighbour's slate, for he 
thought that the teacher was there to supervise the m against copying. 
The result was that all the boys, except him, were found to have spelt every 
word correctly. Only he had been stupid. The teache r tried later on to bring 
this stupidity home to him, but without effect. He could never learn that art of 
"copying". 
 
105. THE TROUBLESOME TOOTH  
When Gandhiji was staying in London towards the clo se of 1906 pleading 
with British statesmen the cause of his countrymen in South Africa, he 
developed a toothache. He was busy with his South A frican Committee when his 
vegetarian friend Dr. Joshia Oldfield called on him . Coming out from the 
Committee Gandhiji asked the doctor if he could tak e out the tooth that was 
worrying him. What followed had better be told by t he doctor himself: 
"I examined his mouth and found a very painful jaw,  and a tooth difficult to 
extract. 
'Go to a dentist,' I said. 
'I haven't time,' he replied, 'if you will take it out for me here and now, I'll 
be very grateful, for it disturbs my power of conce ntration.' 
I went out, borrowed a pair of forceps and returned . He asked the 
Committee to excuse him a minute, came into his bed room and, without a sigh This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69  or a murmur, or an indrawn breath, bore the extract ion of as difficult a tooth 
as I have ever taken out. For myself I wouldn't hav e had it out without an 
anesthetic upon any consideration. He sat still for  a few minutes, thanked me 
gently and earnestly, and went back to his Committe e...." 
 
106. THE SOLA HAT 
Gandhiji had a strong predilection towards the sola  topee  (hat) as a 
protection against the sun. He considered that hat as one of the real boons that 
the Western civilization had given to the tropics. He declared his views on the 
subject as follows: 
"My narrow nationalism rebels against the hat, but my secret 
internationalism regards the sola hat as one of the  few boons from Europe. But 
for the tremendous national prejudice against the h at, I would undertake to 
become president of a league for popularizing sola hats. In my opinion 
educated India has erred in taking (in the climate)  unnecessary, unhygienic, 
inelegant trousers and betraying general hesitation  to take up the sola hat. But 
I know that national likes and dislikes are not gov erned by reason. The Scotch 
Highlander will run the risk of being singled out b y his kilt as an easy target by 
the enemy, but will not abandon the awkward kilt. I  do not expect India to take 
kindly to the sola hat. It is in reality an easily portable umbrella that covers the 
head without the necessity of one hand being occupi ed in carrying it. The 
Calcutta policeman who shades his head from the fie rce sun by sustaining an 
umbrella in his belt puts himself in a double handi cap when pitted against his 
European fellow member. I may here draw the reader' s attention to an 
indigenous and effective equivalent of the hat that  is very generally worn by 
the poor farmers of Malabar. It is an umbrella with out the handle, made of 
leaves with a bark hoop to fit the head. It is chea p, thoroughly effective and in 
no way akin to the hat and yet almost just as servi ceable." 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70   
107. A LESSON IN CORRECT LIVING 
"I have to give you this evening an instance of a f olly of which three of us 
have an equal share," said Gandhiji at one of the p rayer meetings at Sabarmati 
Ashram, "or rather, my share is the biggest inasmuc h as, I, as the head of the 
Ashram, am expected to be much more vigilant than a ny of you." 
As many wondered what this could be, he narrated in  vivid and, as he was 
wont to describe his mistakes, in exaggerated detai l. In Gandhiji's room in the 
Ashram, between the walls which faced the river and  roof there was a piece of 
lattice work. It was meant for ventilation, but it let the sun's rays directly on 
Gandhiji's face. So he had asked one of the Ashrami tes to put something there 
as a screen. This man asked another, who immediatel y brought in a carpenter 
with a board. He naturally thought that a shutter w ould be better than a 
screen, and asked Gandhiji if he would like it. Gan dhiji agreed, but soon after 
the carpenter began his work, he seemed to have per ceived that he had not 
done the right thing. So he began to think aloud. H e first told the friends who 
were sharers in the mistake, then the ladies he use d to meet -every morning, 
and finally the prayer meeting: "Now this is not we  who are pledged to poverty 
may do. It ought to have occurred to me that a piec e of cloth would serve as 
well as this shutter which costs a couple of rupees  and three hours' labour for 
the carpenter. The cardboard or piece of cloth woul d have cost nothing and any 
one could have fixed it there with a couple of nail s. It is in these little things 
that our creed is tested. The Kingdom of Heaven is for those who are poor in 
spirit. Let us, therefore, learn at every step to r educe our needs and wants to 
the terms of the poor and try to be truly poor in s pirit." 
 
108. A REBUKE TO BANIAS 
When Gandhiji arrived in Dhulia in February of 1927  in the course of his 
Harijan tour of Maharashtra, the local merchants, w ho consisted mostly of This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71  Banias, insisted on presenting him an exclusive add ress as well as a purse in the 
address claimed him as one of them, as belonging to  the Vaishya i.e. Bania 
class. But they had not taken a true measure of the ir "casteman". This is what 
he told in the course of his reply: 
“It is not the Brahmanas nor Kshatriyas nor the Shu dras that lost India; it is 
the Vaishyas who lost India, it is the Vaishyas alo ne who can regain it. Indian 
history is replete with instances of Banias who hel ped and served the English 
shop-keepers to the prejudice of India. The shop-ke epers who came here in 
search of trade became warriors to protect their tr ade and became Brahmanas 
too to maintain their dominion based on trade. Our  Varna-shrama Dharma  does 
not say that a Bania may not be a Kshatriya and fig ht for the honour of his 
mother and sister, nor does it say that a Bania may  not acquire knowledge like 
a Brahmana and serve like the Shudra. The Englishma n combined all the 
qualities in himself and dazzled at his feat we for got our  dharma , we became 
cowards, we forgot the real work of the Bania, agri culture, cow-protection and 
and trade, and became traitors to the motherland. Y ou can retrieve the 
situation today by becoming true Banias again, by c apturing again the whole of 
the national trade....I want us to be the Vaishyas of the  Bhagavadgita,  the 
Vaishyas whose natural calling is protection of the  cow, agriculture and trade, 
for his own country." 
 
109. A NEWSPAPER HOAX 
Mr. George Slocombe, the well-known British journal ist whose able 
coverage of the Salt Satyagraha movement launched b y Gandhiji in 1930 earned 
him the plaudits of an impartial public, made himse lf responsible for giving 
currency to an extraordinary cock-and-bull story re garding Gandhiji. He 
published, on what he gave out to be "the best of a uthority", a description of an 
alleged encounter between the Mahatma and the Princ e of Wales (now the 
Duke of Windsor) at Government House in Calcutta, i n the course of which, This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72  according to Mr. Slocombe, Gandhiji prostrated hims elf at the feet of "the 
future Emperor of India" and implored him to treat Indians with generosity. 
Gandhiji's comment on the publication was conveyed to Mr. Slocombe in 
the course of a letter in which he said, among othe r things, "Well, Mr. 
Slocombe; I should have expected you to know better . This does not do credit 
to your imagination even. I would bend the knees be fore the poorest scavenger, 
the poorest untouchable in India, for having partic ipated in crushing him for 
centuries, I would even take the dust off his feet.  But I would not prostrate 
myself, not even before the King, much less before the Prince of Wales, for the 
simple reason that he represented insolent might. I  may allow myself to be 
crushed by an elephant but not prostrate myself bef ore him, but should 
prostrate myself before an ant for having even unco nsciously trodden upon it." 
 
110. A PROMISE TO HIS MOTHER 
When, after matriculating, Gandhiji sailed for Engl and -to study for the 
bar, an English fellow-passenger, older than him, t aking kindly to him, drew 
him into conversation. '"He asked me," says Gandhij i in his  Autobiography , 
"what I ate, what I was, where I was going, why I w as shy, and so on. He also 
advised me to come to table. He laughed at my insis tence on abjuring meat, 
and said in a friendly way when we were in the Red Sea: 'It is all very well so 
far but you will have to revise your decision in th e Bay of Biscay. And it is so 
cold in England that one cannot possibly live there  without meat.' 
'But I have heard that people  can  live there without -eating meat,' I said. 
'Rest assured it is a fib,' said he. 'No one, to my  knowledge, lives there 
without being a meat-eater. Don't you see that I am  not asking you to take 
liquor, though I do so ? But I do think you should eat meat, for you cannot live 
without it.' This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73  'I thank you for your kind advice, but I have solem nly promised to my 
mother not to touch meat, and therefore I cannot th ink of taking it. If it be 
found impossible to get on without it, I will far r ather go back to India than eat 
meat in order to remain there.' " 
Gandhiji adds that when they entered the Bay of Bis cay he did not feel the 
need either of meat or liquor. 
 
111. A BRITISH NURSE'S TAUNT 
Recounting the life in the Yeravda Jail after his r elease in 1924, Gandhiji 
gave to the outside world several interesting littl e known facts about the 
happenings behind the prison bars. He wrote : 
My very efficient English nurse, whom I loved to ca ll 'Tyrant', because she 
insisted in all loving ways on my taking more food and more sleep than I did, 
with a smile curling round her lips and insidious t winkle in her eyes, gently 
remarked after I was safely removed to a private wa rd escorted by the house 
surgeon, and herself : "As I was shading you with m y umbrella I could not help 
smiling, that you, a fierce boycotter of everything  British, probably owed your 
life to the skill of a British surgeon handling Bri tish surgical instruments, 
administering British drugs, and to the ministratio ns of a British nurse. Do you 
know that as we brought you here, the umbrella that  shaded you was of a 
British make ?" 
The gentle nurse as she finished her last triumphan t' sentence evidently 
expected my complete collapse under her loving serm on. But happily I was able 
to confound her self-assurance by saying, "When wil l you people begin to know 
things as they are? Do you know that I do not boyco tt anything because it is 
British ? I simply boycott all foreign cloth becaus e the dumping down of foreign 
cloth in India has reduced millions of my people to  pauperism." This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74  I was even able to interest her in the Khaddar move ment. Probably she 
became a convert to it. 
 
112. “PRAY FOR ME” 
One of the constant visitors to the hospital where Gandhiji was recouping 
after his release from Yeravda Jail in February 192 4 was an Englishman, an old 
military pensioner, who used to make it a point to come every other day with a 
bouquet of flowers, and get into Bapu's room unobst ructed by any one. It was 
simply impossible to stop him. Impatiently he used to rush to Bapu, shake his 
hand, and deliver his message of cheer in a few sec onds and walk away. "Cheer 
up, old man ! I see that you are very much better t han yesterday. I know you 
must get better. How old are you ? Fifty-five. Oh, it is nothing. You know I am 
82. Get better, please do." 
One day he stopped and asked, "Can I do anything fo r you, Mr. Gandhi ?" 
"No," said Bapu, "please pray for me." 
"That I will, but tell me if I can do anything for you. Please do tell me. 
Believe me to be your brother." 
Bapu replied with a smile, "Believe me I have among st my friends a number 
of Englishmen whom I regard as more than my brother s." 
The man was deeply touched and left after assuring.  Gandhiji that he 
prayed thrice every day that Gandhiji may live up t o his age, and also that 
many Englishmen were praying for him, and many offi cers were inquiring after 
him. 
 
113. UNFORGETFUL MEMORIES 
Describing some of the unforgetful memories of his comradeship with 
Gandhiji in South Africa, Mr. Hermann Kallenbach, w ho came to visit Gandhiji This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75  in Sevagram in May 1937 after a separation of no le ss than 23 years, told Shri 
Mahadev Desai that once, during their walks, there was a terrible thunder-
storm. "Rain was pouring down in torrents and the s torm and thunder made all 
other sounds inaudible. As we were trying to cut ac ross a road a tramcar rushed 
past us both, nearly grazing us and it was by the s heerest good luck that we 
were not killed that day. 'It would have been a glo rious death,' said Bapu that 
moment: 'that was the moment to die, because both o f us have been 
strenuously striving to live according to our ideal s. And there is nothing more 
glorious than to die whilst you are striving.’ Well , that is a thing I can never 
forget. I can even now see the tramcar rushing past  us, nearly knocking us 
down. It was during those talks that I decided that  if ever there was a man for 
whom I could lay down my life it was he. But let me  also confess that I have not 
the courage to lay it down for anyone else." 
Mr. Kallenbach also recalled another extraordinary incident in his life with 
Gandhiji. On their journey to England by boat in 19 14, Gandhiji discovered that 
Mr. Kallenbach happened to possess two costly pairs  of binoculars. Gandhiji 
knew that his friend was fond of binoculars, but th en both of them had long 
since decided to eschew luxuries and vowed to lead simple lives. Gandhiji, said 
Mr. Kallenbach, appeared very much annoyed when he found that the costly 
binoculars had been purchased without his permissio n. "He asked me," added 
Mr. Kallenbach, "to fling them into the sea. I had not the heart to do so. I said, 
'You might do whatever you like with them,' and wit hout the slightest twitch of 
conscience he flung both the pairs into the sea." 
 
114. BAPU APOLOGIZES 
When Shri Rajagopalachari and Shri Shankarlal Banke r were discussing the 
possibility of Gandhiji's being examined by doctors  prior to the commencement 
of his 21 days' fast for purification, (which was t o begin on 8th May 1933), 
Gandhiji said : "I cannot agree to any medical exam ination, as it would be 
tantamount to lack of faith on my part." This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76  "Then," said C. R., "you are conceding nothing and claiming infallibility." 
This irritated Gandhiji, who flared up saying, "You  shall not thus undermine 
my conviction and my faith. I am confident that I a m going to survive the 
ordeal. That should be enough- for me, and you as m y friends ought not to try 
to weaken my faith. I cannot agree to any examinati on of me by doctors before 
the commencement of the fast." 
The friends then left. Both of them were sorry that  they should have 
irritated Gandhiji's soul. 
In the evening, while taking our usual walk, Gandhi ji as in a flash realized 
his mistake and said that he had done a great wrong  to two dear friends. "What 
a frail erring creature is man !" said he, "even on  the eve of a purificatory fast, 
I gave way to anger against my dear friends. I will  tender an apology to them." 
Next morning, accordingly, he sent the following le tter to C. R. : 
"My dear C. R. 
You are dearer to me than life itself. I wounded yo u and Shankarlal deeply 
yesterday. It is no use my saying 'forgive me'. You r forgiveness I have, before 
asking. But I will do the very thing that I resiste d like an ass. I will submit to an 
examination now and at any time you like; by any do ctor, provided, of course, 
Government permit it. I feel that the result of suc h an examination should not 
be published, for fear of political use being made of it. I must say, too, that 
medical examination, if it comes, is not likely to affect the commencement of 
the fast. More when we meet. This is just to reliev e my soul of the impurity 
that crept in yesterday. Love to you and Shankarlal . Bapu." 
Next day, however, C. R. came laughing and said,  "There was no occasion 
for apology. The irritation was more on our side th an on yours and we have now 
decided to have no examination." 
- M. D. in  Harijan 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77   
115. WITH THE LEPERS 
A Baptist Missionary in England on furlough from In dia told a  Daily News  
representative of an invitation he extended to Maha tma Gandhi to visit a leper 
colony in Orissa. Gandhiji came in a cab and a loin  cloth. He addressed the 
lepers, and then at the end of his speech asked : " Why should I call those my 
brothers if I do not mix with them ?" And he insist ed that each of the poor 
stricken lepers should be brought to him. Disregard ing the signs and marks of 
this most loathesome of moral diseases, he shook ea ch by the hand, patted 
their heads, and spoke words of comfort to them. "H ow many men, great or 
obscure, would do that ?" the missionary asked. 
The late Shri Mahadev Desai too in his pen-pictures  of the Mahatma's life at 
Sevagram has left the following on record : 
"Among the patients in the Ashram at Sevagram there  is a leper. He was a 
political jail-bird with us in Yeravda and got lepr osy there, or had it diagnosed 
there, I forget which. He is a profound Sanskrit sc holar and talks with you in 
Sanskrit, making you feel as though it was as easy as your mother tongue. After 
having wandered for years as a castaway, having eve n gone on an indefinite 
fast out of loathing for the fell disease which is now in a considerably advanced 
stage, he rolled in here one fine morning, saying h e wanted to lay his bones 
here, that he knew he would have shelter here and w ould not go even if he was 
turned out. 
'How can I say "no" to you ?' said Gandhiji. 'If I harbour a son-in-law 
suffering from tuberculosis, why should I not harbo ur you ? There is Ba to look 
after him. Of Valji Desai everyone is fond and I am  sure he would be taken care 
of. But who will look after you if I don't ? I shal l build you a hut right near my 
hut, and you may make the place your abode. Even if  no one remains here you 
at least shall stay.' " 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78   
116. IN DEFENCE OF KASTURBA 
The very same Mr. W. S. Irwin, who had threatened t hat he and his fellow-
planters of Bihar would take the law into their own  hands if the local 
authorities did not compel Gandhiji to quit Champar an District, had the 
meanness to make an extremely slighting reference t o Kasturba (who had 
accompanied Gandhiji in his Champaran tour) in the course of a letter 
addressed by him to  The Statesman  of Calcutta, which was published in its 
issue of 12th January, '18. On this Gandhiji wrote a letter to the journal from 
Motihari on January 16, in the course of which, aft er remarking that Mr. Irwin 
had "unchivalrously attacked one of the most innoce nt women walking on the 
face of the earth (and this I say although she happ ens to be my wife)," Gandhiji 
went on to say : 
"A word only for my innocent wife who will never ev en know the wrong 
your correspondent has done her. If Mr. Irwin would  enjoy the honour of being 
introduced to her he will soon find out that Mrs. G andhi is a simple woman, 
almost unlettered, who knows nothing of the two baz aars mentioned by him, 
even as I knew nothing of them until very recently and sometime after the 
establishment of the rival bazaar referred to by Mr . Irwin. He will then further 
assure himself that Mrs. Gandhi had no hand in its establishment and is totally 
incapable of managing such bazaar. Lastly he will a t once learn that Mrs. 
Gandhi's time is occupied in cooking for and servin g the teachers conducting 
the school established in the  dehat  in question, in distributing medical relief 
and in moving amongst the women of the  dehat  with a view to giving them an 
idea of simple hygiene. Mrs. Gandhi, I may add, has  not learnt the art of 
making speeches or addressing letters to the Press. " 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 79   
117. THE FALLEN SISTERS 
The chastity of women was always held by Gandhiji a s a very sacred thing. 
It was in Cocanada in 1921 that he came face to fac e with the fallen sisters. 
Thereafter his thoughts consistently turned on the ways and means of 
ameliorating their lot and raising them from the so cial degradation to which 
the brute in man had reduced them. 
Describing his experiences in Andhra Gandhiji wrote  : 
"At Cocanada, just after the great public meeting, on my return to my 
bungalow at about 9 p.m. I had a visit from some wo men and girls. The light 
was very dim when I entered. There was something un canny about their move-
ments and their looks. Somehow or other the usual g reeting, 'Do you spin ? 
What will you give me for the Tilak Swaraj Fund ?' would not come to my lips. 
On the contrary I asked my hosts who the ladies wer e. He did not know. He 
enquired and after some hesitation the reply came, 'We are dancing girls.' I felt 
like sinking into the bowels of the earth. My host soothed me by saying that 
there was a ceremony attached before the commenceme nt of life. It made 
matters worse for me. It gave the damnable thing an  .air of respectability. I 
cross-examined. They said in the politest of tones they had come to have  
darshan.  'Will you take up some other occupation ?' 'Yes, i f it gave us our 
livelihood.' I had not the heart to close with them  there and then. I felt 
ashamed of my sex. I spoke straight the next mornin g at Rajahmundry, the next 
halting places. It was one of the most painful expe riences in Andhra. I suppose 
the sin is common enough in one shape or another in  the rest of India. All I can 
say is that, if we will have Swaraj through self-pu rification, we may not make 
women a prey to our lust. The law of protection of the weak applies here with 
particular force. To me the meaning of cow protecti on includes the protection 
of the chastity of our women. We will not have a re generate India, unless we 
learn to respect our women as we respect our mother s, sisters and daughters. 
Let us cleanse ourselves of the sins that kill the man in us and make us brutes." 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 80   
118. A WORD TO LAKSHMI 
At the wedding ceremony of his son Devadas, Mahatma  Gandhi addressed 
the following words to the bride, Shrimati Lakshmid evi, daughter of Shri C. 
Rajagopalachari : 
"To you Lakshmi, I need not say much. I believe Dev adas will prove himself 
a worthy husband to you. Ever since I have seen and  known you I have felt you 
have justified your name. Let your marriage strengt hen, if possible, the bond of 
affection that has ever been growing between Rajaji  and me. I need not 
emphasize the unique auspices under which the weddi ng is being celebrated. It 
is essentially a religious thing and may it prove t o you both the means for 
better performance of your duty. I should have had nothing to do with the 
marriage had I not known it is in consonance with r eligion and the fruit of pure  
tapasya  undergone by both of you in order to gain our sanc tion and blessings, 
which you have now amply deserved. It has been a gr eat effort on my part to 
say these few words; but I thought it essential for  me to bless you and warn you 
of the great responsibility y OU are taking upon yourselves; May God protect you. 
Only He protects, for, He is father, mother, friend  and everything rolled in one. 
Let your life be a dedication to the service of the  motherland and through it of 
humanity. May you, both ever be humble and may you both walk in fear of God 
always." 
And then to his son Devadas : 
"You have today robbed Rajaji of a cherished gem. M ay you be worthy of it 
and may you treasure it. She is a real Lakshmi. Gua rd her and protect her as 
you would Lakshmi, the goddess of all that is good and beautiful. May you both 
live long and walk in the footsteps of dharma.  May you live for  dharma  and 
have the courage to lay down your lives when an occ asion comes for  dharma. 
Let your life from today be a further dedication to  the service of the country 
and may you never give yourselves to idle pleasures  is my blessing and my 
cherished hope and desire." 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 81   
119. BAPU'S AHIMSA IN ACTION 
Bapu always believed that good evokes good, evil, e vil; and that, 
therefore, if the evil does not receive the corresp onding response, it ceases to 
act, dies for want of nutrition. That was his exper ience too. In all the South 
African jails through which he passed, the official s who were at first unfriendly 
to him became uniformly friendly because he did not  retaliate. Their bitterness 
was always replied with sweetness. 
A European warder suspected Gandhiji. He thought it  was his business to 
suspect every prisoner. As Gandhiji did riot want t o do any the slightest thing 
without the knowledge of the Superintendent, he had  told him that if a 
prisoner passing by salaamed, he would return the s alaam and that he was 
giving to the convict warder in charge all the food  that he could not eat. The 
European warder knew nothing of the conversation wi th the Superintendent. He 
once saw a prisoner salaaming Gandhiji and the latt er returning the salaam. 
Though he saw both in the act, he took the ticket f rom the prisoner alone, 
which meant that he was going to report him. Gandhi ji at once told the warder 
to report him too as he was equally guilty. But the  warder would do nothing of 
the sort. 
Gandhiji wanted to protect the prisoner, but was lo th to take the warder 
to task for his officiousness. He, therefore, menti oned to the Superintendent 
the salaaming incident without mentioning the conve rsation that took place 
between himself and the warder. The warder was surp rised indeed, but more 
than that he was convinced that Gandhiji bore no il l-will against him. From that 
moment he ceased to suspect Gandhiji. 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 82   
120. "THE BRITISH BANIA" 
"You talk of the impoverishment of Indians being th e result of British 
exploitation, but is it not a fact that the real ca use of the agriculturists' misery 
is the rapacity of the Bania and extravagance of ex penditure on the occasion of 
marriages and funerals? Finally, you charge the Bri tish Government with 
extravagance. But what have you to say to the extra vagance of the Indian 
Princes?" . . . were questions shot at Gandhiji by a member of the audience at a 
gathering representing various institutions held at  Woodbrooke Hall, London, 
during his visit to England in the latter part of 1 931 in connection with the 
Second Round Table Conference. Gandhiji's reply was  as follows : 
"The Indian Bania is not a patch upon the British B ania and if we were 
acting violently, the Indian Bania would deserve to  be shot. But^ then, the 
British Bania would deserve to be shot a hundred ti mes. The rate of interest 
charged by the Indian Bania is nothing compared to the loot carried on by the 
British Bania through the jugglery of currency and merciless exactions of Land 
Revenue. I do not know of another instance in histo ry of such an organized 
exploitation of so unorganized and gentle a race.' As for the profligacy of the 
Indian Princes, while I would have little hesitatio n, if I had the power, in 
dispossessing them of their insolent palaces, I wou ld have infinitely less in 
depriving the British Government of New Delhi. The extravagance of the Princes 
was nothing compared to the heartless squandering o f crores of rupees on New 
Delhi to satisfy the whim of a Viceroy in order to reproduce England in India, 
when masses of people were dying of hunger." 
 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 83   
121. ORIGIN OF NAME 'HARIJAN' 
How the name "Harijan" came to be applied to the '" Untouchables" by 
Gandhiji'is related by Shri S. R. Venkataraman in t he Thakkar Bapa Jayanti 
Commemoration Volume. He says: 
During his visit to Madras in December 1933 when th e Harijan leaders met 
Gandhiji and told him that they resented the word " Harijan", Gandhiji replied 
to them as follows : 
"You say that the Depressed Classes were not consul ted. They consulted 
me. That is the point. I have visited all parts of India. 'Why are we called 
Harijans?' I am asked. Why should they not have a b etter name? That is the 
generality of the feeling. ‘For heaven’s sake do no t call us coolies,’ they 
pleaded. At one time this word had a particular sig nificance. A whole race was 
called by that name. If it was not now used, it doe s not mean there has come 
about a change of heart. The offence to the ear has been removed.  That is 
what the new name has achieved. It is not, as I sai d, my coining. An 
untouchable pleaded with me not to be known by ‘Sup pressed’ reminds me of 
slavery,” he very rightly said. ‘I have no name to suggest; will you suggest?’ I 
asked. Then the man suggested ‘Harijan’. He quoted in support from Narasimha 
Mehta, the Gujarati poet, who had used it in his wo rks. I jumped at it. I knew 
also the Tamil saying ‘Thikkatravanukku Deivamay Th unai'. Is not 'Harijan' a 
paraphrase of it? They are God's chosen who are out castes. Tha_t is what 
'Harijan' signifies as applied to suppressed classe s." 
 
122. HARIJAN WORK FOR STUDENTS 
While Gandhiji was recouping his health at Parnakut i, Poona, after his 
"anti-untouchability" fast in Yeravda Jail in 1933,  a group of high school 
students came to see him. They stated that they wan ted to serve Harijans, but This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 84  their fathers would not allow them. Gandhiji laughi ngly said they should fight 
them, but he added, "How can you fight them?" 
He asked them, "What do you do when you want things  done. You cry. Is it 
not?" 
The students laughingly said "Yes." Gandhiji said :  "Then pry and weep." 
(Laughter) 
One student said that as their fathers were Governm ent servants they were 
afraid to join the anti-untouchability movement. 
Gandhiji at once replied : "This is not political w ork. Even Government 
servants could do many things. They could contribut e funds, and engage in 
their houses untouchables and bring up Harijan boys  and girls. There is no 
politics in that." 
"How could we serve them in schools?" asked another  student. 
Gandhiji : "In schools you can't do anything. You g o there to learn. Don't 
bother your little heads there, but out of school h ours you can do much." 
Question : "How?" 
Gandhiji : "Go where the untouchables are living, m ix with them, play with 
them and see that their quarters are kept clean; ta ke a broom and sweep. 
Teach them to be clean. Show by your own life that you don't observe 
untouchability. Show them that you love them. Treat  them as your blood 
brothers." 
Concluding he said, "You are too young. Day by day you will learn better 
and the knack of doing things in the right way." 
The students thanked Gandhiji and offered him garla nds and withdrew. 
 
123. HIS “DAUGHTERS” 
At various times various people claimed kinship wit h Gandhiji, only to 
advance their ulterior motives. Several times such cases were brought to the 
notice of Gandhiji. He considered it as one of the grave dangers that followed 
mass awakening. Here is one such incident : This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 85  "I have just read a notice in the papers that a gir l has been pretending to 
be my daughter and receiving on that account all ki nds of attention. I do not 
mind owning, I should be proud to own, thousands of  good, restrained girls, as 
my daughters. They will do credit tome and the coun try. The world will 
recognize them as members of an ever-increasing fam ily by adoption. As. it is, I 
have to remark for the tenth time that I do not pos sess the good fortune to 
have a daughter. There is a tiny 'untouchable' girl  whom I do proudly call my 
adopted daughter. She has brought happiness to me a nd I hope by the time she 
has grown up she will bring truth and humility to h er future field of service. 
Today she is a veritable 'devil'. She believes in a ll play and no work. She finds it 
hard to work without the ebony ruler which used to-  keep her straight in her 
paternal home. But I do not mind this charming idle r of seven years claiming 
me as father. There are also some grown up girls wh o permit me the pleasure 
of claiming them as my daughters, but then they mak e it difficult for me to live 
up to the standard they exact from me. They are eve r in danger of my being a 
discreditable father to them. But I must inform all  the girls of India that I 
decline to run the risk of being discredited by the ir forcible adoption. I want 
certainly to adopt all the exacting girls like the ones whose names too I dare 
not give to the world. 
"But the reported forcible adoption of me by a girl  is comparatively a 
harmless pastime. I hear that a gentleman by name M otilal Pancholi hailing 
from Udepur claims to be my disciple and to preach temperance and what nots 
among the rustics of Rajputana States. He is report ed to j be surrounded by an 
armed crowd of admirers and establishing his kingdo m or some other dom 
wherever he goes. He claims too miraculous power. H e or his admirers are 
reported also to have done some destructive work. I  wish that people once for 
all understand that I have no disciples. I have for  the time being at any rate no 
existence apart from the Congress and the Khilafat committees. All my activity 
is referable to these two organizations. None works  in my name; none has 
authority to use my name .save under my own writing ." 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 86   
124. "UNCLE GANDHI" 
While in London at the time of his visit to England  -in 1931 in connection 
with the Second Round Table Conference Gandhiji sta yed with Miss Muriel 
Lester as "her guest in Kingsley Hall in the East E nd of the city. Attached to 
Kingsley Hall was a Children's House between the li ttle inmates of which and 
Gandhiji bonds of great affection were soon establi shed. He was "Uncle Gandhi" 
to one and all of them—the name having been first g iven to him by a tiny tot of 
three and then caught on.  In his account of Gandhiji's visit to England Shri  
Mahadev Desai gives specimens of essays written by some of  the children on 
Gandhiji's birthday. Here is one by a girl  of  less than ten years : 
"St. Francis of Assisi was called the little poor m an of Assisi. He was just 
like Gandhi in every way. 
"They both loved nature, such as the children, bird s and flowers. Gandhi 
wears loin-clothes like St. Francis did, when he wa s on earth. 
"Gandhi and S. Francis were sons of rich merchants.  One night while St. 
Francis was feasting with his followers, he thought  of the poor Italians. He ran 
out and gave up his rich clothes and his money to t he poor and dressed himself 
in old sacks, just like Gandhi. 
"St. Francis of Assisi took some of his followers. They made huts of trees. 
Gandhi the very same thing. He gave up all his rich  gay life to the poor Indian 
people. 
"Gandhi's people gave him his loin-clothes to come to London. As he told us 
children who go to Kingsley Hall that he was not ri ch enough to them. 
"On Monday he has a day's silent for that is their religion. Gandhi for his 
birthday presents had wooden toys, candles and swee ts. He lives on goat's milk, 
nuts and also fruit." 
Here is another by a boy of ten, reproduced as it w as written : 
"Mr. Gandhi is a Indian who was educated as a law s tudent in London in 
1890. He gave up this to help his country get bette r conditions. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 87  "He has come to England for the Indian Round Table Conference to try and 
get back the trade for India. He has been trying to  get the 'Brahmins' to let the 
'Untouchables' come into their temples. They are ab out 6,000,000 people who 
do not know what a good meal is. He has given up al l his belongings and is 
trying, to be one of the poorest Indians. That is w hy he wears loin-cloth. 
"His food is goat's milk, fruit, and vegetables. He  does not eat meat or fish 
because he does not believe taken life. Gandhi is a  Christian Indian. 
"Mr. Gandhi spins his own cotton. He does an hour's  spinning every day in 
England and even when he was in hospital. He has ju st come back from 
Lancashire visiting the cotton mills. 
"He prays from Sunday 7 p.m. till Monday 7 p.m. and  if you speak to him he 
does not answer you. When he came visiting, he came  to my house and my 
mother Was ironing, but he said, "Don't stop for I have had to do that myself." I 
have shaken hands with him. The Indian word for 'Hu llo' or 'Good-bye' is 
‘Nomaska’. 
"W.A.I. Saville, 21 Eagling Road, Bow, London, E. 3 , 30-9-’31.” 
 
125. MAHATMA'S DEATH RECONCILES MOTHER AND DAUGHTER  
A dispute which had raged long and bitter between a n old woman on one 
side and her daughter and her husband on the other over the ownership of the 
former's husband's properties came to a dramatic en d in the District Court of 
Chittor on 13th February '48. The Judge had directe d the parties to appear 
before him that day, in a last hope of bringing abo ut a reconciliation between 
them. When they appeared, he explained to them how foolish it was for them 
to go on quarrelling and wasting their money in lit igation and he earnestly 
appealed to them to come to an amicable settlement.  But the appeal proved 
futile. 
Then the Judge, leaning forward over his table, sol emly asked the parties 
whether they  had  heard  the name, of Mahatma Gandhi. Looking at the portrait  This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 88  of the Mahatma hanging on the wall over the seat of  the Judge, they said, 
"Yes." 
This was what followed : 
Judge : Do you know that Mahatmaji lived and died f or the poor and the 
ignorant and the foolish? 
A. : Yes. 
Judge : Do you know that he lived and died for all of us? 
A. : Yes. 
Judge Do you know the whole world is crying over Ma hatma's death today? 
A. : Yes. 
Judge : Why is the whole world crying for him ? 
A. : Because he loved all and was a good soul. 
Judge : Do you not love him? 
A. : Yes, certainly we all love him. 
Judge : Do you know that Mahatma Gandhi's spirit wi ll cry to see you all in 
these foolish quarrels? 
A. : We will not quarrel any more. We give up our q uarrels. 
At the suggestion of the Judge the daughter and her  husband then 
prostrated before the old woman, who embraced them and blessed them, all 
the three, mother, daughter and the son-in-low, cry ing all the while and asking 
each other's forgiveness.. In the settlement finall y arrived at the mother was 
allowed to enjoy her husband's property till her de mise, after which it would  go 
to the daughter. 
 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 89   
126. DEATH OF HIS SPIRITUAL SON 
In December 1920, one day during the Congress week in Nagpur a Marwadi 
youth of 30 springs presented himself before Mahatm a Gandhi and said, "I want 
to ask something of you." "Ask, and it shall be giv en, if it is at all within my 
power to give," replied Gandhiji with some surprise . "Regard me as your son 
Devadas," the young man said. "Agreed," replied Gan dhiji, "only I am giving 
nothing, you are the giver." 
This youth was Jamnalal Bajaj, who, though not orig inally born with a 
silver spoon in his mouth, had been blessed by God early in life with opulence 
beyond the dream of most men. 
The effect on Gandhiji of this surrender on the par t of Jamnalalji was no 
less profound than on Jamnalalji himself. Bewailing  the passing away of this 
matchless spiritual son of his on 11th February 194 2, Gandhiji wrote patheti-
cally in  Harijan  (22-2-'42) : 
"Never before, I can say, was a mortal blessed with  a 'son' like him. Of 
course I have many sons and daughters in the sense that they have done some 
of my work. But Jamnalalji surrendered himself and his without reservation. 
There is hardly any activity of mine in which I did  not receive his full-hearted 
co-operation and in which it did not prove to be of  the greatest value. He was 
gifted with a quick intelligence. He was a merchant  prince. He placed at my 
disposal his ample possessions. He became guardian of my time and my health. 
And he did it all for the public good. The day he d ied he and Janakidevi were to 
come to me. But he died almost at the very hour he should have been with me. 
Never before have I felt so forlorn except when Mag anlal was snatched from me 
fourteen years ago. But I had no doubt then, as I h ave none now, that a 
calamity of that kind is a blessing in disguise. Go d wants to try me through and 
through. I live in the faith that He will give me t he strength too to pass through 
the ordeal." This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 90  On the third day of Jamnalalji's death, Gandhiji, w hile addressing a 
gathering of the inmates of the Ashram, broke down as he was saying : 
"Childless people adopt sons. But Jamnalalji adopte d me as father. He should 
have been an heir to my all. Instead he has left me  an heir to his all."  
 
127. "I AM STILL A STUDENT" 
“Mahatma Gandhi, you are here to address a unique g athering representing 
a variety of races and nationalities — people repre senting 57 countries . . . ; a 
gathering of 200 individuals with 200 opinions full  of reactions and incalculable 
absurdity,” said the chairman of the meeting at the  International Students' 
Movement House while introducing Gandhiji to a thor oughly international 
gathering of men and women students of London on 16 th October, 1931. 
Mahatmaji was cheered in respectful adoration as he  addressed the 
gathering in an affectionate manner as "Fellow Stud ents". He requested them to 
forgive him for his desire to pass time that evenin g in answering questions 
instead of inflicting upon them a set speech. He sa id : 
"I have addressed you as 'Fellow Students'. It is n ot a formula. I regard 
myself essentially as a student and if you are wise , as I am, (laughter) in 
afterlife you regard yourselves as students." 
"Throughout my varied experiences of life," continu ed Gandhiji, "I have 
come to the conclusion that our student life commen ces after we leave our 
Colleges and Universities and Law Chambers where we  are supposed to be 
studying tied down to our studies with the key to o ur knowledge and when we 
leave these premises we practically forget all that  we have learnt. 
"It is really in afterlife that we have to unlearn many things. The so-called 
student life is merely a preparation for the real l ife of a student. When you are 
in College or anywhere else you have got set subjec ts. Even in the optional 
subjects you have to learn them in particular fashi on because you are definitely 
hidebound. But after that stage is over you are fre e like a bird with wings to This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 91  soar high and the higher you soar the stronger you become. So I am still a 
student who has not graduated in the world, (cheers ). 
"When you are buffetted about and thrown on your re sources it becomes a 
tough job. If you give yourselves to study, if you dedicate yourselves to study, 
to eternal research, there is no limit to joy, ther e is no limit to pleasure that 
you derive from that study. My study consistently h as been the search after 
Truth. During the early days of my study and search  I could not consistently find 
Truth unless I invited injury against myself and no t against others. I could find 
Truth only when I eschewed all feeling of causing i njury to others, but when 
necessary, inflicting it on myself. Because, as you  must be knowing, Truth and 
Violence are opposed to each other. Violence hides Truth and if you try to find 
Truth by Violence you will betray the horrible igno rance in the search of Truth 
and, therefore, Non-violence without any exception whatsoever, I have come to 
realize, is the essence of life, that is, Ahimsa'."  
 
128. A TRAGEDY 
Though mighty crowds, hardly controllable, surged r ound Gandhiji 
wherever he travelled, he was spared the sight of a ny serious accident. Perhaps 
the only exception was during his tour of Almora Di strict in U.P. in June 1929. 
This is how he narrated the accident : 
"Throughout a life of continuous bustle lived among  crowds for nearly 
thirty years I cannot recall a serious accident tho ugh I can many narrow 
escapes. But in Almora on the day of my entry i.e.,  18th instant, and after a 
crowded meeting, as J was returning to my host's ho use, a villager named 
Padamsingh who came rushing, as villagers do, to th e car for  darshan , met with 
what proved to be a fatal accident. He could not do dge the car in time, he fell 
and the car ran over him. He was quickly carried by  kind bystanders to the 
hospital where he received the utmost attention and  hope was entertained that 
he would survive. He was strongly built and brave. He lived for two days, his This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 92  pulse was good, he was taking nourishment. But the heart suddenly stopped on 
the 20th instant at 3-15. Padamsingh died leaving a n orphan boy 12 years old. 
"Death or lesser accidents generally do not give me  more than a momentary 
shock, but even at the time of writing this I have not recovered from the shock. 
I suppose it is because I feel guilty of being part y to Padamsingh's death. I have 
found chauffeurs to be almost without exception hot -tempered, easily 
excitable and impatient, as inflammable as the petr ol with which they have to 
come in daily contact. The chauffeur of my car had more than a fair share of all 
these shortcomings. For the crowd through which the  car was struggling to pass 
he was driving rashly. I should have either insiste d on walking, or the car 
proceeding only at a walking pace till we had been clear of the crowd. But 
constant motor ridings have evidently coarsened me,  and freedom from serious 
accidents produces an unconscious- but unforgivable  indifference to the safety 
of pedestrians. This sense of the wrong is probably  responsible for the shock. It 
is well with Padamsingh. Pandit Govind Vallabh Pant  has assured me that the 
son will be well looked after. Padamsingh received attention at the hospital 
which moneyed men might have envied. He was himself  resigned and at peace. 
But his death is a lesson to me as, I hope, it woul d be to motorists. Although I 
may be twitted about my in-) consistency, I must re peat my belief that 
motoring in spite of all its advantages is an unnat ural form of locomotion. It 
therefore behoves those who use it to restrain thei r drivers and to realize that 
speed is not the  summum bonum of life and may even be no gain in the long 
run. I have never been clear in my mind that my mad  rush through India has 
been all to the good. Anyway Padamsingh's death has  set me thinking 
furiously.” 
 
129. AN INTERVIEW WITH GANDHIJI 
The following report of an interview which a Mr. S.  W.Clemens, of Meerut, 
had with Mahatma Gandhi early in 1920, appeared in the  Indian Witness,  a 
Christian journal published in Lucknow : This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 93  "As I talked with Mr. Gandhi, I marvelled at the si mplicity of his dress. He 
wore coarse white cloth, with a Kambal thrown over his body to protect him 
from the cold. A little white cap was his only head -covering. As he sat on the 
floor facing me, I asked myself, how can this littl e man, with his thin face and 
large protruding ears, and quiet brown eyes, be the  great Gandhi about whom I 
have heard so much. All doubts were set aside when he began to talk. I do not 
agree with all the methods that Mr. Gandhi employs to bring about the desired 
end; but I do want to bear this personal testimony of the man himself. Mr. 
Gandhi is a spiritual man. He is a thinker. In my s hort interview, I had the same 
heart-to-heart fellowship with him as I had scores of times with God's saints. I 
took knowledge that this man had been to the Source  of Christian strength and 
had learned from the great Christ. 
"Mr. Gandhi, what can nations of the West do in fur thering the all-round 
development of the East, and particularly of India? " Mr. Gandhi answered the 
question indirectly, "India is just now in the stat e of unlearning. She has learnt 
a lot that is useless and unprofitable. From my obs ervation of the West, and 
particularly your own country, I have learnt two ou tstanding facts : First, clean-
liness, second, energy. I am fully convinced that m y people cannot advance 
spiritually, until they clean up. Your people are w onderfully energetic. To a 
large extent, it has been energy after things mater ial. If Indian people could 
have that same amount of energy rightly directed, t hey would receive great 
blessings." 
"Mr. Gandhi, will you kindly tell how Christianity can best help India, in 
view of the spirit of nationalism that is abroad?" He replied, "What we need 
most of all is sympathy.  When I was down in Africa, I found this illustrati on. I 
had to dig some artesian wells. In order to search the pure flowing streams, I 
had to dig deep. Many of the people who come out he re to study my people 
only scratch the surface. If they would dig deep by  means of sympathy they 
would find a stream of life there pure and clean." 
"And you will kindly tell me, Mr. Gandhi, what book  or person has 
influenced you the most?" Of course, I Was prepared  to hear him say something This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 94  of the Vedas and several other Indian books with wh ich Christian people should 
be conversant; but I was not prepared to hear from the lips of the man the 
mention of three English books that had shaped his life and thought. He frankly 
confessed that he was not an omnivorous reader, but  rather a careful selector 
of the very best. The order in which he spoke of th e books was as follows : The 
Bible, Ruskin, Tolstoy. Speaking of the Bible he sa id, "There have been many 
times when I did not know which way to turn. But I have gone to the Bible and 
particularly the New Testament, and have drawn stre ngth from its message." 
I was anxious to know how our Meerut Graduates' Ass ociation, composed of 
the finest of educated men in the city, could furth er the city's welfare. In reply 
to the question, he gave me this one word :  Scavenger.  He said, "I employ that 
word in all its meaning.) If the members would get out and lend a helping hand 
to clean up the city, literally and morally, they w ould be doing a great work." 
 
130. A SERMON ON TRIFLES 
Gajaraj is a bright little boy of nine. His widowed  mother joined the 
Ashram (at Sevagram) some time back. The boy was pu t to school in the Nai 
Talim Shala of Shri Aryanayakam. He agreed to atten d school but on condition 
that Gandhiji would pay a visit to it. "Not to your  school," Gandhiji replied, "but 
I will come and visit the dormitory in the hostel, where you are to sleep." 
Accordingly two days before he left Sevagram (in De cember 1945) he paid the 
promised visit. 
"What I saw this morning made my sight, ache," he w rote in a note which 
he addressed to the school authorities before he le ft Sevagram, summing up his 
impressions of his visit. In front of the room whic h was used for the children's 
dispensary he found the ground all wet. On inquiry he found that the children 
washed their hands and faces there. In the dormitor y where the children slept 
the mats were untidily kept. A pen and inkstand had  been left lying on a mat in 
the middle of the room. He examined the ink-pots an d the pens. They were 
messy. He opened one of the beddings. The bed cloth es were unwashed. The This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 95  bed-sheet was torn in many places and an indifferen t attempt at mending had 
been made only at a few. The stuffing in the mattre ss had become limpy and 
hard from long use. Under the mattress was a heap o f unwashed rags. Bamboo 
screens had been put up in the verandah to provide extra accommodation for 
more students. 
He had intended to give not more than five minutes to the visit. He 
actually spent three-quarters of an hour in inspect ing and explaining things to 
the superintendent of the hostel. 
"There should have been a receptacle to collect the  water from the 
ablutions at the foot of the tree. Otherwise much p recious water is wasted. 
Besides it breeds mosquitoes. The torn bed-sheet sh ould have been patched up 
or doubled and turned into a quilt. I did much blan ket quilting whilst I was in 
prison in the Transvaal. Such blankets are warm and  lasting. Torn rags should 
not be treated as waste. They should be properly wa shed and kept. They can 
be used for mending clothes and in a variety of oth er ways. 
"Some boys, I found, had not sufficient winter clot hing. Why should not 
those who have more than their requirements be taug ht to part with their 
superfluous clothing for those who were insufficien tly provided? That would be 
a fine object-lesson in mutual aid. 
"And why bamboo screens in the verandah? A verandah  is meant to let in 
air and sunshine. The screens shut both out. I was told this was done to 
improvise accommodation for more students, but then  why admit more 
students than there is accommodation for? 
"All these may appear to be trifles," he proceeded,  "but all things are made 
up of trifles. My entire life has been built on tri fles. To the extent that we have 
neglected to inculcate attention to details on our boys we have failed. Rather I 
should say, I have failed. For it was I who launche d the experiment of Nai Talim 
but could not find time to conduct it myself and ha d to leave it to others. 
"A sense of cleanliness, tidiness and sanitation, i n my opinion, constitutes 
the very core of Nai Talim.  To cultivate it involves no expense. All it needs is a  
keen, observant eye and an artistic sense. If you t ell me that in this way you This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 96  cannot do justice to more than one or two boys," he  concluded, "I will say 'then 
have one or two and no more.' By undertaking more t han we can properly 
manage we introduce into our soul the taint of untr uth." 
- Shri Pyarelal in  Harijan. 
 
131. EXPERIMENTS WITH UNCOOKED FOOD 
Gandhiji believed in Nature Cure. Dietetics also in terested him. There was 
no suggestion that he would throw it away as useles s unless it was tried fully ; 
and gave unfavourable results. He would conduct the  experiment on himself so 
that he could get first-hand information about the pros and cons of the 
experiment. Here is what he described in  Young India  (13-6-'29) as his 
experiments with uncooked food : 
"I have been known as a crank, faddist, madman. Evi dently the reputation 
is well deserved. For, wherever I go, I draw to mys elf cranks, faddists, and 
madmen. Andhra has a fair share of these. They ofte n find their way to 
Sabarmati. No wonder then that I found these specim ens in abundance during 
my Andhra tour. But I propose to introduce to the r eader only the fellow crank 
who by his living faith in his mission compelled my  admiration and induced me 
to plunge into a dietetic experiment which I had le ft unfinished at the age of 
twenty when I was a student in London. This is Sund aram Gopalrav of 
Rajahmundry. The ground was prepared for him by a s urvey superintendent 
whom I met in Vizagapatam and who told me that he w as living practically on 
raw food. Gopalrav has a Nature Cure establishment in Rajahmundry, to which 
he devotes all his time. He said to me, 'The hipbat hs and kindred appliances are 
good so far as they go. But they are artificial. To  be rid of disease it is 
necessary to do away with fire in the preparation o f foods. We must take 
everything in its vital state even as animals do.' 
'Would you advise me to adopt entirely raw diet ?' I asked. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 97  'Certainly, why not? I have cured cases of chronic dyspepsia in old men and 
women through a balanced diet containing germinated  seeds,' was Gopalrav's 
reply. 
'But surely there should be a transition stage,' I gently remonstrated. 
'No such stage is necessary,' rejoined Gopalrav. 'U ncooked food including 
uncooked starch and protein are any day more digest ible than cooked. Try it 
and you will feel all the better for it.' 
'Do you take the risk ? If the cremation ceremony t akes place in Andhra, 
the people will cremate your body with mine,' I sai d. 
'I take the risk,' said Gopalrav. 
'Then send me your soaked wheat. I commence from to day,' I said. 
Poor Gopalrav sent the soaked wheat. Kasturba not k nowing that it could 
possibly be meant for me gave it to the volunteers who finished it. So I had to 
commence the experiment the next day." 
Gandhiji subsequently gave up the experiment -as it  had unfavourable 
effect on his health. 
 
132. ORIGIN OF MASS PRAYERS 
The significance and gradual development of the sys tem of mass prayers 
evolved by him was explained by Mahatmaji in one of  his speeches at Sodepur 
Ashram in December 1945. He said that in 1936 about  a dozen Japanese monks 
paid him a visit when he was staying at Maganvadi ( Wardha). The leading monk 
suggested to him that he intended to send one or tw o of his disciples to the 
Ashram, a proposal which he approved. First came on e and later on another. Of 
the two, one was staying with him till the war with  Japan broke out and as a 
result he was taken into custody. This Buddhist mon k used to do all the tasks he 
used to be given punctually and methodically. In be tween his work he used to This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 98  spend the time at his disposal in singing religious  songs in the Japanese 
language, all the time beating a drum. This he did while taking his rounds. This 
was a Buddhist religious song in praise of the Infi nite. Gandhiji said that he 
incorporated the song in his prayer. This was the f irst item of the prayer. 
The second item of the prayer was a Sanskrit Shloka  (verse) and was, 
according to him, universal in its appeal. This was  an invocation to Mother 
Earth, sustainer of man. If there was any objection  to it on any score he would 
plead that he was helpless. To him all faiths were welcome. He believed in all 
faiths but he saw no reason to give up his own fait h. Possibly, said Gandhiji, 
this Sanskrit Shloka was symbolic but, according to  him, many noble thoughts 
and ideas were couched in symbolic language. 
Thirdly, there was the prayer quoted from the Koran . It was incorporated 
at the instance of the daughter of Abbas Tyabji, th e well-known Congress 
leader. She possessed a gifted voice. When on a vis it to the Ashram she 
expressed the desire to propagate the teaching of t he Koran to the Ashramites, 
Gandhiji said, he readily agreed. She suggested a v erse from the Koran for 
inclusion in the prayer and it was done. 
The fourth item of the prayer was taken from the Ze nd Avesta written in 
the Pahlavi language. When he was fasting in the Ag a Khan Palace, Dr. Gilder 
was there as were also Dr. Bidhan Roy and some othe r medical men. Dr. Gilder 
was a Parsi and from him the verse from the Zend Av esta was taken and 
included. 
So far as the Bhajan songs were concerned, said Gan dhiji, there was no 
hard and fast rule. It all depended upon the time a nd place of the prayer. 
 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 99   
133 "HAVE I PROPERTY?" 
Under this caption Gandhiji wrote as follows in  Young India :  
"Among the many curious inquiries I receive, here a re some from a 
correspondent in Guntur District. People say Gandhi ji does not do what he says. 
He preaches poverty, but possesses property. He wan ts others to become poor, 
but he is not poor. He advocates simple and inexpen sive life yet he is 
expensive. So, answer the questions below: 'Do you take anything from the A. I. 
G. C. or Gujarat Congress Committee for your living  and touring expenses ? If so 
what is the amount ? If not, how are you meeting th e expenses for your long 
tours and your food and clothing if you are, as peo ple take you to be, a 
propertyless man ?' There is much more in the lette r of the same kind, but I 
have taken out the most salient points.  
"I do make the claim that I attempt to act as I pre ach. But I must confess 
that I am not as inexpensive in my wants as I would  like to be. My food since my 
illness costs more than it should. By no means can I call it a poor man's food. My 
travels too cost more than they did before my illne ss. I am no longer able to 
travel long distances third class. Nor ; do I trave l as I did before without a 
companion. All this means not simplicity and povert y but the reverse of it. I 
draw nothings from the A.I.C.C. or the .Gujarat Com mittee. But friends find my 
travelling expenses including food and clothing. Of ten during my tours railway 
tickets are purchased by those who invite me and my  host everywhere covers 
me with kind attention which often embarrasses me. People present me during 
my tours with much more Khaddar than I need. The ba lance goes to clothe 
those who need it or it is put in the general Khadd ar stock of the Ashram which 
is conducted in the public interest. I own no prope rty and yet I feel that I am 
perhaps the richest man in the world. For I have ne ver been in want either for 
myself or for my public concerns. God has always an d invariably responded in 
time. I can recall several occasions when almost th e last penny had been spent 
for my public activities. Moneys then came in from the most unexpected 
quarters. These responses have made me humble and f illed me with a faith in This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 100  God and His goodness that will stand the strain of utter distress" if it ever 
becomes my lot in life. It is open to the world, th erefore, to laugh at dispos-
sessing myself of all property. "For me the disposs ession has been a positive 
gain. I would like people to compete with me in my contentment. It is the 
richest treasure I own. Hence it is perhaps right t o say that though I preach 
poverty, I am a rich man." 
 
134. RIGHTS AND DUTIES 
I learnt from my illiterate but wise mother that al l rights to be deserved 
and preserved came from duty well done," wrote Gand hiji in a letter addressed 
to Dr. Julian Huxley, Director-General of the Unite d Nations Educational, 
Scientific, and Cultural Organization. This letter,  which was written while 
Gandhiji was travelling in a train to Delhi in May 1947,- was in reply to an 
invitation to 60 leading personalities throughout t he world to define what they 
thought would form the basis of a "World Charter of  Human Rights". 
"As I am constantly on the move I never get my post  in time," Gandhiji 
explained. "But for your letter to Pandit Nehru in which you referred to your 
letter to me, I might have missed your letter." 
Regretting that he had no time to give Dr. Huxley a  statement at the 
length he desired, Gandhiji added : "But what is tr uer is that I am a poor reader 
of literature, past or present, much as I should li ke to read some of its gems. 
Living a stormy life since my early youth, I had no  leisure to do the necessary 
readings." 
Defining his view of human rights, Gandhiji said : "The very right to live 
accrues to us only when we do the duty of citizensh ip of the world. Every other 
right can be shown to be an usurpation hardly worth  fighting for." 
Further light on the subject is thrown by the cable  which Gandhiji sent to 
the late Mr. H. G. Wells. Gandhiji's cable ran as f ollows : This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 101  "Received your cable. Have carefully read your five  articles. You will 
permit me to say you are on the wrong track. I feel  sure that I can draw up a 
better charter of rights than you have drawn up. Bu t what  good  will it  be? Who 
will become its guardian? If you mean propaganda or  popular education you 
have begun at the wrong end. I suggest the right wa y. 
"Begin with a charter of Duties of Man and I promis e the rights will follow 
as spring follows winter. I Write from experience. As a young man I began life 
by seeking to assert my rights and I soon discovere d I had none—not even over 
my wife. So "I began by discovering and performing my duty by my wife, my 
children, my friends, companions and society arid I  find today that I have 
greater rights perhaps than any living man I know. If this is too tall a claim, 
then I say I do not know anyone who possesses great er rights than I." 
 
135. MAHATMA GANDHI'S COURTESY 
Bapu was always the soul of courtesy towards young and old, rich and poor. 
An incident illustrative of this side of his charac ter was described by Giralda 
Forbes in the Catholic World of Calcutta. She had never met Gandhiji before. 
She had arrived in Bombay from England and learned that she was to proceed 
to Lahore by the next train. The following afternoo n she went to the station to 
board the train. A porter carried her roll of beddi ng and luggage. There had 
been some delay on the way and she arrived to find the train pulling out. As is 
well known trains in India have separate coaches fo r men and women. There 
was a single women's second class coach in the trai n, but all the  five berths 
were occupied. She hurried frantically up and down the platform looking for 
room; there was none. Her eyes fell on an empty coa ch. It was marked first 
class, but she decided to pay the difference and lo oked around for the guard to 
make the arrangement. She did not notice in her hur ry that a large placard 
hung from the door at the other end of the coach sh owing that it was 
'Reserved'. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 102  The narrative proceeds : "A knot of Hindu gentlemen  were standing talking 
in front of the door, and they turned to look at he r. One of them stopped her 
on her flight and asked if she was in need of help.  He was little, very 
unprepossessing, and had a toothless mouth that mad e his smile look ghastly. 
The train gave a warning shriek. The little man tur ned abruptly and made a 
gesture of authority, and the guard, who was about to wave the flag, blew his 
whistle instead. The harassed missionary explained her predicament, and the 
knot of Hindu gentlemen crowded around and showed s igns of consternation. 
The little man fumbled in the folds of cloth around  his waist and produced a 
ticket. He pressed it into her hand, and asked for hers. Instantly howls of 
protest rose on every side. The little man hushed t hem, and a crowd collected. 
The station master came running to see what was the  matter. The little man 
explained and motioned to the coolie to put the lug gage of the new occupant in 
the coach, and take his out. 
'You see,' he said to her, 'I did not want to trave l first class; but my friends 
bought this accommodation without telling me. I am delighted to make the 
exchange. I am going to Lahore, and you are going t o Lahore, so it is all right.' 
Too dazed to make any protest the missionary accept ed the situation and 
the toothless one led the way chuckling to the rear  of the train, utterly 
indifferent to the furious protests of his friends,  while the crowd shouted and 
laughed, and the station master pleaded frantically  that he must start the 
train." 
 
136. A WALK WITH CHILDREN 
One of the greatest joys of my life has been my per iodical stay, though 
every time it has been very short, at Sevagram, whe re Gandhiji lives. There are 
several special features of the daily life of the i nmates of the Ashram. But if I 
were to choose two from among these, I would select  prayer-time in the 
morning and in the evening and Gandhiji's walk, in which he is always 
accompanied by some of the; permanent residents of the place, young as well This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 103  as old, and one or two of the visitors who may happ en to be there at the time. I 
shall describe here, however, what once I saw while  I followed Gandhiji in his 
morning walk. 
On this particular occasion, among those who accomp anied Gandhiji there 
were two children, one in his mother's arms, the ot her trailing behind her. 
Suddenly the little one, in the arms, cried and the  mother tried to pacify it but 
she failed. Then Gandhiji, handing over his long st aff (which he carries with 
him on his walk) to me, took the babe in his own ar ms, touched its cheeks 
gently and smiled with beaming eyes. And, lo ! the dear wee one became 
silent, nay responded with an equally radiant smile . The mother wondered at 
Gandhiji's skill in motherliness. 
Then the other child, trailing behind its mother, r an away from her side 
and catching hold of Gandhiji's right hand led him to a flower, growing by the 
roadside, and said with the joy of a discoverer, "B apu, how beautiful is the 
flower !" 
"Very beautiful, indeed," replied Gandhiji smilingl y. 
Just then a dog passed by. The child pointing to it s tail, observed, "Bapu, 
Bapu, the dog has a tail." 
"Is that so?" answered back Gandhiji with the inno cence  of a child. And 
then after a moment's pause he asked, "But have you  a tail too?” 
The child laughed and remarked, "You are so old and  big. And yet you do 
not know that man has no tail. You are indeed, an i gnoramus." 
And Gandhiji and all of us joined heartily in the l oud laughter. 
The truth is that when he is among children Gandhij i becomes like one of 
them. He forgets his seventy and odd years as well as his self-imposed burden 
of sacrificial work for the welfare of India and th e world. And every time I have 
seen him among them I have pictured to myself the s cene in Palestine, which 
was enacted whenever Christ passed through its stre ets and the children 
gathered round his knees and looked into his love-f illed eyes. 
— M. N. G. in  Pushpa This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 104   
137. GURU AND CHELA 
Thus Gopal Krishna Gokhale spoke at the Lahore sess ion of the Indian 
National Congress in 1909 : 
"Fellow-delegates, after the immortal part which Mr . Gandhi has played in 
this affair I must say it will not be possible for any Indian, at any time, here or 
in any other assembly of Indians, to mention his na me without deep emotion 
and pride." 
Here the huge gathering rose to its feet and accord ed three hearty and 
most enthusiastic cheers to Mr. Gandhi. 
Gentlemen, it is one of the privileges of my life t hat know Mr. Gandhi 
intimately and I can tell that a purer, a nobler an d a more exalted spirit has 
never moved on this earth (cheers and loud applause s). Mr. Gandhi is one of 
those men, who, living an austerely simple life the mselves and devoted to all 
the highest principles of love to their fellow-bein gs and truth and justice, touch 
the eyes of the weaker brethren as with magic and g ive them a new vision. He 
is a man who may be well described as a man among m en, a hero among 
heroes, patriot among patriots, and we may well say  that in him Indian 
humanity at the present time has really reached its  highest watermark." 
Thus Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi wrote in 1921 : 
"It was like meeting an old friend, or better still , a mother after a long 
separation. His gentle face put me at ease in a mom ent. His minute inquiries 
about myself and my doings in South Africa at once enshrined him in my heart. 
And from that moment Gokhale never lost sight of me . In 1901 on my second 
return from South Africa, we came closer still. He simply 'took me in hand', and 
began to fashion me. He was concerned about how I s poke, dressed, walked 
and ate. My mother was not more solicitous about me  than Gokhale. There was, 
so far as I am aware, no reserve between us. It was  really a case of love at first 
sight, and it stood the severest strain in 1913. He  seemed to be all I wanted as 
a political worker—pure as crystal, gentle as a lam b, brave as a lion and This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 105  chivalrous to a fault. It does not matter to me tha t he may not have been any 
of these things. It was enough for me, that I could  discover no fault in him to 
cavil at. He was and remains to me the most perfect  man on the political field. 
Not, therefore, that we had no political difference s. We differed even in 1901 
in our views on social customs, e.g. widow re-marri age. We discovered 
differences in our estimate of Western civilization . He frankly differed from me 
in my extreme views on non-violence. But these diff erences mattered neither 
to him nor to me. Nothing could put us asunder. It were blasphemous to 
conjecture what would have happened if he were aliv e today. I know that I 
would have been working under him." 
 
138. ALL LIFE IS ONE 
Gandhiji wanted to card some cotton and make sliver s before going to bed, 
even though it was getting late. Mirabahen wanted t o put the bow, etc., ready, 
and being in a hurry, she asked a local volunteer t o fetch her from the garden 
some  babul  tree leaves, which one requires for applying to th e gut of the bow. 
The boy brought her a large bunch, and as he handed  it to her, she was 
surprised to notice that each little leaf was tight ly folded up. She took them to 
Gandhiji's room. "Do you see, Bapu," she said, "the  little leaves have all gone to 
sleep." 
"Of course," replied Gandhiji, looking up with indi gnation and pity in his 
eyes, "trees are living beings just like ourselves.  They live and breathe, they 
feed and drink as we do, and like us they need slee p. It is a wretched thing to 
go and tear the leaves of a tree at night when it i s resting. And why have you 
brought such a huge quantity? Only a few leaves wer e necessary. Surely you 
have heard what I said at the meeting yesterday of the poor flowers and how 
deeply it pains me that people should pluck those m asses of delicate blossoms 
to fling in my face and hang round my neck. Was not  it thoughtless to send 
someone out like that to worry and pain a tree at s uch a late hour when it had This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 106  folded its leaves in sleep ? We should feel a more living bond between ourselves 
and the rest of animate creation." 
“Yes, Bapu, I know—I understand,” said Mira, hangin g her head in shame. 
"It was very thoughtless of me. In future I will go  myself, and I will endeavour 
never again unnecessarily to disturb the peaceful s leep of the trees by plucking 
their foliage after dark." 
When Mirabahen wrote this incident down later, Gand hiji made the 
following comment : 
"Let not the reader call this sentimental twaddle,'  or accuse me or 
Mirabahen of hopeless inconsistency in that we swal low a camel when we eat 
vegetables by the cartload and strain at a gnat bec ause we would not care to 
pluck a leaf from a tree having its night's rest. ' Even a butcher may be to a 
certain extent humane.' Because a man eats mutton, he does not slaughter a 
herd of sheep when they are asleep. The essence of manliness consists in 
showing the utmost consideration to all life, anima l as well as vegetable. He 
who in search of pleasure shows little consideratio n for others is surely less 
than a man. He is thoughtless." 
 
139. IN THE LION'S DEN 
When in 1917 Gandhiji stepped into Champaran (Bihar ) to enquire into the 
condition of the agriculturists there and understan d their grievances against the 
indigo planters, there was a hue and cry raised aga inst him by the latter fully 
backed up by the Anglo-Indian Press. The planters d emanded his instantaneous 
removal from the district and even hinted that they  would take the law into 
their own hands if the authorities did not arrest h is further progress. It is now a 
matter of history how the authorities, succumbing t o the agitation, served a 
notice on him to quit the district immediately, how  he refused to oblige them, 
how he was then put under arrest and asked to stand  his trial, how finally This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 107  realizing the serious consequences that would follo w his conviction, the Viceroy 
intervened and had the case against Gandhiji withdr awn. 
The chagrin of the planters at such a turn of event s could well be 
imagined, and some of them began to hold out threat s of direct action. A day 
before the interview which Gandhiji was to have wit h the Governor of the 
Province, the  Pioneer  published a lengthy letter from a leading planter,  Mr. W. 
S. Irwin, Manager of the Motihari Factory, in which  he wrote as follows : 
"Mr. Gandhi, I believe, is a well-intentioned phila nthropist, but he is a 
crank and a fanatic and is too utterly obsessed wit h his partial success in South 
Africa and his belief that he has been ordained by Providence to be a lighter of 
wrongs to be able to realize that he is being made a cat's paw of by pleaders 
and Mukhtears etc...Mahajans and moneylenders...and  by Home Rule 
politicians... For the protection of the property o f the Champaran planters, one 
and probably only one step is essentially necessary  and that is the removal of 
Mr. Gandhi from the district. The extreme forbearan ce of the planters has so 
far prevented the outbreak of any serious disturban ce, but unless Government 
can see its way to protecting them they will unavoi dably be forced into taking, 
the steps necessary for their own protection." 
The European planters' threats were, however, unava iling as Gandhiji 
refused to be cowed down and ultimately the Bihar G overnment felt obliged to 
appoint a commission of enquiry into the grievances  of the agriculturists. 
 
140. GOD IN ACTION 
"What has brought deepest satisfaction to your soul  in difficulties and 
doubts and questionings?" asked Dr. John Mott, the noted Christian evangelist, 
of Gandhiji when he paid a visit to the latter at S egaon in December 1938. 
"Living faith in God," was Gandhiji's reply. 
Dr. Mott : When have ^mi had indubitable manifestat ion of God in your life 
and experiences ? This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 108  Gandhiji : I have seen and believe that God never a ppears to you in person, 
but in action which can only account for your deliv erance in your darkest hour. 
Dr. Mott : You mean things take place that cannot p ossibly happen apart 
from God ? 
Gandhiji : Yes. They happen suddenly and unawares. One experience 
stands quite distinctly in my memory. It relates to  my 21 days' fast for the 
removal of untouchability. I had gone to sleep the night before without the 
slightest idea of having to declare a fast the next  morning. At about 12 o'clock 
in the night something wakes me up suddenly, and so me voice,...within or 
without, I cannot say,... whispers, 'Thou must go o n a fast.' 'How many days ?' I 
ask. The voice again said, 'Twenty-one days.' 'When  does it begin ?' I ask. It 
says, 'You begin tomorrow.' I went quietly off to s leep after making the 
decision. I did not tell anything to my companions until after the morning 
prayer. I placed into their hands a slip of paper a nnouncing my decision and 
asking them not to argue with me, as the decision w as irrevocable. Well, the 
doctors thought I would not survive the fast. But s omething within me said I 
would, and that I must go forward. That kind of exp erience has never in my life 
happened before or after that date. 
Dr. Mott : Now, you surely can't trace such a thing  to an evil source ? 
Gandhiji : Surely not. I never have thought it was an error. If ever there 
was in my life a spiritual fast it was this. There is something in denying 
satisfaction of the flesh. It is not possible to se e God face to face unless you 
crucify the flesh. It is one thing to do what belon gs to it as temple of God, and 
it is another to deny it what belongs to it as the body of flesh. 
 
141. "THE PRINCE OF BEGGARS" 
During his travels, Gandhiji played the role of an accomplished beggar. He 
was welcomed by crowds almost at every station. Peo ple flocked towards his 
compartment to catch a fleeting glimpse of the Maha tma. How could the This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 109  distinguished National Beggar let such golden oppor tunities slip by in passively 
acknowledging the devotional greetings of the crowd ? He must charge the 
'price' for his  darshan  and so his begging hand was immediately stretched out of 
the window. "One pice for the Harijan !" called out  Gandhiji, and the people 
experienced glow of joy and satisfaction in placing  copper coins in his palm. 
When one hand was full, the other was extended, and  Gandhiji smartly 
collected a decent amount at every station, even du ring nights. A clever and 
experienced beggar as he was Gandhiji took special care to learn at least the 
word for 'pice' in every language. He did not fret or fume at the crowds if they 
woke him up with vociferous cries of 'Mahatma Gandh iki Jai !' The beggar of a 
poor nation could not afford to lie sleeping while there were people clamouring 
to give him 'alms'. And so quietly he got up, opene d the window if it was 
closed, and commenced his work of collection. 
I have witnessed scenes when, sometimes being unusu ally tired, Gandhiji 
did not wake up at a certain station. A few persons  entered his compartment 
and shook him up despite protests from the members of his party, and after 
placing some coins in his hands walked away with "M ahatma Gandhiki Jai !" 
Gandhiji smiled, again lay down on the berth and fe ll into deep sleep. 
When an ordinary beggar receives any coin he feels delighted; but in the 
case of this strange Prince of Beggars, people feel  obliged in placing coins in his 
hands. Sometimes an old, decrepit woman in torn and  tattered garments would 
with great difficulty make her way through the crow d, put a pice in Gandhiji's 
palm, look at him intently with devotion for a whil e and thread her way back. 
It was, perhaps, early in 1937 when the Congress wa s still wavering 
between office-acceptance and non-cooperation, that  a journalist enquired 
with curiosity : "Bapuji, will the Congress accept office ?" "Why, do you wish to 
become a minister ?" asked Gandhiji with a good-hum oured chuckle. The poor 
correspondent was nonplussed and began to recede in to the background. But 
Gandhiji would not let him off so easily. "Will you  please let me use your hat as 
my begging bowl ?" he asked. Of course, the hat was  immediately surrendered 
and Gandhiji instantaneously stretched it before th e owner himself to begin This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 110  with. And the would-be minister had to surrender am id laughter a few silver 
coins too. What a queer and extraordinary beggar th is half-naked Fakir was ! 
It is said that beggars cannot be choosers. But thi s rule did not apply to 
Gandhiji. With him, in fact, it was just the revers e. If you were wealthy, he 
would demand gold and silver; if poor, an honest pe nny; if you could spare no 
coins, he would ask you to pay in hand-spun yarn; i f you could not do even that 
you have to fast and save and pay. Gandhiji was an inexorable beggar, a hard 
taskmaster. And yet so sweet, so loving, so forgivi ng. 
- Gandhiji,  by Shri D. G. Tendulkar and Vithalbhai K. Jhaveri,  1944 
 
142. AN EARLY EXAMPLE OF BAPU'S AHIMSA 
Mahatma Gandhi set a shining example of Ahimsa to t he public world when 
in 1897 he refused, to prosecute his assailants amo ng the whites of South Africa 
who had mobbed him and brutally assaulted him in Du rban. The story of the 
assault has been narrated by himself in the followi ng manner : 
"A mob followed us. With every step we advanced, it  grew larger and 
larger. The gathering was enormous when we reached West Street. A man of 
powerful build took hold of Mr. Laughton and tore h im away from me. He was 
not therefore in a position to come up with me. The  .crowd began to abuse me 
and. shower upon me stones and whatever else they c ould lay their hands on. 
They, threw down my turban. Meanwhile a burly fello w came up. to me, 
slapped me in the face and then kicked me. I was ab out to fall down 
unconscious when I held on to the railings of a hou se nearby. I took breath for a 
while and when the fainting was over proceeded on m y way. I had almost given 
up the hope of reaching home alive. But I remember well that even then my 
heart did not arraign my assailants...." 
On Mr. Escombe, Attorney-General with the Governmen t of Natal, telling 
Gandhiji, "We desire that the offenders should be b rought to book. Can you 
identify any of your assailants ?" Gandhiji replied  : "I might perhaps be able to This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 111  identify one or two of them. But I must say at once  before this conversation 
proceeds that I have already made up my mind not to  prosecute my assailants. I 
cannot see that they are at fault. What information  they had they had obtained 
from their leaders. It is too much to expect them t o judge whether it was 
correct or otherwise. If all that they heard about me was true, it was natural 
for them to be excited and do something wrong in a fit of indignation. I would 
not blame them for it. Excited crowds have always t ried to deal out justice in 
that manner. If anyone is to blame it is the Commit tee of Whites, you yourself 
and, therefore, the Government of Natal. Renter mig ht have cabled any 
distorted account. But when you knew that I was com ing to Natal, it was your 
duty and the duty of the Committee to question me a bout the suspicions you 
entertained with regard to my activities in India, to hear what I had to say and 
then do what might appear proper in the circumstanc es. Now I cannot 
prosecute you or the Committee for the assault. And  even if I could, I would 
not seek redress in a court of law. You took such s teps as seemed advisable to 
you for safeguarding the interests of the whites of  Natal. That is a political 
matter, and it remains for me to fight with you in the political field to convince 
you and the whites that the Indians who constitute a large proportion of the 
population of the. British Empire wish to preserve their self-respect and 
safeguard their rights without injuring the whites in the least." 
 
143. AN IDEAL PRISONER 
Acharya Kaka Kalelkar, who was Gandhiji's companion  in Yeravda Jail in 
1930, thus describes their daily routine : 
We get up early morning at four when the stars are shining in all their 
glory. By 4-20 our morning prayer begins. After pra yer comes the Gita 
recitation. The recitation finished, I would go for  my morning walk and Gandhiji 
would spend half an hour in reading and writing and  then join me. The Gita, 
the Ashram ideal, food problem, the wheel, my laxit y, such are the usual topics 
during the walk. Exactly at 6 we would sit for our breakfast. His breakfast This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 112  consists of curds (when he took it) and dates soake d in water. By the time we 
finished breakfast, the goats would come to be milk ed. Gandhiji always enjoys 
the sight of the kiddies,' greedily sucking the mil k and bleating now and then, 
by way of comma and semi-colon. A gentle kick from the mother would bring 
the full stop. Without a moment's delay Gandhiji si ts at the spinning wheel, and 
the wheel begins to recount the tragic tale of Indi a's woes, and the sure hope 
of deliverance. Have you ever heard the pensive not es of a perfect spinning 
wheel ? Verse by verse the epic goes on and it grow s upon you. 
With the wheel humming by your side you never feel solitary. With one or 
two necessary breaks the things go on till half pas t ten. At about seven he takes 
a cup of hot water with lime juice and salt. At hal f past ten you can see him 
going for his bath. I forget to tell you that every  morning he spends some time 
with the carding bow with its rhythmic twang. Half an hour's work gives him 
more slivers than he can consume during the day. Sa rdar Vallabhbhai once ran 
short of slivers and he sent for some through the S uperintendent. My stock used 
to be rather poor. Gandhiji doubled his time at the  bow with the joy of a 
mother cooking for her dear children. 
At about 11 we used to take the midday meal. Again it used to be curds 
mixed with .a pinch of soda-bicarb, dates or raisin s and boiled vegetables. The 
newspapers came about the same time. I would read o ut the latest news about 
the lathi charges and the ladies of Bombay hoisting  the national flags aloft. We 
rarely used to discuss the news. That was reserved for the evening walk. 
Dietetics and nature cure, used to be the main topi cs at dinner time, because 
Gandhiji has read deeply and experimented diligentl y in this field. The wheel 
must follow the meal immediately; after it the news papers and then the 
midday siesta. At half past one he takes a cupful o f water, with the sour juice 
of lemon, neutralized with soda- bicarb. Then comes  the reading or writing of 
letters. Hymns from the Ashram prayer book must be translated into English for 
the benefit of Mirabai. At four you will' see him w ith the  takli  — a thing of his 
own manufacture out of a broken tile and a bamboo s tick — walking in the sun 
and pulling the milk-white yarn. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 113  At the stroke of five would begin our evening meal - curds, dates and some 
vegetables. Again the goats would come and the kids  wagging their tiny tails. 
Meals over, I would wash the utensils and Gandhiji would prepare the dates for 
the next day and soak them in water. Then the eveni ng walk. The colours of 
the evening sky, the glory of the setting sun and t he weird shapes of the fat 
gray clouds are peculiar attraction for Gandhiji. S ometimes he would call me 
hurriedly to see some peculiar beauty of the skies before my work at the 
waterpipe was finished. I have rarely seen him invi ting anybody in this way to 
steal a few moments from the appointed task... 
At 7 we would begin our evening prayer. During the rains it was timed at 7-
30 p.m., but with the setting in of winter the Ashr am changed the time to 7 
p.m. We also changed our time so that we may have t he satisfaction of saying 
our prayers in company with the Ashram boys and gir ls, although separated by 
hundreds of miles. Only those who know the brotherh ood of prayer can 
appreciate the change we made. 
 
144. THE "HALF-NAKED", "SEDITIOUS FAKIR" 
Arch-imperialist Mr (now, Sir) Winston Churchill, w ho firmly believed that 
"the loss of India would mark and consummate the do wnfall of the British 
Empire" and that "that great organism would pass at  a stroke out of life into 
history", and who had declared, "We have ' no inten tion of casting away that 
most truly bright and precious jewel in the crown o f the King, which more than 
all our other Dominions and Dependencies constitute s the glory and strength of 
the British Empire," could not contain himself when  he saw the Viceroy of India, 
Lord Irwin, carrying on negotiations with Mahatma G andhi for a political truce 
after the latter had launched a countrywide campaig n of civil disobedience. He 
vented his spleen against the Mahatma as well as th e Viceroy in these terms in 
an address to the Council of the West Essex Unionis t Association on February 
23, 1931: "It is alarming and also nauseating to se e Mr. Gandhi, an Inner Temple 
lawyer, now become a seditious fakir of a type well  known in the East, striding This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 114  half-naked up the steps of the Viceregal Palace, wh ile he is still organizing and 
conducting a defiant campaign of civil disobedience , to parley on equal terms 
with the representative of the King-Emperor." 
He had also thundered: "I am against these conversa tions and agreements 
between Lord Irwin and Mr. Gandhi. . . The truth is  that Gandhi-ism and all it 
stands for will have to be grappled with and finall y crushed." It was no wonder 
that Churchill should have refused to meet Gandhiji  when the latter had gone 
to England towards the end of the same year as a de legate to the Second Round 
Table Conference. 
An echo of Churchill's thunder against Gandhiji was  heard thirteen years 
after the latter's release from detention from the Aga Khan's Palace in May 
1944. Gandhiji, who was recouping his health at Pan chgani, wrote the following 
letter to Churchill, who was then Prime Minister of  Great Britain: 
" 'Dilkhush' (Panchgani) 
July 17, 1944 
Dear Prime Minister, 
You are reported to have a desire to crush the simp le 'Naked Fakir' as you 
are said to have described me. I have been long try ing to be a 'Fakir' and that 
naked — a more difficult task. I, therefore, regard  the expression as a 
compliment though unintended. I approach you then a s such and ask you to 
trust and use me for the sake of your people and mi ne and through them those 
of the world. 
Your sincere friend, 
M. K. Gandhi"  
How this letter came to be miscarried and delayed i n seeing the light of 
day was related by Gandhiji in a statement issued b y him on June 18, 1945 from 
Panchgani. According to Gandhiji the letter was wri tten in the small hours of 
the night of July 17, at the same time that he wrot e his Gujarati note to Quide-
i-Azam Jinnah and duly posted to be sent through th e Viceroy. Unfortunately, This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 115  the letter miscarried. Having waited for a long tim e, on September 10, 1944, 
Gandhiji sent a letter of enquiry out of curiosity,  "for the psychological moment 
had passed." To his surprise, the Private Secretary  to the Viceroy wrote in 
return on September 13 that the letter in question had not been received by 
him. As Gandhiji attached importance to the letter he sent a copy of the 
missing letter, repeating the request that it might  be sent to the Prime 
Minister. "My letter of July 17 to Mr. Churchill in  my estimation was of a sacred 
character not meant for the public eye," said Gandh iji, "but I could 
contemplate an occasion or time when it might call,  for publication without 
losing the sacred character. I, therefore, requeste d the Viceroy on December 
13, 1944, to enquire from the Prime Minister whethe r I had his permission to 
publish it in case of need. He replied through his Secretary that the Prime 
Minister agreed to the publication of my letter sub ject to the fact that it was 
duly acknowledged." 
 
145. ALL OVER BEEF TEA AND SALT 
When the Zulu 'rebellion' of 1906 had been quelled and Gandhiji's duties in 
connection with the ambulance corps raised by him c ame to an end, he 
prepared to settle down with his family at Phoenix.  But before he actually 
removed himself there Kasturba fell seriously ill a t Durban. 
Her condition grew worse day by day and Gandhiji co nsented to an 
operation after Kasturba had agreed. She was very w eak and the doctor had to 
perform the operation without chloroform. While she  was convalescing, 
Gandhiji, who was at Johannesburg, received a telep hone call from the doctor 
telling him that his wife's condition was getting w orse. The doctor told Gandhiji 
that unless she received some beef tea, she might d ie and asked Gandhiji's 
permission to give her the beef diet. Gandhiji refu sed to give such permission, 
but told the doctor that if Kasturba consented to t ake it, then he had no 
objection. The doctor, however, told Gandhiji that he refused to consult the This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 116  patient, having regard to her condition. He asked G andhiji to come over to 
Durban at once. 
When Gandhiji arrived at Durban he was told by the doctor that he had 
already given Kasturba the beef tea.  
"Now, doctor, I call this a fraud," exclaimed Gandh iji, deeply pained. 
"The question of fraud does not arise," the doctor replied. "In fact we 
doctors consider it a virtue to deceive patients or  their relatives, if thereby we 
can save our patients." 
Gandhiji was deeply pained, but kept cool. He knew that the doctor meant 
well, besides being his personal friend, but he was  not prepared to put up with 
his medical morals. Thus, after consultation with h is son and Kasturba he 
removed her to Phoenix, where, by the simple expedi ence> of a prescription by 
Gandhiji himself, she was finally cured. 
After a brief respite since her removal to Phoenix,  Kasturba began to suffer 
again from haemorrhage. Gandhiji remembered reading  in some books on 
vegetarianism that salt was not a necessary article  of diet for man, that on the 
contrary saltless diet was better for health. So, h e suggested to his wife that 
she went on saltless diet. She would not agree to t his and when Gandhiji 
persisted, she challenged him, saying that even he could not give up salt as an 
ingredient in his diet although he was advising her  to do so. 
Gandhiji's reaction to this challenge may best be d escribed in his own 
words: 
"I was pained and delighted at the same time — deli ghted in that I got an 
opportunity to shower my love on her. I said to her , 'You are mistaken. Were I 
ailing and advised to give up salt or any other art icle, I would unhesitatingly do 
so. But there, without any advice, medical or other wise, I give up salt and 
pulses for one year, whether you do so or not.' " This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 117  Kasturba was shocked at this and begged forgiveness  of him. She knew that 
her husband always meant what he said. She begged h im to take back his vow 
and promised to abstain from salt, explaining, 'Thi s is too hard on me.' 
Gandhiji was not annoyed with her and ponsoled her.  He told her that his 
abstaining would assist her and would strengthen hi m. On this Kasturba broke 
down in tears, knowing that Gandhiji would not retr eat. 
And believe it or not, Kasturba began to pick up in  health. The 
haemorrhage stopped completely and soon she regaine d her usual robust health 
and, as Gandhiji humorously observed, he added some what to his reputation as 
a 'Quack'. 
 
146. A 'JIVANMUKTA' IN THE ROLE OF SCAVENGER 
"What I could not accomplish in years, he did in a few days," observed Dr. 
Rabindranah Tagore, the illustrious Bard of Santini ketan, in the course of a talk 
with Shri S. K. Roy, an Indian long resident in the  United States of America, 
who had asked the poet when he visited America in 1 920 as to what Mahatma 
Gandhi actually did during his stay at Bolpur that impressed the latter so much. 
Continuing Dr. Tagore is reported to have said: 
"I always held that the boys of my school should th emselves clean their 
rooms, make their own beds, cook their meals and wa sh their dishes. But our 
boys came from such high caste families that I coul d not make them do these 
things. The trouble was that I did not clean my own  room, nor make my own 
bed, nor cook my own meals, nor wash my own dishes.  Consequently the boys 
did not care to take me seriously. I simply lecture d; so the boys just listened. 
"But when Gandhiji came he at once won the hearts o f our boys. He mixed 
with them as one of them. He told them that it was improper to have servants 
do the work they themselves should be doing. And he  himself cleaned his own 
room, made his own bed, washed his own dishes and h e even washed his own 
clothes. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 118  "The boys were ashamed of themselves; and they at o nce began doing all 
these tasks most joyously. I at once knew how Gandh i won the hearts of the 
students. 
"In the meantime Gandhi asked the scavengers not to  do any work for a few 
days. The high caste boys could never think of doin g the work of untouchable 
scavengers. Life in the school became almost imposs ible with the odour of night 
soil. 
"Then Gandhi himself carried the pots on his own he ad to distant fields and 
buried their contents underground. This superman ac t was contageous. Soon 
the boys of the highest castes and rich families we re vying with one another to 
have the honour of doing the work of the outcaste s cavengers. 
"And I was speechless with wonder and admiration fo r this great man from 
Bombay. I bowed to him in humility and with the utm ost reverence my heart 
and mind could command. And I saw in this almost un known man the making of 
a truly great man of major importance. I am most ha ppy that all India now calls 
him Mahatma (Great-Souled-One). If anyone ever dese rved this title, he does. 
And it should be known that this title is the spont aneous gift to Gandhi from 
the hearts of our people." 
Shri Roy, who has recorded this conversation in an issue of the journal  
Psychology , addressing the Poet said, "It is certainly refres hing to hear such 
words regarding Gandhi fall from your lips! Mahatma  Gandhi today wields 
tremendous power over the teeming millions of India . Will you kindly tell me 
what is really the secret of his success?" 
"The secret of Gandhi's success," said Dr. Tagore, "lies in his dynamic 
spiritual strength and incessant self- sacrifice. M any public men make sacrifices 
for selfish reasons. It is a sort of investment tha t yields handsome dividends. 
Gandhi is altogether different. He is unique in his  nobility, his very life is 
another name for sacrifice. He has sacrificed himse lf. He covets no power, no 
position, no wealth, no name and no fame. Offer him  the throne of all India, he 
will refuse to sit on it, but will sell the jewels and distribute the money among 
the needy. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 119  "Give him all the money America possesses, and he w ill certainly refuse to 
accept it, unless to be given away for a worthy cau se for the uplift of 
humanity. 
"His soul is perpetually anxious to give and he exp ects absolutely nothing in 
return — not even thanks. This is not exaggeration,  for I know him well. 
"He came to our school at Bolapur and lived there f or some time.. His 
power of sacrifice becomes all the more irresistibl e, because it is wedded with 
him with paramount fearlessness. 
"Emperors and Maharajas, guns and bayonets, impriso nments and tortures, 
insults and injuries, even death itself, can never daunt the spirit of Gandhi. 
"He is a 'Jivanmukta', in other words, his is a lib erated soul. If anyone 
strangles me', I shall be crying for help; but if G andhi were strangled, I am sure 
he would not cry. He may laugh at his strangler; an d if at all he has to die, he 
will die smiling. 
"His simplicity of life is childlike; his adherence  to truth is unflinching, his 
life for mankind is positive and aggressive. He has  what is known as the Christ 
spirit. The longer I know him, the better I like hi m. It is needless for me to say 
that this great man is destined to play a prominent  part in moulding the future 
of the world." 
"Such a great man deserves to be better known in th e world. Why don't you 
make him known, you are a world figure," asked Shri  Roy. Dr. Tagore replied: 
"How can I make him known? I am nothing compared to  his illumined soul. 
And no truly great man has to be made great. They a re great in their glory, and 
when the world is ready, they become famous by the dint of their own 
greatness. When the time comes, Gandhi will be know n, for the world needs 
him and his message of love, liberty and brotherhoo d. 
"The soul of the East has found a worthy symbol in Gandhi; for he is most 
eloquently proving that man is essentially a spirit ual being, that he flourishes 
the best in the realm of the moral and the spiritua l, and most positively 
perishes both body and soul in the atmosphere of ha tred and gunpowder 
smoke." This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 120  When the Poet visited America for the last time in later years he is 
reported to have remarked to Shri Roy as follows: 
"Mahatma Gandhi is a superman. He is putting into p ractice on a gigantic 
scale the spiritual theories as preached by Prophet s like Buddha, Jesus and 
Baha-ullah. It is not necessary to agree with all t hat Mahatma Gandhi says and 
does to appreciate the tremendous spiritual force h e has let loose throughout 
the world. He is the greatest man in the world toda y. He has most precious 
inner treasures." 
 
147. GANDHI-ROMAIN ROLLAND MEETING 
To an American friend the great French Savant Romai n Rolland wrote as 
follows about the visit of Mahatma Gandhi to his ho me at Villeneuve, 
Switzerland, in December 1931: 
How I should have liked to have you here during the  visit of the Indians! They 
stayed five days—from the 5th to 11th December at t he Villa Vionette. The 
little man bespectacled and toothless, was wrapped in his white burnouse, but 
his legs, thin as a heron's stilts, were bare. His shaven head with its few coarse 
hairs was uncovered and wet with rain. He came to m e with a dry laugh, his 
mouth open like a good dog panting, and flinging an  arm round me leaned his 
cheek against my shoulder. I felt his grizzled head  against my cheek. It was, I 
amuse myself thinking, the kiss of Saint Dominie an d Saint Francis. 
Then came Mira (Miss Slade), proud of figure and wi th the stately bearing 
of a Demeter, and finally three Indians, one a youn g son of Gandhi, Devadas, 
with a round and happy face. He is gentle, but litt le aware of the grandeur of 
his name. The others were secretaries — disciples— two young men of rare 
qualities of heart and mind: Mahadev Desai and Pyar elal. 
As I had contrived shortly beforehand to get a seve re cold on my chest, it 
was to my house and to the chamber on the second fl oor where I sleep at Villa 
Olga — you will remember it — that Gandhi came each  morning for long 
conversations. My sister interpreted, with the assi stance of Mira, and I had also This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 121  a Russian friend and secretary, Miss Kondacheff, wh o took notes on our 
discussions. Some good photographs by Schlemmer, ou r neighbour from 
Montreus, recorded the aspect of our interview. 
Evenings, at seven o'clock, prayers were held in th e first-floor salon. With 
lights lowered, the Indian seated on the carpet, an d the little assembly of the 
faithful grouped about, there was a suite of three beautiful chants — the first 
an extract from the  Gita , the second an ancient hymn on the Sanskrit texts 
which Gandhi has translated, and the third canticle  of Rama and Sita, intoned 
by the warm, grave voice of Mira. 
Gandhi held other prayers at three o'clock in the m orning, for which, in 
London, he used to wake his harassed staff, althoug h he had not retired until 
one. This little man, so frail in appearance, is ti reless, and fatigue is a word 
which does not exist in his vocabulary. He could ca lmly answer for hours the 
heckling of a crowd, as he did at Lausanne and Gene va, without a muscle of his 
face twitching. Seated on a table, motionless, his voice always clear and calm, 
he replied to his adversaries open or masked — and they were not lacking at 
Geneva — giving them rude truths which left them si lenced and Suffocated. 
The Roman bourgeoisie, and nationalists, who had at  first received him 
with crafty looks, quivered with rage when he left.  I believe that if his stay had 
lasted any longer, the public meetings would have b een forbidden. He 
pronounced himself as unequivocally as possible on the double questions of 
national armaments and the conflict between capital  and labour. I was largely 
responsible for steering him on this latter course.  
His mind proceeds through successive experiments in to action and he 
follows a straight line, but he never stops, and on e would risk error in 
attempting to judge him by what he said ten years a go, because his thought is 
in constant revolution. I will give you a little ex ample of it that is 
characteristic. 
He was asked at Lausanne to define what he understo od by God. He 
explained how among the noblest attributes which th e Hindu scriptures 
ascribed to God, he had in his youth chosen the wor d 'truth' as most truly This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 122  defining the essential element. He had then said, ' God is Truth.' "But," he 
added, "two years ago I advanced another step. I no w say 'Truth is God'. For, 
even the atheists do not doubt the necessity for th e power of truth. In their 
passion for discovering the truth, the atheists hav e not hesitated to deny the 
existence of God, and from their point of view, the y are right." You will 
understand from this single trait the boldness and independence of this 
religious spirit from the Orient. I noted in him tr aits similar to Vivekananda. 
And yet not a single political ruse catches him unp repared. And his own 
politics are to say everything that he thinks to ev erybody, not concealing a 
thing. 
On the last evening, after the prayers, Gandhi aske d me to play him a little 
of Beethoven. He does not know Beethoven, but he kn ows that Beethoven has 
been the intermediary between Mira and me, and cons equently between Mira 
and himself, and that, in the final count, it is to  Beethoven that the gratitude 
of us all must go. I played him the Andante of the Fifth Symphony. To that I 
added, "Les Champs Elysees" of Gluck — the page for  the orchestra and the air 
for the flute. 
He is very sensitive to the religious chants of his  country which somewhat 
resemble the most beautiful of our Gregorian melodi es, and he has worked to 
assemble them. We also exchanged our ideas on art, from which he does not 
separate his conception of truth, nor from his conc eption of truth that of joy, 
which he thinks truth should bring. But it follows of itself that for this heroic 
nature joy does not come without effort, not even l ife itself without hardship. 
'The seeker after truth hath a heart tender as the lotus, and hard as granite.' 
Here, my dear friend, are a few hints of those days  of ours together on 
which I have taken much more detailed notes. What I  do not dwell on to you is 
the hurricane of intruders, loiterer, and half-wits  which this visit loosed on our 
two villas. No, the telephone never ceased ringing,  photographers in 
ambuscades let fly their fusillades from behind eve ry bush. The milkmen's 
syndicate at Leman informed me that during all the time of this sojourn with 
me of the 'King of India' they intended to assume c omplete responsibility for his This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 123  'victualling'. We received letters from 'Sons of Go d'. Some Itatians wrote to the 
Mahatma beseeching him to indicate for them the ten  lucky numbers for the 
next drawing of his weekly national lottery! 
My sister, having survived has gone to take ten day s* rest at a cure in 
Zurich. She returns shortly. For my part I have ent irely lost the gift of sleep. If 
you find it, send it to me by registered mail! 
—The Nation,  New York. 
 
148. REBUKE TO A JOURNALISTIC 'SON' 
An occasion when the Mahatma was greatly upset and felt called upon 
severely to castigate a member of the journalistic profession was when the  
Free Press Journal, edited by Shri S. Sadanand, wrote in its issue of 1 2th July 
1944, with reference to the new formula submitted b y Shri G. Rajagopalachari 
to Mr. M. A. Jinnah for a Congress-League "rapproch ement", that Gandhiji had 
been 'misled' by Shri Rajagopalachari and others su rrounding him. Gandhiji 
privately remonstrated with the editor against the baseless insinuation and the 
latter offered some sort of apology to Gandhiji, bu t apparently it did not satisfy 
Gandhiji, for he wrote as follows to Shri Sadanand on 13th July: 
Dilkhush, Panchgani, 
13-7-1944 
My dear Sadanand, 
Your wire. Though this reply is to you as a journal ist and for publication, 
the manner of my reply will be on the basis of your  claim to be my son, a claim 
which you have often repeated. 
You have verbally accepted my amends but in action rejected them. Re-
read the opening parts of your telegrams and you wi ll understand my meaning. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 124  If you do, you will make a public acknowledgement o f the offence you have 
given me even in the act of accepting amends. 
As a pleasing contrast to this, I may tell you that  the four reporters whom I 
had the pleasure of meeting yesterday were graceful  enough to accept my 
amends and to understand fully its implication. 
I have a categorical reply for every one of the que stions you have asked 
me. But I very much fear that they are not sincere but meant to advertise your 
bravery, and newspaper propaganda of an unworthy ty pe. 
I have read with much pain your writings in your is sue of 12-7-'44. They 
caption a wicked attack upon Rajaji and milder one on esteemed public men. 
You are doing a great injustice to yourself and sha ming your nationalism by 
attacking Rajaji, who, to my knowledge, has no axe to grind, has forsaken 
everything for love of his country and has risked p opularity in pursuing the 
dictates of his conscience. Let me tell you that Ra jaji has not discussed his 
politics with me. My dissent from his politics, as I understand him in jail, 
continues. 
Now that I have been involuntarily and prematurely drawn into political 
controversy I shall certainly discuss them with him  as I am doing with respect in 
sp ite of wide political divergence. 
Courtesy towards opponents and eagerness to underst and their view-points 
is the A B C of non-violence. But, you of all perso ns should know that they are 
not likely to deflect me from the straight and narr ow path I have chosen to 
tread. They can but strengthen me in my resolve to follow it, never weaken 
me. 
And I should be an utterly unworthy leader or expon ent of non-violence if I 
could be led astray by eminent leaders or Constant companions like Rajaji. 
In a way the honest mistake made by Mr. Gelder, as his premature 
publication of an abridgement of the notes of inter views with him appears to 
have been, is a blessing in that the country once a gain has an opportunity of This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 125  knowing the measure of my compromising nature. I ha ve no reason to be 
ashamed of it, and I have never considered a sign o f weakness in me but 
strength. 
If you will prove a worthy son of mine, you will re vise the whole of your 
policy and use your journalistic gifts so as to ser ve the country by the way of 
truth and non-violence. 
You have had a fair portion of material goods out o f your journalistic 
venture. Now dare to be poor, if need be, and inste ad of feeding the public on 
sensationalism, give them nothing but solid gold. A nd, if you do not know how 
to do so, accept a humbler vocation. You will then at least have the credit of 
ceasing to do mischief. 
I hope that you will publish this without alteratio n. 
Yours sincerely,  
(Sd.) M. K. Gandhi 
On July 14, the following telegram was sent to Maha tma Gandhi, at 
Panchgani: 
Your letter. Sadanand now at Delhi. Returning lates t "Tuesday. Will then 
attend. — Frejournal. 
Gandhiji replied: 
Dilkhush, Panchgani, 
15-7-'44 
Dear Editor-in-Charge, 
I have your wire. My letter to Shri Sadanand is a p ublic reply to a public 
question and is meant for publication. The proper t hing was to have waited for 
my reply "before publishing the complaint against m e. Delay appears to me to 
be suspicious. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 126  If Shri Sadanand is away, and if direction is consi dered necessary, in a 
matter of ordinary course, you have means of taking  directions by 'phone'. 
Yours sincerely,  
(Sd.) M. K. Gandhi 
Gandhiji's letter to Shri Sadanand was at last publ ished in the issue of the  
Free Press Journal  of 19th July 1944 with the following "in explanati on' from 
the pen of Shri Sadanand: 
Bombay, July 18, 1944 
Gandhiji's letter to me dated July 13, the telegram  to Gandhiji dated July 
14 and Gandhiji's reply dated July 15, are publishe d in these columns. 
There could not be an earlier publication, as I ret urned from Delhi only this 
(18th) afternoon. 
Gandhiji has honoured me by recalling my allegiance  to him, as a son. I 
claim to be true to that allegiance, even today. 
It is within Gandhiji's knowledge, that, according to my concept a son may 
not defend himself against parental chastisement. 
I see no reason to break the golden rule on this oc casion. 
(Sd.) S. Sadanand 
 
149. "STABBING TRUTH" 
The following from the pen of Shri Mahadev Desai ap peared in the issue of  
Harijan  of 16th January 1937: 
During our stay at Faizpur a student secretary of a  Conference came to 
Gandhiji asking for a message. Gandhiji laughed and  said: "What new message 
can I give you at the age of 68 ? And where is the use of my giving you a 
message, if you pass a resolution there of assassin ating me or burning my This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 127  effigy? Assassinating the body of course does not matter, for out of my ashes a 
thousand Gandhis will arise. But if .you assassinat e or burn the principles I have 
lived for?" 
These words were uttered a day before that great sp eech on the cult of 
the Charkha, and those who can see the fire that bu rns there would surely 
understand the pain hidden in the laughter when he said the words I have just 
quoted, or the poignancy underlying the heading at the top. 
These two words were uttered in Lady Thakersey's co ttage — Parnakuti — 
at Poona soon after our arrival there. The occasion  was a seemingly trivial one. 
Gandhiji, who usually has a fair supply of slivers with hint, found in the evening 
of his arrival in Poona that his stock had almost run out, and he asked Pya relal 
if he had any more slivers. He had none. He turned to me: "You  have usually 
your supply of slivers. Haven't you got them?"  I was ashamed. I said: "I had them 
at Faizpur." "You thought you would get time there,  but not here?" There was 
no reply, there could be none. I am a lover of spin ning, and during my several 
years in jail I do not remember having missed my sp inning on a single day. 
Outside I find I cannot keep it up regularly, and t hat is why I had no slivers. 
"But could not we get slivers in Poona? Dev spins, Premabahen spins, there are 
others who spin regularly, and tomorrow we are sure  to get them." Inquiries 
were made at all the likely places, but in vain. 
"But what about Ghandrashankar ?" inquired Gandhiji . He had none. "That, 
Mahadev, was a cruel blow indeed," he said, to me s oon- after the morning 
prayer the next day. "Chandrashankar and his wife, I expected, would be 
spinning. But if he goes into raptures over my spee ch on the cult of the Charkha 
and will not spin, what are his raptures worth to m e? If salt loseth its savour, 
wherewith shall it be salted? I tell you it has bee n a great blow. And no slivers 
in the city of Poona. But if Ghandrashankar has non e why should others have 
them? Dev said, without a blush, that everything co uld be had at Saswad, 20 
miles from here, but not here. And yet we wonder wh y we have no Swaraj." This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 128  I could see that he was boiling as he said this. I quietly retired and told 
Shankarlal everything. He said he too *had his shar e of the whipping. "How am I 
to help it?" he said. "Because I am the secretary o f the Spinners' Association 
Bapu thinks I must see that slivers are available e verywhere. I quite see his 
grief, but I hope he will see mine. I have been try ing to get all the workers in 
the A. I. S. A. offices in India to spin regularly,  but I have yet to succeed. But I 
must get the slivers at once from Bombay." He rang up a friend there who sent 
the slivers and all the carding tackle from Navajiv an Sangh. In the afternoon 
some indifferent stuff came from the Poona Khadi Bh andar, and in the evening 
Shri Haribhau Phatak and Balukaka Kanitkar turned u p. Both of these friends 
are supposed to be believers in the Charkha and so Gandhiji said: "I have not 
yet recovered from my shock. Balukaka has been a se vere disappointment. You 
who swore by the Charkha, is this your faith in the  Charkha?"' 
"But did I not tell you," said Balukaka, "that the council programme was 
sure to kill the constructive programme?" 
"That is irrelevant. What has that got to do with y our faith in Khadi and 
spinning which you have repeated times without numb er? Convictions are there 
to be lived for and to die for and certainly to be worked for. But this 
conviction, without anything to do with it, is mean ingless. It is stabbing truth." 
The words were not misunderstood. Shri Haribhau sai d: "We deserve the 
cuts you have given us, and we have decided to turn  a new leaf from 
tomorrow." 
"But you do not know," said Gandhiji, "the cuts I h ave given myself over this 
tragedy. How can we have Swaraj if we care so littl e for our convictions? And 
now you say you are going to mend. It is something.  To, err is human,  and to 
mend is also human. But to know that you err and st ill not to mend it is less 
than human. For brutes don't err. But 'less than hu man' is not the word. To err 
is human, not to err is divine. To try to mend is h uman, but not to try to mend 
is devilish. That is the proper word. Well, if you will mend it will be all right. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 129  But do nothing without conviction. The conviction s hould be yours and not 
borrowed from me." 
'Stabbing truth' — these words went like a stab of fire in our hearts. "I do 
not ask for slivers from those who do not believe i n Khadi or Charkha. I never 
even mention the word Charkha to the Rt. Hon. Srini vasa Sastri, though we are 
bosom friends. For he does not believe in it. I hon our those people who do not 
believe in it and denounce it. But you believe in i t, and every day of your lives 
you live a lie. That is stabbing truth — than which  there is no greater sin." 
 
150. LESSONS IN JOURNALISTIC ETHICS 
(By R. K. Prabhu) 
A combination of unforeseen circumstances had place d me, towards the 
close of the year 1918, in editorial charge of  Young India — the weekly journal, 
which soon after and for years to come was destined  to exercise the 
profoundest influence on the course of Indian histo ry. Jamnadas Dwarkadas, 
who was the declared editor of the journal, then be ing printed at the  Bombay 
Chronicle  Press, had proposed to me that I should look after  the editorial 
affairs of the journal and I had consented. Hardly had three months passed 
since I took charge of the journal when Horniman, e ditor of the  Bombay 
Chronicle , was suddenly whisked away to England from his sic k-bed in Bombay 
and the  Bombay Chronicle  and its Press were placed under official censorshi p. 
In consequence, the board of directors of  Young India  were obliged to suspend 
the publication of the journal. 
This was in February 1919. When, a couple of weeks later, the censorship 
was ended and the  Chronicle  Press began to function again in a normal manner, 
offers were made to Gandhiji by the directors of bo th the  Bombay Chronicle 
and  Young India  to place the journals in his hands. Gandhiji decli ned the offer 
of the  Chronicle  but accepted that of  Young India , provided he was free to 
change the venue of the publication of the journal from Bombay to This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 130  Ahmedabad. When the negotiations for the transfer o f the control of Young 
India  were completed, I was asked to see Gandhiji with a  view to handing over 
my charge and giving him whatever information he mi ght need regarding the 
editorial conduct of the journal. 
At this time, Gandhiji was putting up at Mani Bhava n, Gamdevi, as the 
guest of Revashankarbhai Jhaveri, and I proceeded t here, accompanied by a 
journalist colleague of mine who was a regular cont ributor to the columns of 
Young India.  I had always a feeling that this colleague of mine  had a better 
command of the English vocabulary and idiom than I could claim and I had 
envied his gift. Arriving at Mani Bhavan, we introd uced ourselves to Gandhiji. 
Scanning the editorial columns of the last issue of  Young India,  of which I 
handed over to him a copy, Gandhiji wanted to know who the writer of a 
particular article in it was. It was, I recollect, some sharp criticism of one of 
Lloyd George's dubious utterances about India. I to ld Gandhiji - that I had 
written the article. Pointing his finger to another  article, Gandhiji asked who 
had written it. "I wrote it," said my colleague. 
After a brief pause, Gandhiji remarked: "I like thi s first article, whereas I 
"don't at all like the second. In the first, you ha ve said all that you wanted to 
say in a direct manner, while the writer of the sec ond article indulges in all 
sorts of innuendos and says things which he does no t really mean. "For instance, 
you write," said Gandhiji, looking at my colleague, " 'we are afraid. . . .' and so 
on. I don't like the phrase at all. Here, you don't  really want the reader to 
believe that you are afraid —you mean just the cont rary, don't you? When you 
want to say a thing, don't beat about the bush, don 't indulge in euphemisms and 
pin-pricks but tell it in a straightforward way." 
These might not be the very words uttered by Gandhi ji but they were to 
that effect as far as my memory goes. Of course, bo th my colleague and myself 
held our peace while this brief homily on the ethic s of journalism was delivered 
to us. My colleague having left shortly after, Gand hiji, looking at the page of  
Young India  which was made up of news in brief, asked me who g athered those 
news items. Being told that I was responsible for t hem, he asked me whence I This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 131  culled the news. I said I made the clippings from t he latest issues of the various 
Indian journals which were received in exchange for  Young India and the  
Bombay Chronicle. 
"How much time do you spend in gathering these item s?" he asked. 
I replied that it took me hardly more than half an hour to clip and paste 
the news items required to make up the page. 
"You spend only half an hour over them," he remarke d in surprise. "Do you 
know," he added, "when I edited  Indian Opinion  in South Africa, we received 
some 200 papers in exchange and I used to go throug h all of them carefully 
throughout the week and I culled each news item onl y after I was fully satisfied 
that it would be of real service to the readers. Wh en one takes up the res-
ponsibility of editorship, one must discharge it wi th a full sense of one's duty. 
That is the only way journalism should be practised  — don't you agree with me?" 
Shamefacedly I said, "I do." I went on to explain t o Gandhiji that having a 
very busy time throughout the week as a member of t he editorial staff of the  
Chronicle, I had to do things hurriedly for  Young India.  Practically the major 
portion of my work for the journal, including the w riting of editorials, did not 
occupy me more than an afternoon. 
"And how much are you paid for all this?" he next a sked, somewhat 
abruptly. 
I replied that I was paid at the rate of ten rupees  per column — a column, 
by the way, which was hardly a dozen inches long an d that too in fat 10-point 
type! - and that my earnings from  Young India  varied between one hundred and 
one hundred fifty rupees a month. 
"How much are you paid as a member of the  Chronicle staff?" was the 
question next shot at me by the inexorable inquisit or. 
"Four hundred rupees per month," I answered. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 132  After a brief pause, which appeared to me like eter nity, Gandhiji 
remarked: "Do you think you are justified in taking  from  Young India  the 
amount that is paid to you? You know the journal is  not a mercenary concern. It 
is a patriotic undertaking and I don't think it is even self- supporting. Are you 
justified in adding to the burden of its conductors ?" 
I replied that I did not compel the proprietors of the journal to pay me 
what they did. Jamnadas Dwarkadas, I said, paid all  contributors to  Young India  
on a generous scale as he did to me. It was all vol untary on his part. I made no 
stipulation whatsoever regarding my remuneration. 
"Still, if I were in your position, I would not tak e  a pie from  Young India,"  
put in Gandhiji, and added, "You are handsomely pai d at the  Chronicle  office 
for your full- time work and what you do for  Young India  is in your leisure 
hours. A person who gets paid adequately for his fu ll-time work should not 
expect payment for what he does elsewhere during th e same period. Don't you 
think so?" 
Though he uttered these pointed remarks gently and half smilingly, I could 
see that he made them in all seriousness. I was som ewhat dazed by the new 
lesson in ethics which he sought to drive home to m e. I could respond to his 
query only by a nod of humble acquiescence. 
— Courtesy :  Gandhiji  
 
151. SOME TYPICAL LETTERS OF GANDHIJI 
To Ashram Children 
Little Birds, 
Ordinary  birds  cannot fly without wings. With wings, of course, a ll can fly. 
But if you, without wings, will learn how  to  fly, then all your  troubles will  
indeed  be  at an end And I will teach you that. This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 133  See I have no  wings, yet I come flying to you every day in thought. Look, 
here is Vimala, here is Hari and here Dharmakumar. And you also can come 
flying to me in thought. 
There is no need of a teacher for those who know ho w to think. The 
teacher may guide us, but he cannot give us the pow er of thinking. That is 
latent in us. Those who are wise get wise thoughts.  
Tell me who, amongst you, are not praying properly in Prabhubhai's 
evening prayer. 
Send me a letter signed by all, and those who do no t know how to sign may 
make a cross. 
Bapu's Blessings 
 
To the Father of an Ailing Child  
Bear Friend, 
What can I possibly prescribe for a six months old baby suffering from 
paralysis? There is no prescription but prayer to G od. Any medicine is for me 
unthinkable. You may gently massage the affected pa rts, put the baby in the 
sun and give him nothing but milk and fruit juices.  And if God wishes, he will 
recover. If he does not you should courageously res ign yourself to the 
separation. 
He who gives, may also take away. 
Yours sincerely, 
M. K. Gandhi 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 134  Duty of the Living to the Dead  
[To Dr. Jal Pavry and Miss Bapsy Pavry, condoling t hem on the death of 
their father, Dastur Cursetji Pavry, the late Pars!  High Priest] 
"One must not grieve excessively over the one who i s gone to the great 
beyond, for the departed one lives in spirit foreve r, but we who are left behind 
must live to die in the service of humanity. 
"The only way to cause rejoicing to the soul of the  departed one is to fulfill 
his most cherished dream in which the spirit of the  departed, that is ever 
present with us, definitely gives strength to the l iving, and only when they 
fulfill that dream of the departed, then and then o nly they prove themselves 
worthy of the sacred heritage, and then and then on ly will the soul of the 
departed rejoice." 
(The last of these letters ends with the words in G ujarati, "M. K. Gandhi's 
blessings".) 
 
TO ADOLF HITLER 
Dear Friend,  
That I address you as a friend is no formality. I o wn no foes. My business in 
life has been for the past thirty- three years to e nlist the friendship of the 
whole humanity by befriending mankind, irrespective  of race, colour or creed. 
I hope you will have the time and desire to know ho w a good portion of 
humanity who have been living under the influence o f that doctrine of universal 
friendship view your actions. We have no doubt abou t your bravery or devotion 
to your fatherland, nor do we believe that you are the monster described by 
your opponents. But your own writings and pronounce ments and those of your 
friends and admirers leave no room for doubt that m any of your acts are 
monstrous and unbecoming of human dignity, especial ly in the estimation of 
men like me who believe in universal friendliness. Such are your humiliation of This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 135  Czechoslovakia, the rape of Poland and the swallowi ng of Denmark. I am aware 
that your view of life regards such spoliations as virtuous acts. But we have 
been taught from childhood to regard them as acts d egrading humanity. Hence 
we cannot possibly wish success to your arms. But o urs is a unique position. We 
resist British Imperialism no less than Nazism. If there is a difference, it is in 
degree. One-fifth of the human race has been brough t under the British heel by 
means that will not bear scrutiny. Our resistance t o it does not mean harm to 
the British people. We will convert them, not defea t them on the battlefield. 
Ours is an unarmed revolt against the British rule.  But whether we convert 
them or not we are determined to make their rule im possible by non-violent 
non-co-operation. It is a method in its nature unde featable. It is based on the 
knowledge that  no spoliator can compass his end without a certain degree of 
co-operation, willing or compulsory, of the victim.  Our rulers can have our land 
and bodies, but not our souls. They can have the fo rmer only by destruction of 
every Indian, man, woman, and child. That all may n ot rise to that degree of 
heroism and that a fair amount of frightfulness can  bend the back of the revolt 
is true, but the argument would be beside the point . For, if a fair number of 
men and women can be found in India who would be pr epared without any ill-
will against the spoliators to lay down their lives  rather than bend the knee to 
them, they would have shown the way to freedom from  the tyranny of 
violence. I ask you to believe me when I say that y ou will find an unexpected 
number of such men and women in India. They have be en having that training 
for the past twenty years. 
We have been trying for the past half a century to throw off the British 
rule. The movement of independence has been never s o strong as now. The 
most powerful political organization, I mean the In dian National Congress, is 
trying to achieve this end. 
We have attained a very fair measure of success thr ough non-violent 
effort. We are groping for the right means to comba t the most organized 
violence in the world, which the British power repr esents. You have challenged This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 136  it. It remains to be seen which is the better organ ized, the German or the 
British. 
We know what the British heel) means for us and the  non-European races 
of the world. But we would never wish to end Britis h rule with German aid. We 
have found in non-violence a force which, if organi zed, can without doubt 
match itself against a combination of all the most violent forces in the world. In 
non-violent technique, as I have said, there is no such thing as defeat. It is all 
"do or die" without killing or hurting. It can be u sed practically without money 
and obviously without the aid of the science of des truction, which you have 
brought to such perfection. 
It is a marvel to me that you do not see it is nobo dy's monopoly. If not the 
British, some other power will certainly improve up on your method and beat 
you with your own weapon. You are leaving no legacy  to your people of which 
they would feel proud. They cannot take pride in a recital of cruel deeds, 
however skilfully planned. 
I, therefore, appeal to you in the name of humanity  to stop the war. You 
will lose nothing by referring all the matters of d ispute between you and Great 
Britain to an International Tribunal of your joint choice. If you attain success in 
the war, it will not prove that you were in the rig ht. It will only prove that your 
power of destruction was greater, whereas an award,  by an imperial tribunal, 
will show as far as it is humanly possible, which p arty was in the right. 
You know that not long ago I made an appeal to ever y Briton to accept my 
method of non-violent resistance. I did it because the British know me as a 
friend, though a rebel. I am a stranger to you and your people. I have not the 
courage to make to you the appeal I made to every B riton. Not that it would 
not apply to you with the same force as to the Brit ish. But my present proposal 
is much simpler because it is much more practical a nd familiar. 
During this season when the hearts of the peoples o f Europe yearn for 
peace, we have suspended even our peaceful struggle . Is it too much to ask you 
to make an effort for peace during a time which may  mean nothing to you 
personally, but must mean much to the millions of E uropeans, whose dumb cry This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 137  for peace I hear, for my ears are attuned to hearin g the dumb millions? I had 
the privilege of meeting Signor Mussolini when I wa s in Rome during my visit to 
England as a delegate to the Round Table Conference . I hope he will take this 
as addressed to him also with the necessary changes . 
I am 
Your sincere friend, 
M. K. Gandhi 
(The letter reproduced above was written by Gandhij i in the Christmas week of 1941, but 
the Government of India would not allow it to be tr ansmitted to the Nazi dictator.) 
 
152. GANDHIJI'S FAVOURITE HYMNS 
[The following were among the favourite hymns of Ga ndhiji and they were usually sung at 
his prayer-gatherings.] 
The True Vaishnava 
He is a real  Vaishnava , who "feels the suffering of others as his own 
suffering. He is ever ready to serve, and is .never  guilty of overweening pride. 
He bows before everyone despises none, preserves pu rity in thought, word and 
deed. Blessed is the mother of such a son: in every  woman he reveres his 
mother. He preserves equanimity and never stains hi s mouth with falsehood, 
nor touches the riches of another. The bonds of des ire cannot hold him. Ever in 
harmony with  Ramanama,  his body in itself possesses all the places of 
pilgrimage. He knows neither desire nor disappointm ent, neither passion nor 
wrath. 
—Narasimh Mehta 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 138   
The Path of Love  
"The way of the Lord is open only to heroes, to cow ards it is fast shut. 
"Give up thy life and all that thou hast, so thou m ayst assume the name of 
the Lord. 
"Only he who leaves his son, his wife, his riches, and his life, s.hall drink 
from the vessel of God. 
"For in truth, he that would fish for pearls must d rive into the deepest 
depths of the sea and take his life in his hands. 
"Death affrights him not: he forgets all the misery  of body and soul. 
"He who stands hesitating on the bank and fears to dive, gains nought. 
"But the path of love is trial by fire. The coward shrinks back from it.  
"He who dares the leap into the fire, attains to ev erlasting bliss." 
- Pritama 
 
My Heartfelt Prayer  
"Lord, preserve me from looking on things which aro use evil thoughts. It 
were better for me to be blind. 
"Lord, preserve me from soiling my lips with impure  words. It were better 
for me to be dumb. 
"Lord, preserve me from hearing any word of slander  and insult. It were 
better for me to be deaf. 
"Lord, preserve me from looking with desire on any of those who should be 
my sisters. It were better for me to be dead." 
- Tukaram  This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 139   
Lead Kindly Light  
Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom,  
Lead Thou me on; 
The night is dark, and I am far from home; 
Lead Thou me on. 
Keep Thou my feet; I do not ask to see 
The distant scene; one step enough for me. 
I was not ever thus, nor pray'd that Thou  
Shouldst lead me on; 
I loved to choose, and see my path; but now  
Lead Thou me on. 
I loved the garish day, and, spite of fears, 
Pride ruled my will: remember not past years. 
So long Thy power hath blest me, sure it still  
Will lead me on, 
O'er moor and fen, o'er crag and torrent, till  
The night is gone; 
And with the morn those Angel faces smile, 
Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile. 
 - Cardinal Newman 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 140   
The Wondrous Cross 
When I survey the wondrous Cross 
On which the Prince of Glory died, 
My richest gain I count but loss, 
And pour contempt on all my pride. 
Forbid it, Lord, that I should boast 
Save in the Cross of Christ, my God; 
All the vain things that charm me most,  
I sacrifice them to His Blood. 
See from His Head, His Hands, His Feet, 
Sorrow and love flow mingling down; 
Did e'er such love and sorrow meet, 
Or thorns compose so rich a crown ? 
Were the whole realm of nature mine,  
That were an offering far too small; 
Love so amazing, so divine, 
Demands my soul, my life, my all. 
To Christ, Who won for sinners grace  
By bitter grief and anguish sore, 
Be praise from all the ransom'd race,  
Forever and ever more. 
- I. Watts 
 This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 141   
Rock of Ages  
Rock of Ages, cleft for me, 
Let me hide myself in Thee; 
Let 'the Water and the Blood, 
From Thy riven Side which flow'd, 
Be of sin the double cure, 
Cleanse me from its guilt and power. 
 
Not the labours of my hands  
Can fulfill Thy law's demands; 
Could my zeal no respite know,  
Could my tears for ever flow,  
All for sin could not atone;  
Thou must save, and Thou alone. 
 
Nothing in my hand I bring,  
Simply to Thy Cross I cling;  
Naked, come to Thee for dress;  
Helpless, look to Thee for grace;  
Foul, I to the Fountain fly;  
Wash me, Saviour, or I die. 
 
While I draw this fleeting breath,  
When my eyelids close in death,  
When I soar through tracts unknown,  
See Thee on Thy Judgment Throne;  
Rock of Ages, cleft for me,  This was Bapu 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 142  Let me hide myself in Thee. 
— A. M. Toplady 
 
The Sermon on the Mount  
Blessed  are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. 
Blessed  are they that mourn: for they shall  be comforted. 
Blessed  are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. 
Blessed  are they which do hunger and thirst after righteou sness: for they 
shall be filled. 
Blessed  are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. 
Blessed  are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. 
Blessed  are the peacemakers: for they shall  be called the children of God. 
Blessed  are they which are persecuted for righteousness' s ake: for theirs is 
the Kingdom of Heaven. 
- Gospel of Mathew 