 
 
TOWARDS 
NEW EDUCATION  
 
 
 
 
Written By 
 
M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
 
 
Edited By 
 
 Bharatan Kumarappa Editor's Note 
 
It is necessary to state at the outset what this bo ok sets out to cover. The Navjivan 
Publishing House has already published a book by Ga ndhiji on Basic Education. It 
deals with Gandhiji's writings and speeches on educ ation primarily from the latter half 
of 1937 when he launched his new scheme of educatio n. This new scheme came to be 
called Basic Education. It related to education to be given to a child from his 7th to 
14th year. To this was to be added in course of tim e Pre-Basic and Post-Basic 
education relating to education before the 7th and after the 14th year respectively. 
The education covering all these three stages is wh at is comprised under New 
Education or Nai Talim.  
Gandhiji's ideas in regard to this New Education di d not, of course, suddenly emerge 
from his brain in 1937, but were the outcome of lon g years of sustained thought and 
experience. The present book relates to this earlie r formative period when he revolted 
from the prevailing system of education and sought in various ways to substitute it by 
educational practices it by educational practices m ore in harmony with his own 
conception of the function of education. To underst and adequately the Basic Education 
scheme which he formulated in 1937 it is essential to go back to this earlier period 
where we can see it in origin and growth. The prese nt book may, therefore, be said to 
be a necessary companion volume to the one on Basic  Education.  
The material for this book was collected by Prof. N irmal Kumar Bose and Prof. Anath 
Nath Bose. But for editing and arranging it in its present from they are not 
responsible.  
An attempt has here been made to arrange the writin gs in such a way that the reader 
may see for himself the evolution of Gandhiji's ide as in regard to Education. Section I 
deals with his period of revolt ; Section II with e xperimentation, and Section III and 
the others following with formulation of principles . It is hardly necessary to say that 
these sections are by no means rigid, for even in h is period of revolt and 
experimentation we find Gandhiji formulating princi ples. Nevertheless it is hoped that 
classifying his writings thus will help to provide a clearer understanding of the 
development of his ideas.  
For the most part the titles of chapters and of ext racts have been altered to suit the 
above arrangement. 
Bharatan Kumarappa  
Bombay  To The Reader 
 
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wr itings and to others who are 
interested in them that I am not at all concerned w ith appearing to be consistent. In 
my search after Truth I have discarded many ideas a nd learnt many new things. Old 
as I am in age, I have no feeling that I have cease d to grow inwardly or that my 
growth will stop at the dissolution of the flesh. W hat I am concerned with is my 
readiness to obey the call of Truth, my God, from m oment to moment, and, therefore, 
when anybody finds any inconsistency between any tw o writings of mine, if he has 
still faith in my sanity, he would do well to choos e the later of the two on the same 
subject.  
M. K. GANDHI  
Harijan, 29-04-1933, p. 2  INADEQUACY OF PREVAILING EDUCATION 
 
 
Literary Education  
Editor (Gandhiji) : The ordinary meaning of education is a knowledge of  letters. To 
teach boys reading, writing and arithmetic is calle d primary education. A peasant 
earns his bread honestly. He has ordinary knowledge  of the world. He knows fairly 
well how he should behave towards his parents, his wife, his children and his fellow-
villagers. He understands and observes the rules of  morality. But he cannot write his 
own name. What do you propose to do by giving him a  knowledge of letters ? Will you 
add an inch to his happiness? Do you wish to make h im discontented with his cottage 
or his lot? And even if you want to do that, he wil l not need such an education. 
Carried away by the flood of Western thought, we ca me to the conclusion, without 
weighing pros and cons, that we should give this ki nd of education to the people.  
Now let us take higher education. I have learned Ge ography, Astronomy, Algebra, 
Geometry etc. What of that? In what way have I bene fited myself or those around 
me? Why have I learned these things? Professor Huxl ey has thus defined education:   
"That man I think has had a liberal education who h as been so trained in youth that 
his body is the ready servant of his will and does with ease and pleasure all the work 
that as a mechanism it is capable of ; whose intell ect is a clear, cold, logic engine with 
all its parts of equal strength and in smooth worki ng order... whose mind is stored 
with a knowledge of the fundamental truths of natur e... Whose passions are trained to 
come to heel by a vigorous will, the servant of a t ender conscience... who has learnt 
to have all vileness and to respect others as himse lf. Such a one and no other, I 
conceive, has had a liberal education, for he is in  harmony with Nature. He will make 
the best of her and she of him.  
If this be true education, I must emphatically say that the sciences I have 
enumerated above I have never been able to use for controlling my senses. 
Therefore, whether you take elementary education or  higher education it is not 
required for the main thing. It does not make of us  men. It does not enable us to do 
our duty.  
Reader :  If that is so, I shall have to ask you, what enabl es you to tell all these 
things to me? If you had not received higher educat ion how would you have been able 
to explain to me the things that you have?  
Editor: You have spoken well. But my answer is simp le: I do not for one moment 
believe that my life would have been wasted, had I not received higher or lower 
education. Nor do I consider that I necessarily ser ve because I speak. But I do desire 
to serve and, in endeavoring to fulfill that desire , I make use of the education I have received. And, if I am making good use of it, even then it is not for the millions, but I 
can use it only for such as you, and this supports my contention. Both you and I have 
come under the bane of what is mainly false educati on. I claim to have become free 
from its ill effects, and I am trying to give you t he benefits of my experience and, in 
doing so, I am demonstrating the rottenness of this  education.  
Moreover, I have not run down a knowledge of letter s under all circumstances. All I 
have now shown is that we must not make of it a fet ish. It is not our kamadhuk. In its 
place it can be of use, and it has its place when w e have brought our senses under 
subjection, and put our ethics on a firm foundation . And then, if we feel inclined to 
receive that education, we may make good use of it.  As an ornament it is likely to sit 
well on us. It now follows that it is not necessary  to make this education compulsory. 
Our ancient school system is enough. Character-buil ding has the first place in it, and 
that is primary education. A building erected on th at foundation will last.  
Hind Swaraj (1908), Ch. XVIII  
 
I have never been able to make a fetish of literary  training. My experience has proved 
to my satisfaction that literary training by itself  adds not an inch to one's moral height 
and that character-building is independent of liter ary training. I am firmly of opinion 
that the Government schools have unmanned us, rende red us helpless and godless. 
They have filled us with discontent, and providing no remedy for the discontent, have 
made us despondent. They have made us what we were intended to become, clerks 
and interpreters.  
Young India, 1-6-1921  
 
The question arises whether this education answers the wants of the people. As in the 
rest of India so in Baroda, the population is predo minantly agricultural. Do the 
children of these farmers become better farmers ? D o they show moral and material 
improvement for the education they have received ? Fifty years is a long enough time 
for showing results. I am afraid the answer to the inquiry cannot be satisfactory. The 
farmers of Baroda are no happier, no better than th eir brethren elsewhere. They are 
as helpless as any in times of famine. The sanitati on of their villages is as primitive as 
in the other parts of India. They do not know even the value of manufacturing their 
own cloth. Baroda possesses some of the richest lan ds in India. It should not have to 
export its raw cotton. It can easily become a self- contained State with a prosperous 
peasantry. But it is bedecked in foreign cloth—a vi sible sign of their poverty and 
degradation. Nor are they better off in the matter of drink. Probably they are worse. 
Baroda education is as much tainted with the drink revenue as the British revenue. The children of the Kaliparaj are ruined by the dri nk demon in spite of the education 
they may receive. The fact is the education in Baro da is an almost slavish imitation of 
the British type. Higher education makes us foreign ers in our country and the primary 
education being practically of no use in afterlife becomes almost useless. There is 
neither originality nor naturalness about it. It ne ed not be at all original if it would 
only be aboriginal.  
English Education  
Reader :  Do I then understand that you do not consider Engl ish education necessary 
for obtaining Home Rule?  
Editor (Gandhiji) :  My answer is yes and no. To give millions a knowle dge of English 
is to enslave them. The foundation that Macaulay la id of education has enslaved us. I 
do not suggest that he had any such intention, but that has been the result. Is not a 
sad commentary that we should have to speak of Home  Rule in a foreign tongue?  
And it is worthy of note that the systems which the  Europeans have discarded are the 
systems in vogue among us. Their learned men contin ually make changes. We 
ignorantly adhere to their cast-off systems. They a re trying each division, to improve 
its own status. Wales is a small portion of England . Great efforts are being made to 
revive a knowledge of Welsh among Welshmen. The Eng lish Chancellor, Mr Llyod 
George is taking a leading part in the movement to make Welsh children speak Welsh. 
And what is our condition ? We write to each other in faulty English, and from this 
even, our M.A.'s are not free ; our best thoughts a re expressed in English ; the 
proceedings of our Congress are conducted in Englis h ; our best newspapers are 
printed in English. If this state of things continu es for a long time posterity will—it is 
my firm opinion—condemn and curse us.  
It is worth noting that, by receiving English educa tion, we have enslaved the nation. 
Hypocrisy, tyranny, etc., have increased ; English- knowing Indians have not hesitated 
to cheat and strike terror into the people. Now, if  we are doing anything for the 
people at all, we are paying only a portion of the debt due to them.  
It is not a painful thing that, if I want to go to a court of justice, I must employ the 
English language as a medium ; that, when I become a Barrister, I may not speak my 
mother tongue, and that someone else should have to  translate to me from my own 
language ? Is not this absolutely absurd ? Is it no t a sign of slavery ? Am I to blame 
the English for it or myself ? It is we, the Englis h-knowing men, that have enslaved 
India. The curse of the nation will rest not upon t he English but upon us.  
I have told you that my answer to your last questio n is both yes and no. I have 
explained to you why it is yes. I shall now explain  why it is no. 
We are so much beset by the disease of civilization , that we cannot altogether do without English education. Those who have already r eceived it may make good use of 
it wherever necessary. In our dealing with the Engl ish people, in our dealings with our 
own people, when we can only correspond with them t hrough that language, and for 
the purpose o knowing how much disgusted they (the English) have themselves 
become with their civilization, we may use or learn  English, as the case may be. 
Those who have studied English will have to teach m orality to their progeny through 
mother tongue, and to teach them another Indian lan guage ; but when they have 
grown up, they may learn English, the ultimate aim being that we should not need it. 
The object to making money thereby should be eschew ed. Even in learning English to 
such a limited extent, we will have to consider wha t we should learn through it and 
what we should not.  
Hind Swaraj (1908), Ch. XVIII  
 
 
 
Education for Manufacturing Clerks  
You, the students of Madras as well as the students  all over India, are you receiving 
an education which will make you worthy to realize that ideal and which will draw the 
best out of you, or is it an education which has be come a factory for making 
Government employees or clerks in commercial office s? Is the goal of the education 
that you are receiving that of mere employment whet her in the Government 
departments or other departments? If that be the go al of your education, if that is the 
goal that you have set before yourselves, I feel an d I fear that the vision which the 
Poet pictured for himself is far from being realize d. As you have heard me say 
perhaps, or as you have read I am and I have been a  determined opponent of modern 
civilization. I want you to turn your eyes today up on what is going on in Europe and if 
you have come to the conclusion that Europe is toda y groaning under the heels of 
modern civilization, then you and your elders will have to think twice before you can 
emulate that civilization in our Motherland. But I have been told : "How can we help 
it, seeing that our rulers bring that culture to ou r Motherland ?" Do not make any 
mistake about it at all. I do not for one moment be lieve that it is for any rulers to 
bring that culture to you unless you are prepared t o accept it, and if it be that the 
rulers bring that culture before us, I think that w e have forces within ourselves to 
enable us to reject that culture.  
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, pp. 312,31 3 ; 27-4-15  
 
 English Education  
It is my considered opinion that English education in the manner it has been given 
emasculated the English-educated Indian, it has put  a severe strain upon the Indian 
students' nervous energy, and has made of us imitat ors. The process of displacing the 
vernacular has been one of the saddest chapters in the British connection. Rammohan 
Rai would have been a greater reformer, and Lokaman ya Tilak would have been a 
greater scholar, if they had not to start with the handicap of having to think in English 
and transmit their thoughts chiefly in English. The ir effect their own people, 
marvelous as it was, would have been greater if the y had been brought up under a 
less unnatural system. No doubt they both gained fr om their knowledge of the rich 
treasures of English literature. But these should h ave been accessible to them through 
their own vernaculars. No country can become a nati on by producing a race of 
imitators. Think of what would have happened to the  English if they had not an 
authorized version of the Bible. I do believe that Chaitanya, Kabir, Nanak, Guru 
Govindsing, Shivaji, and Pratap were greater men th an Rammohan Rai and Tilak. I 
know that comparisons are odious. All are equally g reat in their own way. But judged 
by the results, the effect of Rammohan and Tilak on  the masses is not so permanent 
or far reaching as that of the others more fortunat ely born. Judged by the obstacles 
they had to surmount, they were giants, and both wo uld have been greater in 
achieving results, if they had been handicapped by the system under which they 
received their training. I refuse to believe that t he Raja and the Lokamanya could not 
have thought the thoughts they did without a knowle dge of the English language. Of 
all the superstitions that affect India, none is so  great as that a knowledge of the 
English language is necessary for imbibing ideas of  liberty, and developing accuracy of 
thought. It should be remembered that there has bee n only one system of education 
before the country for the past fifty years, and on ly one medium of expression forced 
on the country. We have, therefore, no data before us as to what we would have been 
but for the education in the existing schools and c olleges. This, however, we do know 
that India today is poorer than fifty years ago, le ss able to defend herself, and her 
children have less stamina. I need not be told that  this is due to the defect in the 
system of Government. The system of education is it s most defective part. It was 
conceived and born in error, for the English rulers  honesty believed the indigenous 
system to be worse than useless. It has been nurtur ed in sin, for the tendency has 
been to dwarf the Indian body, mind and soul.  
Young India, 27-4-''21  
 
Reply to Tagore  I do not want my house to be walled in on all sides  and my windows to be stuffed. I 
want the cultures of all the lands to be blown abou t my house as freely as possible. 
But I refuse to be blown off my feet by any. I refu se to live in other peoples' houses 
as an interloper, a beggar or a slave. I refuse to put the unnecessary strain of 
learning English upon my sisters for the sake of fa lse pride or questionable social 
advantage. I would have our young men and young wom en with literary tastes to 
learn as much English and other world languages as they like, and then expect them 
to give the benefits of their learning to India and  to the world, like a Bose, a Roy or 
the Poet himself. But I would not have a single Ind ian to forget, neglector be ashamed 
of his mother tongue, or to feel that he or she can not think or express the best 
thoughts in his or her own vernacular. Mine is not a religion of the prison-house. It 
has room for the least among God's creation. But it  is proof against insolence, pride of 
race, religion or colour.  
Young India, 1-6-1921  
 
Translations from English Literature Enough  
In asking our men and women to spend less time in t he study of English than they are 
doing now, my object is not to deprive them of the pleasure which they are likely to 
deprive from it, but I hold that the same pleasure can be obtained at less cost and 
trouble if we follow a more natural method. The wor ld is full of many a gem of 
priceless beauty ; but then these gems are not all of English setting. Other languages 
can well boast of productions of similar excellence  ; all these should be made 
available for our common people and that can only b e done if our own learned men 
will undertake to translate them for us in our own languages.  
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, pp. 426-28  ; 20-2-1918  FORESHADOWINGS OF A NEW TYPE OF EDUCATION 
 
At Home  
Need for Experiments in Education   
There is too much of make-believe, self-deception a nd submission to convention. The 
field of education which holds the seeds of the fut ure of the children of the soil 
requires absolute sincerity, fearlessness in the pu rsuit of truth and boldest 
experiments, provided always that they are sound an d based upon deep thought 
matured and sanctified by a life of consecration. N ot every tyro in education may 
make such experiments. If the field is vast enough for sound experimenting, it is too 
dangerous for hasty and ill-conceived prospecting s uch as people in feverish search of 
gold delight in.  
Young Indian, 30-9-1926  
 
Education in the Home  
When I landed at Durban in January 1897, I had ther e children with me, my sister'7s 
son ten years old, and my own sons nine and five ye ars of age. Where was I to 
educate them? I was loth to send them back to India , for I believed even then that 
young children should not be separated from their p arents. The education that 
children naturally imbibe in a well-ordered househo ld is impossible to obtain in 
hostels. I therefore kept my children with me. I co uld not devote to the children all 
the time I had wanted to give them. My inability to  give them enough attention and 
other unavoidable causes prevented me from providin g them with the literary 
education I had desired, and all my sons have had c omplaints to make against me in 
this matter. Whenever they come across an M.A. or a  B.A. or even a Matriculate, they 
seem to feel the handicap of a want of school educa tion.  
Nevertheless I am of opinion that, If i had insiste d on their being educated somehow 
at public schools, they would have been deprived of  the training that can be had only 
at the school of experience, or from contact with t he parents. I should never have 
been free, as I am today, from anxiety on their sco re, and the artificial education they 
could have had in England or South Africa, torn fro m me, would never have taught 
them the simplicity and the spirit of service they show in their lives today, while their 
artificial ways of living might have been a serious  handicap in my public work. 
Therefore, though i have not been able to give them  a literary education either to 
their or to my satisfaction, I am not quite sure, a s I look back on my past years that I 
have not done my duty by them to the the best of my  capacity. Nor do I regret not 
having sent to them to public schools. I have alway s felt that the undesirable traits I see today in my eldest son are echo of my own undis ciplined and unformulated early 
life. I regard that time as a period of half baked knowledge and indulgence. It 
coincided with the most impressionable years of my eldest son, and naturally he has 
refused to regard it as my time of indulgence and i nexperience. He has on the 
contrary believed that that was the brightest perio d of my life, and the changes, 
effected later have been due to delusion, miscalled  enlightenment. And well he might. 
Why should he not think that my earlier years repre sented a period of awakening, and 
the later years of radical change, years of delusio n and egotism? Often have I been 
confronted with various posers from friends : What harm had there been, if I had 
given my boys an academicals education ? What right  had I thus to clip their wings? 
Why should I have come in the way of their taking d egrees and choosing their own 
careers ?  
I do not think that there is much point in these qu estions. I have come in contact with 
numerous students. I have tried myself or through o thers to impose my educational 
'fads' on other children too and have seen the resu lt thereof. There are within my 
knowledge a number of young men today contemporaneo us with my sons. I do not 
think that man to man they are any better than my s ons, or that my sons have much 
to learn from them.  
But the ultimate result of my experiments is in the  womb of the future. My object in 
discussing this subject here is that a student of t he history of civilization may have 
some measure of the difference between disciplined home education and school 
education, and also of the effect produced on child ren through changes introduced by 
parents in their lives. The purpose put of this cha pter is also to show the lengths to 
which a votary of truth is driven by his experiment s with truth, as also to show the 
votary of liberty how many are the sacrifices deman ded by that stern goddess. Had I 
been without a sense of self-respect and satisfied myself with having for my children 
the education that other children could not get, I should have deprived them of the 
object-lesson in liberty and self-respect that I ga ve them at the cost of the literary 
training. And where a choice has to be made between  liberty and learning, who will 
not say that the former has to be preferred a thous and times to the latter ?   
Autobiography (1926), pp. 245-48  
On The Tolstoy Farm  
Education in the Tolstoy Farm   
As the Farm grew, it was found necessary to make so me provision for the education 
of its boys and girls. I did not believe in the exi sting system of education, and I had a 
mind to find out by experience and experiment the t rue system. Only this much I 
knew, —that, under ideal conditions true education could be imparted only by the parents, and that then there should be the minimum of outside help, that Tolstoy 
Farm was a family, in which I occupied the place of  the father, and that I should so far 
as possible shoulder the responsibility for the tra ining of the young. 
The conception no doubt was not without its flaws. All the young people had not been 
with me since their childhood, they had been brough t up in different conditions and 
environments, and they did not belong to the same r eligion. How could I do full 
justice to the young people, thus circumstanced, ev en if I assumed the place of 
paterfamilias ? 
But I had always given the first place to the cultu re of the heart or the building of 
character, and as I felt confident that moral train ing could be given to all alike, no 
matter how different their ages and their upbringin g, I decided to live amongst them 
all the twenty-four hours of the day as their fathe r. I regarded character-building as 
the proper foundation for their education and, if t he foundation was firmly laid, I was 
sure that the children could learn all the other th ings themselves or with the 
assistance of friends. But as I fully appreciated t he necessity of a literary training in 
addition, I started some classes with the help of M r Kallenbach and Shri Pragji Desai. 
Nor did I underrate the building up of the body. Th is they got in the course of their 
daily routine. For there were no servants on the Fa rm, and all the work, from cooking 
down to scavenging, was done by the inmates. There were many fruit-trees to be 
looked after, and enough gardening to be done as we ll. Mr Kallenbach was fond of 
gardening and had gained some experience of this wo rk in one of the Governmental 
model gardens. It was obligatory on all, young and old, who were not engaged in the 
kitchen, to give some time to gardening. The childr en had the lion's share of this 
work, which included digging pits, felling timber a nd lifting loads. This gave them 
ample exercise. They took delight in the work, and so they did not generally need any 
other exercise or games. Of course some of them, an d sometimes all of them, 
malingered and shirked. Sometimes I connived at the ir pranks, but often I was strict 
with them. I dare say that they did not like the st rictness, but I do not recollect their 
having resisted it. Whenever I was strict, I would,  by argument, convince them that it 
was not right to play with one's work. The convicti on would, however, be short-lived, 
the next moment they would again leave their work a nd go to play. All the same we 
got along, and at any rate they built up fine physi ques. There was scarcely any illness 
on the Farm, though it must be said that good air a nd water and regular hours of food 
were not a little responsible for this.  
A word about vocational training. It was my intenti on to teach every one of the 
youngsters some useful manual vocation. For this pu rpose Mr Kellenbach went to a 
Trappist monastery and returned having learnt shoe- making. I learnt it from him and 
taught the art to such as were ready to take it up.  Mr Kellenbach had some experience of carpentry, and there was another inma te who knew it ; so we had a 
small class in carpentry. Cooking almost all the yo ungsters knew. All this was new to 
them. They had never even dreamt that they would ha ve to learn these things some 
day. For generally the only training that Indian ch ildren received in South Africa was 
in the three Ra's. On Tolstoy Farm we made it a rul e that the youngsters should not 
be asked to do what the teachers did not do, and, t herefore, when they were asked to 
do any work, there was always a teacher co-operatin g and actually working with 
them. Hence whatever the youngsters learnt, they le arnt cheerfully. 
Literary training, however, was a more difficult ma tter. I had neither the resources 
nor the literary equipment necessary; and I had not  the time I would have wished to 
devote to the subject. The physical work that I was  doing used to leave me 
thoroughly exhausted at the end of the day, and I u sed to have the classes just when 
I was most in need of some rest. Instead, therefore , of my being fresh for the class, I 
could with the greatest difficulty keep myself awak e. The mornings had to be devoted 
to work on the Farm and domestic duties, so the sch ool hours had to be kept after the 
midday meal. There was no other time suitable for t he school.  
We gave three periods at the most to literary train ing. Hindi, Tamil, Gujarati and Urdu 
were all taught, and tuition was given through the vernaculars of the boys. English 
was taught as well. It was also necessary to acquai nt the Gujarati Hindu children with 
a little Sanskrit, and to teach all the children el ementary history, geography and 
arithmetic.  
I had undertaken to teach Tamil and Urdu. The littl e Tamil I knew was acquired during 
voyages and in jail. I had not got beyond Pope's ex cellent Tamil handbook. My 
knowledge of the Urdu script was all that I had acq uired on a single voyage, and my 
knowledge of the language was confined to the famil iar Persian and Arabic words that 
I had learnt from contact with Mussalman friends. O f Sanskrit I knew no more than I 
had learnt at the high school ; even my Gujarati wa s no better than that which one 
acquires at the school. Such was the capital with w hich I had to carry on. In poverty 
of literary equipment my colleagues went one better  than I. But my love for the 
languages of my country, my confidence in my capaci ty as a teacher, as also the 
ignorance of my pupils, and more than that, their g enerosity, stood me in good stead.   
The Tamil boys were all born in South Africa, and t herefore, knew very little Tamil, 
and did not know the script at all. So I had to tea ch them the script and the rudiments 
of grammar. That was easy enough. My pupils knew th at they could any say beat me 
in Tamil conversation, and when Tamilians, not know ing English came to see me, they 
became my interpreters. I got along merrily, becaus e I never attempted to disguise 
my ignorance from my pupils. In all respects I show ed myself to them exactly as I 
really was. Therefore, in spite of my colossal igno rance of the language I never lost their love and respect. It was comparatively easier  to teach the Mussalman boys 
Urdu. They knew the script. I had simply to stimula te in them an interest in reading 
and to improve their handwriting. 
 
lost their love and respect. It was comparatively e asier to teach the Mussalman boys 
Urdu. They knew the script. I had simply to stimula te in them an interest in reading 
and to improve their handwriting. 
These youngsters were for the most part unlettered and unschooled. But I found in 
the course of my work that I had very little to tea ch them, beyond weaning them from 
their laziness, and supervising their studies. As I  was content with this, I could pull on 
with boys of different ages and learning different subjects in one and the same class 
room. 
Of text-books, about which we hear so much, I never  felt the want. I do not even 
remember having made much use of the books that wer e available. I did not find it at 
all necessary to load the boys with quantities of b ooks. I have always felt that the true 
text-book for the pupil is his teacher. I remember very little that my teachers taught 
me from books, but I have even now a clear recollec tion of the things they taught me 
independently of books. Children take in much more and with less labour through 
their ears than through their eyes. I do not rememb er having read any book from 
cover to cover with my boys. But I gave them, in my  own language, all that I had 
digested from my reading of various books, and I da re say they are still carrying a 
recollection of it in their minds. It was laborious  for them to remember what they 
learnt from books, but what I imparted to them by w ord of mouth they could repeat 
with the greatest ease. Reading was a task for them , but listening to me was a 
pleasure, when I did not bore them by failure to ma ke my subject interesting. And 
from the questions that my talks prompted them to p ut I had a measure of their 
power of understanding.  The spiritual training of the boys was a much more difficult 
matter than their physical and mental training. I r elied little on religious books for the 
training of the spirit. Of course I believed that e very student should be acquainted 
with the elements of his own religion and have a ge neral knowledge of his own 
scriptures, and therefore, I provided for such know ledge as best as I could. But that, 
to my mind, was part of the intellectual training. Long before I undertook the 
education of the youngsters of the Tolstoy Farm I h ad realized that the training of the 
spirit was a thing by itself. To develop the spirit  is to build character and to enable 
one to work towards a knowledge of God and self-rea lization. And I held that this was 
as essential part of the training of the young, and  that all training without culture of 
the spirit was of no use, and might be even harmful . I am familiar with the 
superstition that self-realization is possible only  in the fourth stage of life, i.e. sannyasa (renunciation). But it is a matter of comm on knowledge that those who 
defer preparation for this invaluable experience un til the last stage of life attain not 
self-realization but old age amounting to a second and pitiable childhood, living as a 
burden on this earth I have a full recollection tha t I held these views even whilst I was 
teaching, i.e. in 1911-12, though I might not then have expressed in identical 
language. How then was this spiritual training to b e given? i made the children 
memorize and recite hymns, and read to them from bo oks on moral training. But that 
was far from satisfying me. As I came into closer c ontact with them I saw that it was 
not through books that one could impart training of  the spirit, Just as physical training 
was to be imparted through physical exercise, and i ntellectual through intellectual 
exercise, even so the training of the spirit was po ssible only through the exercise of 
the spirit. And the exercise of the spirit entirely  depended on the life and character of 
the teacher. The teacher had always to be mindful o f his p's and q's whether he was 
in the midst of his boys or not.   
It is possible for a teacher situated miles away to  affect the spirit of the pupils by his 
way of living. It would be idle for me, if I were a  liar, to teach boys to tell the truth. A 
cowardly teacher would never succeed in making his boys valiant, and a stranger to 
self-restraint could never teach his pupils the val ue of self-restraint. I saw, therefore, 
that I must be an eternal object-lesson to the boys  and girls living with me. They thus 
became my teachers, and I learnt I must be good and  live straight, if only for their 
sakes. I may say that the increasing discipline and  restraint I imposed on myself at 
Tolstoy Farm was mostly due to those wards of mine.  One of them was wild, unruly, 
given to lying, and quarrelsome. On one occasion he  broke out most violently. I was 
exasperated. I never punished my boys, but this tim e I was very angry. I tried to 
reason with him. But he was adamant and even tried to over-reach me. At last I 
picked up a ruler lying at hand and delivered a blo w on his arm. I trembled as I struck 
him. I dare say he noticed it. This was an entirely  novel experience for them all. The 
boy cried out and begged to be forgiven. He cried n ot because the beating was painful 
to him; he could, if he had been so minded, have pa id me back in the same coin, 
being a stoutly built youth of seventeen; but he re alized my pain in being driven to 
this violent resource. Never again after this incid ent did he disobey me. But I still 
repent that violence. I am afraid I exhibited befor e him that day not the spirit, but the 
brute, in me. 
I have always been opposed to corporal punishment. I remember only one occasion 
on which I physically punished one of my sons. I ha ve therefore never until this day 
been able to decide whether I was right or wrong in  using the ruler. Probably it was 
improper, for it was prompted by anger and a desire  to punish. Had it been an expression only of my distress, I should have consi dered it justified. But the motive in 
this case was mixed.  
This incident set me thinking and taught me a bette r method of correcting students. I 
do not know whether that method would have availed on the occasion in question. 
The youngster soon forgot the incident, and I do no t think he ever showed great 
improvement. But the incident made me understand be tter the duty of a teacher 
towards his pupils. 
Cases of misconduct on the part of the boys often o ccurred after this, but I never 
resorted to corporal punishment. Thus in my endeavo r to impart spiritual training to 
the boys and girls under me, I came to understand b etter and better the power of the 
spirit. Day by day it became increasingly clear to me how very difficult it was to bring 
up and educate boys and girls in the right way. If I was to be their real teacher and 
guardian, I must touch their hearts, I must share t heir joys and sorrows, I must help 
them to solve the problems that faced them, and I m ust take along the right channel 
the surging aspirations of their youth. 
I hold that some occasions of delinquency on the pa rt of pupils call for even the 
drastic remedy of fasting by the teacher. But it pr esupposes clearness of vision and 
spiritual fitness. Where there is no true love betw een the teacher and the pupil, where 
the pupil's delinquency has not touched the very be ing of the teacher and where the 
pupil has no respect for the teacher, fasting is ou t of place and may even be harmful. 
Though there is thus room for doubting the propriet y of fasts in such cases, there is 
no question about the teacher's responsibility for the errors of his pupil.   
Autobiography (1926), pp. 407-15, 418 and 419  
In National Schools  
National Schools  
National schools, to be worth the name in terms of Swaraj, for the attainment of 
which they were brought into existence, must be con ducted with a view to advancing 
the national programme in so far as it was applicab le to educational institutions. Thus, 
for instance, national schools must be the most pot ent means of propagating the 
message of the charkha, of bringing Hindus, Mussalm ans and others closer together 
and of educating the 'untouchables' and abolishing the curse of untouchability from 
the schools. Judged by this standard the experiment  must be pronounced, if not a 
failure, certainly a very dismal success. Out of 30 ,000 boys and girls hardly one 
thousand are spinning on 100 charkhas at the rate o f ½ an hour per day. Hundreds of 
charkhas are lying idle and neglected. Whilst in th eory the schools are open to the 
'untouchables', very few as a matter of fact have ' untouchable' children in them. The 
Mussalman attendance at the schools is poor. I had therefore no hesitation in advising  that now we were to strive not after quantity but q uality. The test for admission must 
be progressively stiffer. Parents who did not like their children to learn spinning or to 
mix with 'untouchable' children might if they chose  withdraw them. I had no 
hesitation in advising that teachers should run the  risk of closing down their schools if 
the condition of running them required the exclusio n of 'untouchables' and the 
charkha. It was not enough to tolerate 'untouchable ' children if they stole in, but it 
was necessary to draw them into our school by lovin g care and attention. The 
teachers were not to wait for Mussalman and Parsi p arents to send their children but 
it was necessary to invite such parents to send the ir children. A national teacher must 
become a Swaraj missionary within his own sphere. H e should know the history of 
every child under his care and know the children no t in his school. He should know 
their parents and understand why they did not send their children to his school. He 
would do all this work not in an intolerant spirit but lovingly. Thus and thus only would 
national schools be truly national in terms of the Congress resolution. The difficulty of 
the task is unmistakable. This Government has made everything mercenary. 
Character is no test for anything. Mechanical abili ty to go through a superficial 
syllabus is the sole test. Every profession has bee n degraded to mean a career. We 
become lawyers, doctors and school-masters not to s erve our countrymen but to 
bring us money. The Vidyapith* therefore had to rec ruit for teachers in such a soul-
killing atmosphere. The majority of the teachers ha ve had to rise superior to 
themselves and their surroundings. The wonder is th at they have at all responded to 
the call of the country.  
But now after nearly four years' experience, we mus t turn over a new leaf. We cannot 
afford to remain at a standstill and not sink. We m ust therefore insist upon the boys 
and girls plying the charkha for at least half an h our daily. It is an education of no 
mean sort for thirty thousand boys and girls and ei ght hundred teachers to be 
spinning i.e., labouring for the country for half a n hour every day. It is a daily 
practical lesson in patriotism, useful toil and giv ing. That a boy should begin giving 
even during his education without expectation of re turn is an object-lesson in sacrifice 
he will not forget in after-life. And to the nation  it means a gift of 1875 maunds of 
yarn per month. It will supply at least one dhoti e ach to 5,000 men. Apart from every 
other consideration let every teacher work out the value of the lesson learnt by each 
child in thinking that he or she with five others m ay be spinning in one month yarn 
enough for supplying one dhoti to each of his count rymen rendered naked during the 
recent floods in Madras.  Young India, 7-8-''24   
 
I can only think of national education in terms of Swaraj. Hence I would have even 
the collegiate to devote their attention to perfect ing themselves in the art of spinning and all it means, I would have them study the econo mics and implications of Khaddar. 
They should know how long it takes to establish a m ill and the capital required. They 
should know too the limitations on the possibility of an indefinite expansion of mills. 
They should know too the method of distribution of wealth through mills and that 
through hand-spinning and hand-weaving. They should  know how hand-spinning and 
the manufacture of Indian fabrics were destroyed. T hey should understand and be 
able to demonstrate the effect of the adoption of h and-spinning in the cottages of the 
millions of India's peasants. They should know how a full revival of this cottage 
industry will weave into an undivided whole the sun dered Hindu and Mussalman 
hearts.  
Young India, 11-12-24  
 
Spinning and the Sciences  
I do not mean to say that our educational instituti ons must become mere spinning 
and weaving institutes. I do regard spinning and we aving as the necessary part of any 
national system of education. I do not aim at takin g the whole of the children's time 
for this purpose. Like a skilled physician I tend a nd concentrate my attention on the 
diseased limb knowing that that is the best way of looking after the others. I would 
develop in the child his hands, his brain and his s oul. The hands have almost 
atrophied. The soul has been altogether ignored. I therefore put in a plea in season 
and out of season for correcting these grave defect s in our education. Is half an hour's 
spinning every day by our children too great a stra in upon them ? Will it result in 
mental paralysis ?  
I value education in the different sciences. Our ch ildren cannot have too much of 
chemistry and physics. And if these have not been a ttended to in the institution in 
which I am directly supposed to be interested it is  because we have not the professors 
for the purpose and also because practical training  in these sciences requires very 
expensive laboratories for which in the present sta te of uncertainty and infancy we 
are not ready.  
Young India, 12-3-''25  
 
Spinning in Schools  
If spinning is to be revived as an indispensable in dustry, it must be treated seriously 
and must be taught in a proper and scientific manne r like the other subjects  
taught in well-managed schools. The wheels will the n be in perfectly good order and 
condition, will conform to all the tests laid down in these columns from time to time, 
the pupils' work would be regularly tested from day  to day just as all their exercises would be or should be. 
Whilst charkha spinning may be taught so as to enab le boys and girls, if they wish, to 
use the spinning wheel in their own homes, for clas s-spinning the takli is the most 
economical and the most profitable instrument.  
Young India, 15-10-''25  
 
National vs. Government Education   
One of our students has gone to jail in Bardoli and  many more will go. They are the 
pride of the Vidyapith. Much as they may desire to do likewise, can students of 
Government institutions dare to do so ? It is not o pen to them to go to Bardoli and 
help Vallabhbhai, as it is to you. They can only gi ve secret sympathy. What is literary 
training worth if it cramp and confine us at a crit ical moment in national life ? 
Knowledge and literary training are no recompense f or emasculation.  
Again there is a world of difference between our me thod of teaching and theirs. For 
instance, we may not teach English in the way they do. We may give a working 
knowledge of that language, but we may not without committing national suicide 
neglect the mother tongue, and make English the veh icle of our thought. In this 
national institution we strive to correct the perni cious practice We must learn all our 
subjects through the Gujarati language. We must enr ich it and make it capable of 
expression all shades of thought and feeling.  
Then take the teaching of economics. The present sy stem obtaining in Government 
institutions is vicious. Each country has its own e conomics. German text-books are 
different from the English. Free trade may be Engla nd's salvation. It spells our ruin. 
We have yet to formulate a system of Indian economi cs.   
The same about history. A Frenchman writing a histo ry of India will write it in his own 
way. The Englishman will write it quite differently . The descriptions of battles between 
the English and the French will differ with the wri ters who have described them. 
Indian history written from original sources by an Indian patriot will be different from 
that written by an English bureaucrat though each m ay be quite honest. We have 
grievously erred in accepting English estimates of events in our national life. Here, 
therefore, there is a vast field for you and your t eachers for original research.  
Even our teaching of a subject like arithmetic will  also be different. Our teacher of 
arithmetic frames his examples from Indian conditio ns. He will thus simultaneously 
with the teaching of arithmetic teach Indian geogra phy.  
Then we are putting a special emphasis on manual an d industrial training. Do not 
make the mistake of imagining that this training wi ll dull your wit. It is not by making 
our brains a storehouse for cramming facts that our  understanding is opened. An intelligent approach to an industrial training is o ften a more valuable aid to the 
intellect than an indifferent reading of literature .  NEW EDUCATION 
 
 
New Education to be rooted in the Culture and Life of the People  
National Education   
The curriculum and pedagogic ideas which form the f abric of modern education were 
imported from Oxford and Cambridge, Edinburgh and L ondon. But they are essentially 
foreign, and till they are repudiated, there never can be national education. For the 
moment, we are not going to discuss the problem whe ther it is possible for India to do 
without European education ; ( and in this connecti on let us say that we regard the 
English as a mere special phenomenon of the Europea n system). It India decides in 
the light of the need there is of fighting Europe w ith her own weapons, Industrialism, 
Capitalism, Militarism, and all the rest, in favor of making counterfeit Europeans of her 
children, soldiers, inventors of explosives, prosti tutors of Science, forgetters of God, 
she must go forward on her path stern and open-eyed , whatever the disaster. But in 
that case, she should make up her mind to do withou t national education, for, national 
education will not secure those ends, will not make  her sons and daughters fit for the 
fulfillment of those functions. The fact to be real ized is that India by the very fact of 
her long established and elaborated civilization ha d once the advantage of an 
educational system of her own, the only thing entit led to be called 'national'. But it 
was fundamentally distinct from the Anglo-Indian ty pe and from the pseudo-national 
type that is its descendant. The question then is t his: The choice must be clearly and 
finally made between national and foreign education , the choice of type and 
archetype, of meaning and purpose, of end and means . It has so far not been made. 
We are almost certain that the necessity for choosi ng is hardly realized. As long as 
confusion on this matter exists, 'national' educati on cannot flourish. And that for a 
simple reason. The Government is already imparting one type of education in respect 
of which it is impossible for any purely non-offici al body to complete. Official 
organization is bigger, it has more money, it has m ore prizes to offer. We believe that 
this root paradox will last as long as there is no hard and clear thinking about 
fundamentals. If, as a result of careful decisions,  we promise to the people that the 
education we offer will be truly Indian and not a m ere inferior prototype of the 
education offered in the schools and colleges of Go vernment, people are bound to 
listen to us. We believe that the folk who suffer f rom the effects of the existing 
arrangements, who deplore social disruption, who ar e stricken by the waste of youth, 
will be thankful to find an avenue of escape. Insti tutions that stand for the inevitable 
revolution for the restoration of national and soci al continuum will have in their hands 
the secret of the future.   For that which should be remembered is this. The gr eatest visible evil of the present 
educational method, in itself evidence of deeper de fects, is, that it has broken up the 
continuity of our existence. All sound education is  meant to fit one generation to take 
up the burden of the previous and to keep up the li fe of the community without 
breach or disaster. The burden of social life is co ntinuous, and if at at any stage one 
generation gets completely out of touch with the ef forts of its predecessors or in 
anywise gets ashamed of itself or its culture, it i s lost. The force that maintains 
society together is a series of high loyalties, loy alty to faith, calling, parents, family, 
dharma. The ancient educational system in India cer tainly maintained the long 
tradition of pride and service, the place of every order within the body social and body 
politic. It is equally certain that modern, foreign , non-national education makes young 
people unfit for any useful function in life. The v ast majority of people that sent their 
children to the English schools were agriculturists , men and women with a deep and 
abiding faith in God. There is no doubt that the yo ung people when they came back 
knew not a thing about agriculture, were indeed dee ply contemptuous of the calling of 
their fathers and professed to have outgrown all fa ith in God or in His fulfilling 
providence. The fact that the tragedy of this destr uctive breach was limited by the 
need of Government for only a specified number of c lerks and deputies, should not 
really mask the reality of the transaction. 'Reform s' have succeeded 'Reforms' in the 
educational system, Commissions have considered the  case of the Universities, 
primary instruction has been sought to be made comp ulsory ; but there has never 
been the remotest perception of the fact that the w hole thing is an evil because it was 
destroying the very foundations of all national lif e and growth. The system must be 
scrapped ; enquiry must be made promptly as to what  constituted the elements of 
education before Indian Universities were constitut ed, before Lord Macaulay wrote his 
fatal minutes. Promptness is essential, because the  race of old teachers is nearly 
extinct and the secret of their methods may die wit h them. The resuscitation of those 
curricula may mean the disappearance of political h istory and geography; but the 
prospect does not disturb us in the slightest. We h ave been trying to get at the 
elements of the old curricula at least in one part of the country and we dare aver in all 
conscience that they strike us as infinitely more e fficient and satisfactory than the 
latest thing come out of Europe. But we confess it is a layman's opinion. That is why 
we should like to have the matter investigated by e xperts. If it is done and its 
consequences faced, we are confident that the peopl e of the land will have reason to 
be highly thankful.   
Young India, 20-3-''24   
 Almost from the commencement, the text-books (today ) deal, not with things the 
boys and the girls have always to deal with in thei r homes, but things to which they 
are perfect strangers. It is not through the text-b ooks that a lad learns what is right 
and what is wrong in the home life. He is never tau ght to have any pride in his 
surroundings. The higher he goes, the farther he is  removed from his home, so that at 
the end of his education he becomes estranged from his surroundings. He feels no 
poetry about the home life. The village scenes are all a sealed book to him. His own 
civilization is presented to him as imbecile, barba rous, superstitious and useless for all 
practical purposes. His education is calculated to wean him from his traditional 
culture. And if the mass of educated youths are not  entirely denationalized, it is 
because the ancient culture is too deeply imbedded in them to be altogether uprooted 
even by an education adverse to its growth. If I ha d my way, I would certainly 
destroy the majority of the present text- books and  cause to be written text-books 
which have a bearing on and correspondence with the  home life, so that a boy as he 
learns may react upon his immediate surroundings.   
Young India, 1-9-''21   
 
No Relation to Environment   
Unfortunately the system of education has no connec tion with our surroundings which 
therefore remain practically untouched by the educa tion received by a microscopic 
minority of boys and girls of the nation.  
Harijan, 23-5-1936  
 
With the best motives in the world, the English tut ors could not wholly understand the 
difference between English and Indian requirements.  Our climate does not require the 
buildings which they need. Nor do our children brou ght up in predominantly rural 
environment need the type of education the English children brought up in 
surroundings predominantly urban need.  
When our children are admitted to schools, they nee d, not slate and pencil and books, 
but simple village tools which they can handle free ly and remuneratively. This means 
a revolution in educational methods. But nothing sh ort of a revolution can put 
education within reach of every child of school-goi ng age.  
It is admitted that so-called knowledge of the thre e R's that is at present given in 
Government schools is of little use to the boys and  girls in afterlife. Most of it is 
forgotten inside of one year, if only for want of u se. It is not required in their village 
surroundings.  But if a vocational training in keeping with their surroundings was given to the 
children, they would not only repay the expenses in curred in the schools but would 
turn that training to use in afterlife. I can imagi ne a school entirely self-supporting, if 
it became, say, a spinning and weaving institution with perhaps & cotton field 
attached to it.  
The scheme I am adumbrating does not exclude litera ry training. No course of 
primary instruction would considered complete that did not include reading, writing 
and arithmetic. Only, reading and writing would com e during the last year when really 
the boy or girl is readiest for learning the alphab et correctly. Handwriting is an art. 
Every letter must be correctly drawn, as an artist would draw his figures. This can 
only be done if the boys and girls are first taught  elementary drawing. Thus side by 
side with vocational training which occupy most of the day at school, they would be 
receiving vocal instruction in elementary history, geography and arithmetic. They 
would learn manners, have object-lessons in practic al sanitation and hygiene, all of 
which they would take their homes in which they wou ld become silent revolutionists.   
Young India, 11-7-1929  
 
To Develop Character  
Education of the Heart   
One word only as to the education of the heart. I d o not believe that this can be 
imparted through books. It can only be done through  the living touch of the teacher. 
And, who are the teachers in the primary and even s econdary schools ? Are they men 
and women of faith and character ? Have they themse lves received the training of the 
heart ? Are they expected to take care of the perma nent element in the boys and girls 
placed under their charge ? Is not method of engagi ng teachers for lower schools an 
effective bar against character ? Do the teachers g et even a living wage ? And we 
know that the teachers of primary schools are not s elected for their patriotism. They 
only come who can not find any other employment.  
Young India, 1-9-''21  
 
Freedom but under Discipline   
The pupils must have initiative. They must cease to  be mere imitators. They must 
learn to think and act for themselves and yet be th oroughly obedient and disciplined. 
The highest form of freedom carries with it the gre atest measure of discipline and 
humility. Freedom that comes from discipline and hu mility can not be denied, 
unbridled license is a sign of vulgarity injurious alike to self and one's neighbours.  
Young India, 3-6''26   
Purity of Heart Indispensable   
Purity of personal life is the one indispensable co ndition for building a sound 
education. And my meetings with thousands of studen ts and the correspondence 
which I continuously have with students, in which t hey pour out their innermost 
feelings and take me into their confidence, show me  quite clearly that there is much 
left to be desired. I am sure that all of you under stand thoroughly what I mean. In 
our languages there is a beautiful word, equivalent  for the word student, that is, 
brahmachari. Vidyarthi is a coined word and a poor equivalent for brahmachari. And I 
hope you know what the word brahmachari means. It m eans searcher after God, one 
who conducts himself so as to bring himself nearest  to God in the least possible time. 
And all the great religions of the world, however m uch they may differ, are absolutely 
one on this fundamental thing that no man or woman with an impure heart can 
possibly appear before the Great White Throne. All our learning or recitation of the 
Vedas,   
correct knowledge of Sanskrit, Latin, Greek and wha t not will avail us nothing if they 
do not enable us to cultivate absolute purity of he art. The end of all knowledge must 
be building up of character.  
Young India, 8-9-1927  
 
Service a Part of Education   
Whilst Sir M. Vishweshwarayya has emphasized one gr ave defect of our present 
education which places exclusive emphasis on litera ry merit, I would add a graver 
defect in that students are made to think that whil st they are pursuing their literary 
studies, they may not do acts of service at the sac rifice of their studies, be it ever so 
small or temporary. They will lose nothing and gain  much if they would suspend their 
education, literary or industrial, in order to do r elief work, such as is being done by 
some of them in Gujarat. The end of all education s hould surely be service, and if a 
student gets an opportunity of rendering service ev en whilst he is studying, he should 
consider it as a rare opportunity and treat it not really as a suspension of his 
education but rather its complement.  
Young India, 13-10-''27  
 
Unity of All Life   
Real education consists in drawing the best out of yourself. What better book can 
there be than the book of humanity ? What better ed ucation can there be than to go, 
day in and day out, to Harijan quarters and to rega rd Harijans as members of one human family ? It would be an uplifting, ennobling study. Mine is no narrow creed. It 
is one of realizing the essential brotherhood of ma n.  
Harijan, 30-3-''34  
 
To Madame Montessori   
Even as you, out of your love for children, are end eavoring to teach children, through 
your numerous institution, the best that can be bro ught out of them, even so, I hope 
that it will be possible not only for the children of the wealthy and the well-to-do, but 
for the children of paupers to receive training of this nature. You have very truly 
remarked that if we are to reach real peace in this  world and if we are to carry on a 
real war against war, we shall have to begin with c hildren and if they will grow up in 
their natural innocence, we won't have the struggle , we won't have to pass fruitless 
idle resolutions, but we shall go from love to love  and peace to peace, until at last all 
the corners of the world are covered with that peac e and love for which, consciously 
or unconsciously, the whole world is hungering.  
Young India, 19-11-''31  
Not Mere Text-Book Learning  
Pupils to Learn Discrimination   
Pupils should know to discriminate between what sho uld be received and what 
rejected. It is the duty of the teacher to teach hi s pupils discrimination. If we go on 
taking in indiscriminately we would be no better th an machines. We are thinking, 
knowing beings and we must in this period distingui sh truth from untruth, sweet from 
bitter language, clean from unclean things and so o n. But the student's path today is 
strewn with more difficulties than the one of disti nguishing good from bad things. The  
rishis taught their pupils without books. They only gave t hem a few mantras which the 
pupils treasured in their memories and translated i n practical life. The present day 
student has to live in the midst of heaps of books,  sufficient to choke him.  
Young India, 29-1-''25  
 
Text-books   
For India a multiplicity of text-books means epriva tion of the vast majority of village 
children of the means of instruction. Text-books, t herefore, in India must mean, 
principally and for the lower standards, text-books  for teachers, not pupils. Indeed, I 
am not sure that it is not better for the children to have much of the preliminary 
instruction imparted to them vocally. To impose on children of tender age a 
knowledge of the alphabet and the ability to read b efore they can gain general 
knowledge is to deprive them, whilst they are fresh , of the power of assimilating instruction by word of mouth. Should, for instance,  a lad of seven wait for learning the 
Ramayan till he can read it ? The results that we a rrive at when we think of the few 
lakhs living in the cities of India are wholly diff erent from those we obtain, we think, 
in terms of the millions of rural India.  
Young India, 16-9-1926  
 
Teachers and Text-books   
There seems to me to be no doubt that in the public  schools the books used, 
especially for children, are for the most part usel ess when they are not harmful. That 
many of them are cleverly written cannot be denied.  They might even be the best for 
the people and the environment for which they are w ritten. But they are not written 
for Indian boys and girls, not for the Indian envir onment. When they are so written, 
they are generally undigested imitations hardly ans wering the wants of the scholar. In 
this country, wants vary according to the provinces  and the classes of children. For 
instance, wants of Harijan children are, in the beg inning stages at least, different from 
those of the others.  
I have, therefore, come to the conclusion that book s are required more for the 
teachers than for the taught. And every teachers, i f he is to do full justice to his 
pupils, will have to prepare the daily lesson from the material available to him. This, 
too, he will have to suit to the special requiremen ts of his class. Real education has to 
draw out the best from the boys and girls to be edu cated. This can never be done by 
packing ill-assorted and unwanted information into the heads of the pupils. It 
becomes a dead weight crushing all originality in t hem and turning them into mere 
automata. It we were not ourselves victims of the s ystem, we would long ago have 
realized the mischief wrought by the modern method of giving mass education, 
especially in a case like India's. 
Attempts have undoubtedly been made by many institu tions to produce their own 
text-books with more or less success. But in my opi nion they do not answer the vital 
needs of the country. I lay no claim to originality  for the views I have endeavoured to 
set forth here. They are repeated here for the bene fit of the managers and teachers of 
Harijan schools, who have tremendous task before th em. They dare not be satisfied 
with mere mechanical work resulting in simply makin g the children under their charge 
indifferently and in a parrot-like manner learn the  books chosen anyhow. They have 
undertaken a great trust which they must discharge courageously, intelligently an 
honestly.  
The task is difficult enough but not so difficult a s one would imagine, provided the 
teacher or the manager puts his whole heart into th e work. If he becomes a parent to his pupils, he will instinctively know what they ne ed and set about giving it to them. If 
he has it not to give, he will proceed to qualify h imself. And seeing that we have 
stated with the idea that the boys and girls have t o have instruction in accordance 
with their wants, no extraordinary cleverness or po ssession of external knowledge is 
required in a teacher of Harijan and for that matte r, any other children.  
And when it is remembered that the primary aim of a ll education is, or should be, the 
moulding of the character of pupils, a teacher who has a character to keep need not 
lose heart.  
Young India, 1-12-1933  
To Teach Self-reliance and Respect for Manual Labou r  
Self-reliance   
As a lover of the Gurukula, I may be permitted to o ffer one or two suggestions to the 
Committee and the parents. The Gurukula boys need a  thorough industrial training if 
they are to become self-reliant and self-sup-portin g. It seems to me that in our 
country in which 85 per cent of population is agric ultural and perhaps 10 per cent 
occupied in supplying the wants of the peasantry, i t must be part of the training of 
every youth that he has a fair practical knowledge of agriculture and hand-weaving. 
He will lose nothing if he knows a proper use of to ols, can saw a piece of board 
straight and build   
a wall that will not come down through a faulty han dling of the plumber's line. A boy 
who is thus equipped, will never feel helpless in b attling with the world and never be 
in want of employment. A knowledge of the laws of h ygiene and sanitation, as well as 
the art of rearing children, should also form a nec essary part of the Gurukula lads. 
The sanitary arrangements at the fair left much to be desired. The plague of flies told 
its own tale. These irrepressible sanitary inspecto rs incessantly warned us that in 
point of sanitation all was not well with us. They plainly suggested that the remains of 
our food and excreta need to be properly buried. It  seemed to me to be such a pity 
that a golden opportunity was being missed of givin g to the annual visitors practical 
lessons on sanitation. But the work must begin with  the boys. Thus the management 
would have at the annual gathering three hundred pr actical sanitary teachers. Last 
but not least, let the parents and the Committee no t spoil their lads by making them 
ape European dress or modern luxuries These will hi nder them in their afterlife and 
are antagonistic to brahmacharya. They have enough to fight against in the evil 
inclinations common to us all. Let us not make thei r fight more difficult by adding to 
their temptations.  
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, pp. 334, 3 35  
 Manual Labour   
You may ask : 'Why should we use our hands?' and sa y ' the manual work has got to 
be done by those who are illiterate. I can only occ upy myself with reading literature 
and political essays.' I think we have to realize t he dignity of labour. If a barber or 
shoemaker attends a college, he ought not to abando n the profession of abarber or 
shoemaker. I consider that a barber's rofession is just as good as the profession of 
medicine.  
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, pp. 388, 3 89 ; 16-2-''16  
 
Whatever may be true of other countries, in India a t any rate where more than eight 
per cent of the population is agricultural and anot her ten per cent industrial, it is a 
crime to make education merely literary, and to unf it boys and girls for manual work 
in afterlife. Indeed I hold that as the larger part  of our time is devoted to labour for 
earning our bread, our children must from their inf ancy be taught the dignity of such 
labour. Our children should not be so taught as to despise labour. There is no reason 
why a peasant's son after having gone to a school s hould become useless, as he does 
become, as agricultural labourer. It is a sad thing  that our school-boys look upon 
manual labour with disfavour, if not contempt.  
Young India, 1-9-1921  
 
The Duty of Spinning   
In any curriculum of the future, spinning must be a  compulsory subject. Just as we 
cannot live without breathing and without eating, s o is it impossible for us to attain 
economic independence and banish pauperism from thi s ancient land without reviving 
and without reviving home-spinning. I hold the spin ning wheel to be as much a 
necessity in every household as the hearth. No othe r scheme that can be devised will 
ever solve the problem of the deepening poverty or the people. 
How then can spinning be introduced in every home? I have already suggested the 
introduction of spinning and systematic production of yarn in every national school. 
Once our boys and girls have learnt the art they ca n easily carry it to their homes.  
Young India, 19-1-1921  
To be Self-financing  
If every school introduced spinning, it would revol utionize our ideas of financing 
education. We can work a school for six hours per d ay and give free education to the 
pupils. Supposing a boy works at the wheel for four  hours daily, he will produce every 
day 10 tolas of yarn and thus earn for his school o ne anna per day. Suppose further 
that he manufactures very little during the first m onth, and that the school works only twenty-six days in the month. A class of thirty boy s would yield, after the first month, 
an income of Rs. 48-12-0 per month.  
I have said nothing about literary training. It can  be given during the two hours out of 
the six. It is easy to see that every school can be  made self-supporting without much 
effort and the nation can engage experienced teache rs for its schools.  
The chief difficulty in working out the scheme is t he spinning wheel. We require 
thousand of wheels if the art becomes popular. Fort unately, every village carpenter 
can easily construct the machines. It is a serious mistake to order them from the 
Ashram or any other place. The beauty of spinning i s that it is incredibly simple, easily 
learnt, and can be cheaply introduced in every vill age.  
The course suggested by me is intended only for thi s year of purification and 
probation. When normal times are reached and Swaraj  is established, one hour only 
may be given to spinning and the rest to literary t raining.  
Young India, 2-2-'' 21  
 
Our education should not be financed out of the exc ise revenue, neither out of land 
revenue. Under Swaraj its main prop should be the s pinning wheel. If the spinning 
wheel and the loom are introduced in every school a nd college, our education would 
easily pay its way. Today, I would like our boys to  give all their time to spinning. After 
Swaraj is attained, at least one hour will have to be given. Swaraj must react in each 
and every department of our life. Our schools today  are so many factories to turn out 
slaves from. Education under Swaraj will aim at mak ing boys self-supporting from 
their youth. Any other profession may be taught the m, but spinning will be 
compulsory. The spinning wheel ought to be the sola ce of the miserable. Nothing else 
has its virtues, for it alone can supplement agricu lture. All cannot be carpenters, nor 
smiths, but all must be spinners, and must spin eit her for their country or to 
supplement their own earnings. Because the need of clothing is universal the spinning 
wheel must needs be universal.  
Let us have spinning introduced from now as a neces sary adjunct to literary 
education, so that under Swaraj we may not have to fight over this question a new.  
Young India, 30-3-1921  
 
I venture to suggest to you, that it is a matter of  deep humiliation for the country to 
find its children educated from the drink revenue. We shall deserve the curse of 
posterity if we do not wisely decide to stop the dr ink evil, even though we may have 
to sacrifice the education of our children. But we need not. I know, many of you have 
laughed at the idea of making education self-suppor ting by introducing spinning in our schools and colleges. I assure you that it solves t he problem of education as nothing 
else can. The country cannot bear fresh taxation. E ven the existing taxation is 
unbearable. Not only must we do away with the opium  and the drink revenue, but the 
other revenues have also to be very considerably re duced if the ever-growing poverty 
of the masses is to be combated in the near future.  
Young India, 8-6-1921  
 
Who does not know what questionable things fathers of families in need of money for 
their children's education have considered it their  duty to do ? I am convinced that we 
are in for far worse times, unless we change the wh ole system of our education. We 
have only touched the fringe of an ocean of childre n. The vast mass of them remain 
without education, not for want of will but of abil ity and knowledge on the part of the 
parents. There is something radically wrong, especi ally for a nation so poor as ours, 
when parents have to support so many grown up child ren, and given them a highly 
expensive education without the children making any  immediate return. I can see 
nothing wrong in the children, from the very thresh old of their education, paying for it 
in work. The simplest handicraft suitable for all, required for the whole of India, is 
undoubtedly spinning along with the previous proces ses. If we introduced this in our 
educational institutions, we should fulfil three pu rposes, make education self-
supporting, train the bodies of the children as wel l as their minds, and pave the way 
for a complete boycott of foreign yarn and cloth. M oreover, the children thus equipped 
will become self-reliant and independent.  
Young India, 15-6-1921  
 
If we expect, as we must, every boy and girl of sch ool going age to attend public 
schools, we have not the means to finance education  in accordance with the existing 
style nor are millions of parents able to pay the f ees that are at present imposed. 
Education to be universal must therefore be free. I  fancy that even under an ideal 
system of Government, we shall not be able to devot e two thousand million rupees 
which we should require for finding education for a ll the children of school going age. 
It follows, therefore, that our children must be ma de to pay in labour partly or wholly 
for all the education they receive. Such universal labour to be profitable can only be 
(to my thinking) hand-spinning and hand-weaving. Bu t for the purpose of my 
proposition, it is immaterial whether we have spinn ing or any other form of labour, so 
long as it can be turned to account. Only, it will be found upon examination that on a 
practical, profitable and extensive scale, there is  no occupation other than the processes connected with cloth production which can  be introduced in our schools 
throughout India.  
The introduction of manual training will serve a do uble purpose in a poor country like 
ours. It will pay for the education of our children  and teach them an occupation on 
which they can fall back in afterlife, if they choo se for earning a living. Such a system 
must make our children self-reliant. Nothing will d emoralize the nation so much as 
that we should learn to despise labour.  
Young India, 1-9-1921  
To Promote All-Round Development of the Pupil  
Integrated Education   
I hold that true education of the intellect can onl y come through a proper exercise and 
training of the bodily organs, e.g. hands, feet, ey es, ears, nose, etc. In other words 
an intelligent use of the bodily organs in a child provides the best and quickest way of 
developing his intellect. But unless the developmen t of the mind and body goes hand 
in hand with a corresponding awakening of the soul,  the former alone would prove to 
be a poor lop-sided affair. By spiritual training I  mean education of the heart. A proper 
and all-round development of the mind, therefore, c an take place only when it 
proceeds pari passu with the education of the physi cal and spiritual faculties of the 
child. They constitute an indivisible whole. Accord ing to this theory, therefore, it would 
be a gross fallacy to suppose that they can be deve loped piecemeal or independently 
of one another.  
The baneful effects of absence of proper co-ordinat ion and harmony among the 
various faculties of body, mind and soul respective ly are obvious. They are all around 
us; only we have lost perception of them owing to o ur present perverse associations. 
Take the case of our village folk. From their child hood upward they toil and labour in 
their fields from morning till night like their cat tle in the midst of whom they live. 
Their existence is a weary, endless round of mechan ical drudgery unrelieved by a 
spark of intelligence or higher grace of life. Depr ived of all scope for developing their 
mind and soul, they have sunk to the level of the b east. Life to them is a sorry bungle 
which they muddle through anyhow. On the other hand , what goes by the name of 
education in our schools and colleges in the cities  today is in reality only intellectual 
dissipation. Intellectual training is there looked upon as something altogether 
unrelated to manual or physical work. But since the  body must have some sort of 
physical exercise to keep it in health, they vainly  try to attain that end by means of an 
artificial and otherwise barren system of physical culture which would be ridiculous 
beyond words if the result was not so tragic. The y oung man who emerges from this 
system can in no way compete in physical endurance with an ordinary labourer. The slightest physical exertion gives him headache ; a mild exposure to the sun is enough 
to cause him giddiness. And what is more, all this is looked upon as quite 'natural'. As 
for the faculties of the heart, they are simply all owed to run to seed or to grow 
anyhow in a wild undisciplined manner. The result i s moral and spiritual anarchy. And 
it is regarded as something laudable.   
As against this, take the case of a child in whom t he education of the heart is 
attended to from the very beginning. Supposing he i s set to some useful occupation 
like spinning, carpentry, agriculture etc. for this  education, and in that connection is 
given a thorough comprehensive knowledge relating t o the theory of the various 
operations that he is to perform, and the use and c onstruction of the tools that he 
would be wielding. He would not only develop a fine , healthy body but also a sound, 
vigorous intellect that is not merely academic but is firmly rooted in and is tested from 
day to day by experience. His intellectual educatio n would include a knowledge of 
mathematics and the various sciences that are usefu l for an intelligent and efficient 
exercise of his avocation. If to this is added lite rature by way of recreation, it would 
give him a perfect well-balanced, all-round educati on in which the intellect, the body 
and the spirit have all full play and develop toget her into a natural, harmonious 
whole. Man is neither mere intellect, nor the gross  animal body, nor the heart or soul 
alone. A proper and harmonious combination of all t he three is required for the 
making of the whole man and constitutes the true ec onomics of education.  
Harijan, 8-5-1937  
To be Craft-Centered  
As to the necessity and value of regarding the teac hing of village handicrafts as the 
pivot and centre of education I have no manner of d oubt. The method adopted in the 
institutions in India I do not call education, i.e.  drawing out the best in man, but a 
debauchery of the mind. It informs the mind anyhow,  whereas the method of training 
the mind through village handicrafts from the very beginning as the central fact would 
central fact would promote the real, disciplined de velopment of the mind resulting in 
conservation of the intellectual energy and indirec tly also the spiritual.  
Harijan, 5-6-' 37  
 
I would therefore begin the child's education by te aching it a useful handicraft and 
enabling it to produce from the moment it begins it s training. I hold that the highest 
development of the mind and the soul is possible un der such a system of education. 
Only every handicraft has to be taught not merely m echanically as is done today but 
scientifically, i.e. the child should know the why and the wherefore of every process. I 
am not writing this without some confidence, becaus e it has the backing of experience. This method is being adopted more or le ss completely wherever spinning 
is being taught to workers. I have myself taught sa ndal-making and even spinning on 
these lines with good results.   
Harijan , 31-7-' 37  THE QUESTION OF RELIGIOUS EDUCATION 
 
 
Religious Education  
The question of religious education is very difficu lt, Yet we cannot do without it. India 
will never be godless. Rank atheism cannot flourish  in this land. The task is indeed 
difficult. My head begins to turn as I think of rel igious education. Our religious 
teachers are hypocritical and selfish; they will ha ve to be approached. The Mullas, the 
Dasturs and the Brahmins hold the key in their hand s, but if they will not have the 
good sense, the energy that we have derived from En glish education will have to be 
devoted to religious education. This is not very di fficult. Only the fringe of the ocean 
has been polluted, and it is those who are within t he fringe who alone need cleansing. 
We who come under this category can even cleanse ou rselves, because my remarks 
do not apply to the millions. In order to restore I ndia to its pristine condition, we have 
to return to it.  
Hind Swaraj (1908), p. 107  
 
To me religion means Truth and Ahimsa or rather Tru th alone, because Truth includes 
Ahimsa, Ahimsa being the necessary and indispensabl e means for its discovery. 
Therefore anything that promotes the practice of th ese virtues is a means for 
imparting religious education and the best way to d o this, in my opinion, is for the 
teachers rigorously to practise these virtues in th eir own person. Their very 
association with the boys, whether on the playgroun d or in the class room, will then 
give the pupils a fine training in these fundamenta l virtues.  
So much for instruction in the universal essentials  of religion. A curriculum of religious 
instruction should include a study of the tenets of  faiths other than one's own. For this 
purpose the students should be trained to cultivate  the habit of understanding and 
appreciating the doctrines of various great religio ns of the world in a spirit of 
reverence and broad-minded tolerance. This if prope rly done would help to give them 
a spiritual assurance and a better appreciation of their own religion. There is one rule, 
however, which should always be kept in mind while studying all great religions, and 
that is that one should study them only through the  writings of known votaries of the 
respective religions. For instance, if one wants to  study the Bhagavata one should do 
so not through a translation of it made by a hostil e critic but one prepared by a lover 
of the Bhagavata. Similarly to study the Bible one should study it through the 
commentaries of devoted Christians. This study of o ther religions besides one's own 
will give one a grasp of the rock-bottom unity of a ll religions and afford a glimpse also 
of that universal and absolute truth which lies bey ond the 'dust of creeds and faiths'.  Let no one even for a moment entertain the fear tha t a reverent study of other 
religions is likely to weaken or shake one's faith in one's own. The Hindu system of 
philosophy regards all religions as containing the elements of truth in them and 
enjoins an attitude of respect and reverence toward s them all. This of course pre-
supposes regards for one's own religion. Study and appreciation of other religions 
need not cause a weakening of that regard ; it shou ld mean extension of that regard 
to other religions.  
In this respect religion stands on the same footing  as culture. Just as preservation of 
one's own culture does not mean contempt for that o f others, but requires 
assimilation of the best that there may be in all t he other cultures, even so should be 
the case with religion.  
Young India, 6-12-'28  THE LANGUAGE PROBLEM 
 
 
Medium of Instruction  
The Mother Tongue   
I am hoping that this University* will see to it th at the youths who come to it will 
receive their instruction through the medium of the ir vernaculars. Our language is the 
reflection of ourselves, and if you tell me that ou r languages are too poor to express 
the best thought, then I say that the sooner we are  wiped out of existence the better 
for us. Is there a man who dreams that English can ever become the national 
language of India ? (Cries of ''Never''.) Why this handicap on the nation ? Just 
consider for one moment what an unequal race our la ds have to run with every 
English lad. I had the privilege of a close convers ation with some Poona professors. 
They assured me that every Indian youth, because he  reached his knowledge through 
the English language, lost at least six precious ye ars of life. Multiply that by the 
number of students turned out by our schools and co lleges and find out for yourselves 
how many thousand years have been lost to the natio n. The charge against us is, that 
we have no initiative. How can we have any if we ar e to devote the precious years of 
our life to the mastery of a foreign tongue ? We fa il in this attempt also. . . . I have 
heard it said that after all it is English-educated  India which is leading and which is 
doing everything for the nation.   
It would be monstrous if it were otherwise. The onl y education we receive is English 
education. Surely we must show something for it. Bu t suppose that we had been 
receiving during the past fifty years education thr ough our vernaculars, what should 
we have today ? We should have today a free India, we should have our educated 
men, not as if they were foreigners in their own la nd, but speaking to the heart of the 
nation ; they would be working amongst the poorest of the poor, and whatever they 
would have gained during the past fifty years would  be a heritage for the nation 
(Applause). Today even our wives are not sharers in  our best thought. Look at 
Professor Bose and Professor Ray and their brillian t researches. Is it not a shame that 
their researches are not the common property of the  masses ?   
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, p.p. 318-2 0; 4-2-1916   
 
The Foreign Medium   
The foreign medium has caused brain fag, put an und ue strain upon nerves of our 
children, made them crammers and imitators, unfitte d them for original work and 
thought, and disabled them for filtrating their lea rning to the family or the masses. The foreign medium has made our children practicall y foreigners in their own land. It 
is the greatest tragedy of the existing system. The  foreign medium has prevented the 
growth of our vernaculars. If I had the powers of a  despot, I would today stop the 
tuition of our boys and girls through a foreign med ium, and require all the teachers 
and professors on pain of dismissal to introduce th e change forthwith. I would not 
wait for the preparation of text-books. They will f ollow the change. It is an evil that 
needs a summary remedy.  
Young India, 1-9-1921  
 
But for the fact that the only higher education, th e only education worth the name has 
been received by us through the English medium, the re would be no need to prove 
such a self-evident proposition that the youth of a  nation to remain a nation must 
receive all instruction including the highest in it s own vernacular or vernaculars. 
Surely, it is a self-demonstrated proposition that the youth of a nation cannot keep or 
establish a living contact with the masses unless t heir knowledge is received and 
assimilated through a medium understood by the peop le. Who can calculate the 
immeasurable loss sustained by the nation owing to thousands of its young men 
having been obliged to waste years in mastering a f oreign language and its idiom of 
which in their daily life they have the least use a nd in learning which they had to 
neglect their own mother tongue and their own liter ature? There never was a greater 
superstition than that a particular language can be  incapable of expansion or 
expressing abstruse or scientific ideas. A language  is an exact reflection of the 
character and growth of its speakers.  
Among the many evils of foreign rule this blighting  imposition of a foreign medium 
upon the youth of the country will be counted by hi story as one of the greatest. It has 
sapped the energy of the nation, it has shortened t he lives of the pupils, it has 
estranged them from the masses, it has made educati on unnecessarily expensive. If 
this process is still persisted in, it bids fair to  rob the nation of its soul. The sooner 
therefore educated India shakes itself free from th e hypnotic spell of the foreign 
medium, the better it would be for them and the peo ple.  
Young India , 5-7-'' 28  
 
My Own Experience  
Let me give a chapter from my own experience. Up to  the age of 12 all the knowledge 
I gained was through Gujarati, my mother tongue. I knew then something of 
Arithmetic, History and Geography. Then I entered a  High School. For the first three 
years the mother tongue was still the medium. But t he schoolmaster's business was to drive English into the pupil's head. Therefore m ore than half of our time was given 
to learning English and mastering its arbitrary spe lling and pronunciation. It was a 
painful discovery to have to learn a language that was not pronounced as it was 
written. It was a strange experience to learn the s pelling by heart. But that is by the 
way, and irrelevant to my argument. However, for th e first three years, it was 
comparatively plain sailing.  
The pillory began with the fourth year. Everything had to be learnt through English—
Geometry, Algebra, Chemistry, Astronomy, History, G eography. The tyranny of 
English was so great that even Sanskrit or Persian had to be learnt through English, 
not through the mother tongue. It any boy spoke in the class in Gujarati which he 
understood, he was punished. It did not matter to t he teacher if a boy spoke bad 
English which he could neither pronounce correctly nor understand fully. Why should 
the teacher worry? His own English was by no means without blemish. It could not be 
otherwise. English was as much a foreign language t o him as to his pupils. The result 
was chaos. We the boys had to learn many things by heart, though we could not 
understand them fully and often not at all. My head  used to reel as the teacher was 
struggling to make his exposition on Geometry under stood by us. I could make 
neither head nor tail of Geometry till we reached t he 13th theorem of the first book of 
Euclid. And let me confess to the reader that in sp ite of all my love for the mother 
tongue, I do not to this day know the Gujarati equi valents of the technical terms of 
Geometry, Algebra and the like. I know now that wha t I took four years to learn of 
Arithmetic, Geometry, Algebra, Chemistry and Astron omy, I should have learnt easily 
in one year, if I had not to learn them through Eng lish but Gujarati. My grasp of the 
subjects would have been easier and clearer. My Guj arati vocabulary would have been 
richer. I would have made use of such knowledge in my own home. This English 
medium created an impassable barrier between me and  the members of my family, 
who had not gone through English schools. My father  knew nothing of what I was 
doing. I could not, even if I had wished it, intere st my father in what I was learning. 
For though he had ample intelligence, he knew not a  word of English. I was fast 
becoming a stranger in my own home. I certainly bec ame a superior person. Even my 
dress began to undergo imperceptible changes. What happened to me was not an 
uncommon experience. It was common to the majority.  
The first three years in the High School made littl e addition to my stock of general 
knowledge. They were a preparation for fitting the boys for teaching them everything 
through English. High Schools were schools for cult ural conquest by the English. The 
knowledge gained by the three hundred boys of my Hi gh School became a 
circumscribed possession. It was not for transmissi on to the masses.  A word about literature. We had to learn several bo oks of English prose and English 
poetry. No doubt all this was nice. But that knowle dge has been of no use to me in 
serving or bringing me in touch with the masses. I am unable to say that if I had not 
learnt what I did of English prose and poetry, I sh ould have missed a rare treasure. If 
I had, instead, passed those precious seven years i n mastering Gujarati and had 
learnt Mathematics, Sciences, and Sanskrit and othe r subjects through Gujarati, I 
could easily have shared the knowledge so gained wi th my neighbours. I would have 
enriched Gujarati, and who can say that I would not  have, with my habit of 
application and my inordinate love for the country and the mother tongue, made a 
richer and greater contribution to the service of t he masses?  
I must not be understood to decry English or its no ble literature. The columns of the 
Harijan are sufficient evidence of my love of Engli sh. But the nobility of its literature 
cannot avail the Indian nation any more than the te mperate climate or the scenery of 
English can avail her. India has to flourish in her  own climate and scenery and her 
own literature, even though all the three may be in ferior to the English climate, 
scenery and literature. We and our children must bu ild on our own heritage. If we 
borrow another we impoverish our own. We can never grow on foreign victuals. I 
want the nation to have the treasures contained in that language, and for that matter 
the other languages of the world, through its own v ernaculars. I do not need to learn 
Bengali in order to know the beauties of Rabindrana th's matchless productions. I get 
them through good translations. Gujarati boys and g irls do not need to learn Russian 
to appreciate Tolstoy's short stories. They learn t hem through good translations. It is 
the boast of Englishmen that the best of the world' s literary output is in the hands of 
that nation in simple English inside of a week of i ts publication. Why need I learn 
English to get at the best of what Shakespeare and Milton thought and wrote?  
It would be good economy to set apart a class of st udents whose business would be to 
learn the best of what is to be learnt in the diffe rent languages of the world and give 
the translation in the vernaculars. Our masters cho se the wrong way for us, and habit 
has made the wrong appear as right.  
I find daily proof of the increasing and continuing  wrong being done to the millions by 
our false de-Indianizing education. These graduates  who are my valued associates 
themselves flounder when they have to give expressi on to their innermost thoughts. 
They are strangers in their own homes. Their vocabu lary in the mother tongue is so 
limited that they cannot always finish their speech  without having recourse to English 
words and even sentences. Nor can they exist withou t English books. They often write 
to one another in English. I cite the case of my co mpanions to show how deep the evil 
has gone. For we have made a conscious effort to me nd ourselves.  It has been argued that the wastage that occurs in our colleges need not worry us if, 
out of the collegians, one Jagadish Bose can be pro duced by them. I should freely 
subscribe to the argument, if the wastage was unavo idable. I hope I have shown that 
it was and is even now avoidable. Moreover the crea tion of a Bose does not help the 
argument. For Bose was not a product of the present  education. He rose in spite of 
the terrible handicaps under which he had to labour . And his knowledge became 
almost intransmissible to the masses. We seem to ha ve come to think that no one can 
hope to be like a Bose unless he knows English. I c annot conceive a grosser 
superstition than this. No Japanese feels so helple ss as we seem to do.  
The medium of instruction should be altered at once  and at any cost, the provincial 
languages being given their rightful place. I would  prefer temporary chaos in higher 
education to the criminal waste that is daily accum ulating. In order to enhance the 
status and the market-value of the provincial langu ages, I would have the language of 
the law courts to be the language of the province w here the court is situated. The 
proceedings of the provincial legislatures must be in the language, or even the 
languages of the province where a province has more  than one language within its 
borders. I suggest to the legislators that they cou ld, by enough application, inside of a 
month understand the languages of their provinces. There is nothing to prevent a 
Tamilian from easily learning the simple grammar an d a few hundred words of Telugu, 
Malayalam, and Kanarese all allied to Tamil. At the  centre Hindustani must rule 
supreme.  
In my opinion this is not a question to be decided by academicians. They cannot 
decide through what language the boys and girls of a place are to be educated. That 
question is already decided for them in every free country. Nor can they decide the 
subjects to be taught. That depends upon the wants of the country to which they 
belong. There is a privilege of enforcing the natio n's will in the best manner possible. 
When this country becomes really free, the question  of medium will be settled only 
one way. The academicians will frame the syllabus a nd prepare text-books 
accordingly. And the products of the education of a  free India will answer the 
requirements of the country as today they answer th ose of the foreign ruler. So long 
as we the educated classes play with this question,  I very much fear we shall not 
produce the free and healthy India of our dream. We  have to grow by strenuous effort 
out of our bondage, whether is it Educational, Econ omical, Social or Political. The 
effort itself is three-fourths of the battle.  
Harijan, 9-7-1938  
 
Need for Quick Action   If the medium is changed at once and not gradually,  in an incredibly short time we 
shall find text-books and teachers coming into bein g to supply the want. And if we 
mean business, in a year's time we shall find that we need never have been party of 
the tragic waste of the nation's time and energy in  trying to learn the essentials of 
culture through a foreign medium. The condition of success is undoubtedly that 
provincial languages are introduced at once in Gove rnment offices and courts, if the 
Provincial Governments have the power or the influe nce over the courts. If we believe 
in the necessity of the reform, we can achieve it i n no time.  
Harijan, 30-7-38  
 
Technical Education through the Mother Tongue   
Gandhiji deprecated the suggestion that it would ne ed a lot of research and 
preparation to enable them to impart technical educ ation through the medium of the 
mother tongue. Those who argued like that, were una ware of the rich treasure of 
expressions and idioms that were buried in the dial ects of our villages. In Gandhiji's 
opinion there was no need to go to Sanskrit or Pers ian in search for many 
expressions. He had been in Champaran and he had fo und that the village folk there, 
could fully express themselves with ease and withou t the help of a single foreign 
expression or idiom. As an illustration of their re sourcefulness, he mentioned the word 
hava gadi which they had coined to denote a motor c ar.  
Harijan, 18-8-46  
 
Mother Tongue Fundamental   
I must cling to my mother tongue as to my mother's breast, in spite of its 
shortcomings. It alone can give me the life-giving milk.  
Harijan, 25-8-46  
National Language and Script  
Hindi : The National Language for India   
It behaves us to devote attention to a consideratio n of a national language, as we 
have done to that of the medium of instruction. If English is to become a national 
language, it ought to be treated as a compulsory su bject. Can English become the 
national language? Some learned patriots contend th at even to raise the question 
betrays ignorance. In their opinion, English alread y occupies that place. His Excellency 
the Viceroy in his recent utterance has merely expr essed a hope that English will 
occupy that place. His enthusiasm does not take him  as far as that of the former. His 
Excellency believes that English will day after day  command a larger place, will 
permeate the family circle, and at last rise to the  status of a national language. A superficial consideration will support the vicerega l contention. The condition of our 
educated classes gives one the impression that all our activities would come to a 
stand-still if we stop the use of English. And yet deeper thought will show that English 
can never and ought not to become the national lang uage of India. What is the test of 
national language ?  
(1) For the official class it should be easy to lea rn.  
(2) The religious, commercial and political activit y throughout India should be possible 
in that language.  
(3) It should be the speech of the majority of the inhabitants of India.  
(4) For the whole of the country it should be easy to learn.  
(5) In considering the question, weight ought not t o be put upon momentary of short-
lived conditions.  
The English language does not fulfill any of the co nditions above-named. The first 
ought to have been the last, but I have purposely g iven it the first place, because that 
condition alone gives it the appearance of being ap plicable to the English language. 
But upon further consideration we should find that for the officials even at the present 
moment it is not an easy language to learn. In our scheme of administration, it is 
assumed that the number of English officials will p rogressively decrease, so that in the 
end only the Viceroy and others whom one may count on one's finger-tips will be 
English. The majority are of Indian nationality tod ay, and their number must increase.  
And every one will admit that for them, English is more difficult to be learnt than any 
Indian language. Upon an examination of the second condition, we find that until the 
public at large can speak English, religious activi ty through that tongue is an 
impossibility. And a spread of English to that exte nt among the masses seems also 
impossible.  
English cannot satisfy the third condition, because  the majority in India do not speak 
it.  
The fourth, too, cannot be satisfy by English, beca use it is not an easy language to 
learn for the whole of India.  
Considering the last condition we observe that the position that English occupies 
today is momentary. The permanent condition is that  there will be little necessity for 
English in national affairs. It will certainly be r equired for imperial affairs. That, 
therefore, it will be an imperial language, the lan guage of diplomacy, is a different 
question. For that purpose its knowledge is a neces sity. We are not jealous of English. 
All that is contended for is, that it ought not to be allowed to go beyond its proper 
sphere. And as it will be the imperial language, we  shall compel our Malaviyajis, our Shastriars and our Banerjees to learn it. And we sh all feel assured that they will 
advertise the greatness of India in other parts of the world. But English cannot 
become the national language of India. To give it t hat place is like an attempt to 
introduce Esperanto. In my opinion, it is unmanly e ven to think that English can 
become our national language. The attempt to introd uce Esperanto merely betrays 
ignorance. Then which is the language that satisfie s all the five conditions ? We shall 
be obliged to admit that Hindi satisfies all those conditions.  
I call that language Hindi which Hindus and Mohamme dans in the North speak and 
write, either in the Devanagari or the Urdu charact er. Exception has been taken to 
this definition. It seems to be argued that Hindi a nd Urdu are different languages. This 
is not a valid argument. In the Northern parts of I ndia, Mussalmans and Hindus speak 
the same language. The literate classes have create d a division. The learned Hindus 
have Sanskritized Hindi. The Mussalmans, therefore,  cannot understand it. The 
Moslems of Lucknow have Persianized their speech an d made it unintelligible to the 
Hindus. These represent two excesses of the same la nguage. They find no common 
place in the speech of the masses. I have lived in the North. I have freely mixed with 
Hindus and Mohammedans and although I have but a po or knowledge of Hindi, I have 
never found any difficulty in holding communion wit h them. Call the language of the 
North what you will, Urdu or Hindi, it is the same.  If you write it in the Urdu character 
you may know it as Urdu. Write the same thing in th e Nagari character and it is Hindi.  
There, therefore, remains a difference about the sc ript. For the time being 
Mohammedan children will certainly write in the Urd u character, and Hindus will 
mostly write in the Devanagari. I say mostly, becau se thousands of Hindus use the 
Urdu character, and some do not even know the Nagar i character. But when Hindus 
and Mohammedans come to regard one another without suspicion, when the causes 
begetting suspicion are removed, that script which has greater vitality will be more 
universally used, and therefore, become the nationa l script. Meanwhile those Hindus 
and Mohammedans who desire to write their petitions  in the Urdu character, should 
be free to do so and should have the right of havin g them accepted at the seat of the 
National Government.  
There is not another language capable of competing with Hindi in satisfying the five 
conditions. Bengali comes next to Hindi. But the Be ngalis themselves make use of 
Hindi outside Bengal. No one wonders to see a Hindi -speaking man making use of 
Hindi, no matter where he goes. Hindu preachers and  Mohammedan Moulvis deliver 
their religious discourses throughout India in Hind i and Urdu and even the illiterate 
masses follow them. Even the unlettered Gujarati go ing to the North, attempts to use 
a few Hindi words whereas a gate-keeper from the No rth declines to speak in Gujarati 
even to his employer, who has on that account to sp eak to him in broken Hindi. I have heard Hindi spoken even in the Dravid country.  It is not true to say that in 
Madras one can go on with English. Even there I hav e employed Hindi with effect. In 
the trains I have heard Madras passengers undoubted ly use Hindi. It is worthy of note 
that Mohammedans throughout India speak Urdu and th ey are to be found in large 
numbers in every Province. Thus Hindi is destined t o be the national language. We 
have made use of it as such in times gone by. The r ise of Urdu itself is due to that 
fact. The Mohammedan kings were unable to make Pers ian or Arabic the national 
language. They accepted the Hindi grammar, but empl oyed the Urdu character and 
Persian words in their speeches. They could not, ho wever, carry on their intercourse 
with the masses through a foreign tongue. All this is not unknown to the English. 
Those who know anything of the sepoys, know that fo r them military terms have had 
to be prepared in Hindi or Urdu.  
Thus we see that Hindi alone can become the nationa l language. It presents some 
difficulty in case of the learned classes in Madras . For men from the Deccan, Gujarat, 
Sind and Bengal it is easy enough. In a few months they can acquire sufficient 
command over Hindi to enable them to carry on natio nal intercourse in that tongue. It 
is not so for the Tamils. The Dravidian languages a re distinct from their Sanskrit sister 
in structure and grammar. The only thing common to the two groups is their Sanskrit 
vocabulary to an extent. But the difficulty is conf ined to the learned class alone. We 
have a right to appeal to their patriotic spirit an d expect them to put forth sufficient 
effort in order to learn Hindi. For in future when Hindi has received State recognition, 
it will be introduced as a compulsory language in M adras as in other Provinces, and 
intercourse between Madras and them will then incre ase. English has not permeated 
the Dravidian masses. Hindi, however, will take no time.  
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, pp.395-99;  20-10-17  
 
The Need for Hindustani  
I have ventured to advise every student to devote t his year of our trial to the 
manufacture of yarn and learning Hindustani. I am t hankful to the Calcutta students 
that they have taken kindly to the suggestion. Beng al and Madras are the two 
Provinces that are cut off from the rest of India f or want of a knowledge of Hindustani 
on their part. Bengal, because of its prejudice aga inst learning any other language of 
India, and Madras, because of the difficulty of the  Dravidians about picking up 
Hindustani. An average Bengali can really learn Hin dustani in two months if he gave it 
three hours per day and a Dravidian in six months a t the same rate. Neither a Bengali 
not a Dravidian can hope to achieve the same result  with English in the same time. A 
knowledge of English opens up intercourse only with  the comparatively few English-knowing Indians, whereas a possible knowledge of Hi ndustani enables up to hold 
intercourse with the largest number of our countrym en. I do hope the Bengalis and 
the Dravidians will come to the next Congress with a workable knowledge of 
Hindustani. Our greatest assembly cannot be a real object-lesson to the masses 
unless it speaks to them in a language which the la rgest number can understand. I 
appreciate the difficulty with the Dravidians, but nothing is difficult before their 
industrious love for the motherland . . . . You and  I, and every one of us has 
neglected the true education that we should have re ceived in our national schools. It 
is impossible for the young men of Bengal, for the young men of Gujarat, for the 
young men of the Deccan to go to the Central Provin ces, to go to the United 
Provinces, to go to the Punjab and all those vast t racts of India which speak nothing 
but Hindustani, and therefore I ask you to learn Hi ndustani also in your leisure hours. 
Do not consider for one moment that you can possibl y make English a common 
medium of expression between the masses. Twenty-two  crores of Indians know 
Hindustani—they do not know any other language. And  if you want to steal into their 
hearts, Hindustani is the only language open to you .  
Young India, 2-2-1921  
 
The Richness of the Hindi Language   
You talk of the poverty of Hindi literature—you tal k of the poverty of today's Hindi, but 
if you dive deep into the pages of Tulsidas, probab ly you will share my opinion that 
there is no other book that stands equal to it in t he literature of the world in modern 
languages. That one book has given me faith and hop e which no other book has 
given. I think that it is a book which can stand an y criticism and any scrutiny, alike in 
literary grace, in metaphor and in religious fervou r.  
Young India, 9-2-1921  
 
Hindustani and Mother Tongue   
A fear had been expressed, observed Gandhiji, that the propagation of Rashtrabhasha 
or the national tongue would prove inimical to the provincial languages. That fear was 
rooted in ignorance. Provincial tongues provided th e sure foundation on which the 
edifice of the national tongue should rest. The two  were intended to complement, not 
supplant each other.  
Harijan, 18-8-1946  
 
A Common Script   If we are to make good our claim as one nation, we must have several things in 
common. We have a common culture running through a variety of creeds and sub-
creeds. We have common disabilities. I am endeavour ing to show that a common 
material for our dress is not only desirable but ne cessary. We need also a common 
language not in suppression of the vernaculars, but  in addition to them. It is generally 
agreed that that medium should be Hindustani—a resu ltant of Hindi and Urdu, neither 
highly Sanskritized, nor highly Persianized or Arab ianized. The greatest obstacle in the 
way are the numerous scripts we have for the vernac ulars. If it is possible to adopt a 
common script, we should remove a great hindrance i n the way of realizing the 
dream, which at present it is, of having a common l anguage.  
A variety of scripts is an obstacle in more ways th an one. It constitutes an effectual 
barrier against the acquisition of knowledge. The A ryan languages have so much in 
common that, if a great deal of time had not to be wasted in mastering the different 
scripts, we should all know several languages witho ut much difficulty ; for instance, 
most people who have a little knowledge of Sanskrit  would have no difficulty in 
understanding the matchless creation of Rabindranat h Tagore, if it was all printed in 
Devanagari script. But the Bengalee script is a not ice to the non-Bengalis—"hands 
off". Conversely, if the Bengalis knew the Devanaga ri script, they would at once be 
able to enjoy the marvellous beauty and spiritualit y of Tulsidas and a host of other 
Hindustani writers. When I returned to India in 190 5, I had a communication from a 
society whose headquarters were, I believe, in Calc utta, and whose object was to 
advocate a common script for all India. I do not kn ow the activities of that society, 
but its object is worthy, and a great deal of subst antial work can be done by a few 
earnest workers in this direction. There are obviou s limitations. A common script for 
all India is a distant ideal. A common script for a ll those who speak the Indo-Sanskrit 
languages, including the Southern stock, is a pract ical ideal, if we can but shed our 
provincialisms. There is little virtue, for instanc e, in Gujarati clinging to the Gujarati 
script. A provincial patriotism is good where it fe eds the larger stream of all-India 
patriotism, as the latter is good to the extent tha t it serves the still larger end of the 
universe. But a provincial patriotism that says "In dia is nothing. Gujarat is all", is 
wickedness. I have selected Gujarat because it is t he half-way house, and because I 
am myself a Gujarati. In Gujarat, somewhat fortunat ely, those who settled the 
principles of primary education, decided to make De vanagari script compulsory. Every 
Gujarati boy or girl, who has passed through a scho ol, therefore knows both the 
Gujarati and the Devanagari scripts. If the committ ee had decided upon purely 
Devanagari script, it would have been better still.  No doubt, the research scholars 
would still have learnt the Gujarati script for dec iphering old manuscripts, but the 
Gujarati boy's energy would have been spared for mo re useful labour, if he had to learn only one instead of two scripts. The committe e that settled the education 
scheme for Maharashtra, was more enlightened, and i t simply required the 
Devanagari script. The result is that a Mahratta re ads, so far as mere reading is 
concerned, Tulsidas with as much facility as he rea ds Tukaram, and Gujaratis and 
Hindustanis read Tukaram with equal facility. The c ommittee in Bengal, on the other 
hand, ruled otherwise, with the result we all know and many of us deplore. The 
treasures of the richest Indian vernacular have bee n rendered most difficult of access 
as if by design. That Devanagari should be the comm on script, I suppose, does not 
need any demonstration—the deciding factor being th at it is the script known to the 
largest part of India.  
These reflections arise, because, I was called upon  to solve, during my visit to 
Cuttack, a practical question. There is a tribe wed ged between the Hindi-speaking 
people in Bihar and Uriya-speaking people of Orissa . What was to be done for the 
education of its children ? Were they to be taught through Uriya of through Hindi ? Or 
were they to be taught through their own dialect, a nd if they were, was the script to 
be Devanagari or a new invention ? The first though t of the Utkal friends was to 
absorb the tribe amongst the Uriyas. The Biharis wo uld think of absorbing them in 
Bihar, and if the elders of the tribe were consulte d, they would most probably and 
naturally say that their dialect was just as good a s the Uriya or the Bihari, and that it 
should be reduced to writing. And for them it would  be a toss whether the script to be 
adopted should be Devanagari or Uriya, if not even a newly invented script, as has 
happened in modern times in at least two instances I know. Endeavouring to think in 
terms of all-India I suggested to my friends that, whilst it was proper for them to 
strengthen the Uriya language among the Uriya-speak ing people, the children of this 
tribe should be taught Hindi and naturally the scri pt should be Devanagari. A spirit 
that is so exclusive and narrow as to want every fo rm of speech to be perpetuated 
and developed, is anti-national and anti-universal.  All undeveloped and unwritten 
dialects should, in my humble opinion, be sacrifice d and merged in the great 
Hindustani stream. It would be a sacrifice only to be nobler, not a suicide. If we are to 
have a common language for cultured India, we must arrest the growth of any 
process of disintegration or multiplication of lang uages and scripts. We must promote 
a common language. The beginning must naturally be made with the script, and until 
the Hindu-Muslim question is solved, confined perha ps to Hindu India. If I could have 
my way, I would make the learning of Devanagari scr ipt and Urdu script, in addition 
to the established provincial script, compulsory in  all the provinces and I would print 
in Devanagari chief books in the different vernacul ars with a literal translation in 
Hindustani.  
Young India, 27-8-1925  Roman Script   
Regarding the replacing of the Urdu and Nagari scri pts by the Roman script, however 
attractive the proposition may appear to be, in my opinion, the replacing would be a 
fatal blunder and we would find ourselves in the fi re out of the frying pan.  
Harijan, 23-3-1947  
Other Languages  
Every cultured Indian should know in addition to hi s own provincial language, if a 
Hindu, Sanskrit; if a Mohammedan, Arabic; if a Pars ee, Persian; and all, Hindi. Some 
Hindus should know Arabic and Persian; some Mohamme dans and Parsees, Sanskrit. 
Several Northerners and Westerners should learn Tam il. A universal language for 
India should be Hindi, with the option of writing i t in Persian or Nagari characters. In 
order that the Hindus and Mohammedans may have clos er relations, it is necessary to 
know both the characters.  
Hind Swaraj (1908), p. 107  
 
If I had not acquired the little Sanskrit that I le arnt then, I should have found it 
difficult to take any interest in our scared books.  In fact I deeply regret that I was not 
able to acquire a more thorough knowledge of the la nguage, because I have since 
realized that every Hindu boy and girl should posse ss sound Sanskrit learning.  
It is now my opinion that in all Indian curricula o f higher education there should be a 
place for Hindi, Sanskrit, Persian, Arabic and Engl ish, besides of course the 
vernacular. This big list need not frighten anyone.  If our education were more 
systemic, and the boys free from the burden of havi ng to learn their subjects through 
a foreign medium, I am sure learning all these lang uages would not be an irksome 
task, but a perfect pleasure. A scientific knowledg e of one language makes a 
knowledge of other languages comparatively easy.  
Autobiography (1926), p. 30  
The Place of English   
English is a language of international commerce, it  is the language of diplomacy, and 
it contains many a rich literary treasure, it gives  us an introduction to Western 
thought and culture. For a few of us, therefore, a knowledge of English is necessary. 
They can carry on the departments of national comme rce and international diplomacy, 
and for giving to the nation the best of Western li terature, thought, and science. That 
would be the legitimate use of English, whereas tod ay English has usurped the 
dearest place in our hearts and dethroned our mothe r tongues. It is an unnatural 
place due to our unequal relations with Englishmen.  The highest development of the 
Indian mind must be possible without a knowledge of  English. It is doing violence to the manhood and specially the womanhood of India to  encourage our boys and girls 
to think that an entry into the best society is imp ossible without a knowledge of 
English. It is too humiliating a thought to be bear able. To get rid of the infatuation for 
English is one of the essentials of Swaraj.  
Young India, 2-2-1921  
I know this tussle between English and Hindi is alm ost an eternal tussle. Whenever I 
have addressed student audiences, I have been surpr ised by the demand for English. 
You know, or ought to know, that I am a lover of th e English language. But I do 
believe that the students of India, who are expecte d to throw in their lot with the 
teeming millions and to serve them, will be better qualified if they pay more attention 
to Hindi than to English. I do not say that you sho uld not learn English ; learn it by all 
means. But, so far as I can see, it cannot be the l anguage of the millions of Indian 
homes. It will be confined to thousands or tens of thousands, but it will not reach the 
millions.  
Harijan, 17-11-''33  
 
I love the English tongue in its own place, but I a m its inveterate opponent, if it 
usurps a place which does not belong to it. English  is today admittedly the world 
language. I would therefore accord it a place as a second, optional language, not in 
the school but in the university course. That can o nly be for the select few—not for 
the millions. Today when we have not the means to i ntroduce even free compulsory 
primary education, how can we make provision for te aching English ? Russia has 
achieved all her scientific progress without Englis h. It is our mental slavery that 
makes us feel that we cannot do without English. I can never subscribe to that 
defeatist creed.  
Harijan, 25-8-''46  COMPULSORY EDUCATION 
 
 
Compulsory Education  
I am not quite sure that I would not oppose compuls ory education at all times. All 
compulsion is hateful to me. I would no more have t he nation become educated by 
compulsion than I would have it become sober by suc h questionable means. But just 
as I would discourage drink by refusing to open dri nk shops and closing existing ones, 
so would I discourage illiteracy by removing obstac les in the path and opening free 
schools and making them responsive to the people's needs. But at the present 
moment we have not even tried on any large scale th e experiment of free education. 
We have offered the parents no inducements. We have  not even sufficiently or at all 
advertised the value of literacy. We have not the p roper school-masters for the 
training. In my opinion therefore it is altogether too early to think of compulsion. I am 
not even sure that the experiment in compulsory edu cation has been uniformly 
successful wherever it has been tried. If the major ity wants education, compulsion is 
wholly unnecessary. If it does not, compulsion woul d be most harmful. Only a 
despotic Government passes laws in the teeth of the  opposition of a majority. Has the 
Government afforded full facilities for education t o the children of the majority ? We 
have been compulsion-ridden for the past hundred ye ars or more. The State rules our 
life in its manifold details without our pervious s anction. It is time to use the nation to 
voluntary methods even though for the time being th ere may be no response to 
prayers, petitions and advice addressed to the nati on. It has had little response to its 
prayers. Nothing is more detrimental to the true gr owth of society than for it to be 
habituated to the belief that no reform can be achi eved by voluntary effort. A people 
so trained become wholly unfit for Swaraj.  
It follows from what I have said above that if we g et Swaraj today I should resist 
compulsory education at least till every effort at voluntary primary education has been 
honestly made and failed. Let the reader not forget  that there is more illiteracy in 
India today than there was fifty years ago, not bec ause the parents are less willing 
but because the facilities they had before have dis appeared under a system so foreign 
and unnatural for the country.   
It is not reasonable to assume that the majority of  parents are so foolish or heartless 
as to neglect the education of their children even when it is brought to their doors free 
of charge.   
Young India, 14-8-1924  EDUCATION OF SPECIAL GROUPS 
Adult Education  
In my opinion what we have reason to deplore and be  ashamed of is not so much 
illiteracy as ignorance. Therefore for adult educat ion I should have an intensive 
programme of driving out ignorance through carefull y selected teachers with an 
equally carefully selected syllabus, according to w hich they would educate the adult 
villagers'' mind. This is not to say that I would n ot give them a knowledge of the 
alphabet. I value it too much to despise or even be little its merit as a vehicle of 
education. I appreciate Prof. Laubach's immense lab ours in the way of making the 
alphabet easy and Prof. Bhagwat's great and    and practical contribution in the same 
direction. Indeed I have invited the latter to come  to Segaon whenever he chooses 
and try his art on the men, women and even children  of Segaon.  
Harijan, 5-6-1937  
 
Q. In our schemes for adult education should the ai m be to promote the spread of 
literacy or to impart 'useful knowledge'?  
A. The primary need of those who are come of age an d are following an avocation, is 
to know how to read and write. Mass illiteracy is I ndia's sin and shame and must be 
liquidated. Of course, the literacy campaign must n ot begin and end with a knowledge 
of the alphabet.  
It must go hand in hand with the spread of useful k nowledge. But Municipal bodies 
should beware of trying to ride two horses at a tim e, or else they are sure to come a 
cropper.  
Harijan, 18-2-1939  
 
The Gandhi Mission Society, Tiruvennainallur, send me their half-yearly report of adult 
literary work. The total number of adults educated was 197. But the problem that 
really faces them is 'how to enable the adults to r etain the knowledge thus gained'. 
The report goes on : 'Nearly half the members who a ttended the class during the first 
session have approached the worker in charge to rep eat the lessons. In fact they had 
lapsed into illiteracy. The workers are racking the ir brains to devise means to prevent 
this lapse.' The workers need not rack their brains  at all. The lapse is bound to occur 
after the short courses that are given. The lapse c an only be prevented by correlating 
the teaching to the villagers` daily wants. The dry  knowledge of the three R's is not 
even now, it can never be, a permanent part of the villagers' life. They must have 
knowledge given to them which they must use daily. It must not be thrust upon them. 
They should have the appetite for it. What they hav e today is something they neither want nor appreciate. Give the villagers village ari thmetic, village geography, village 
history, and the literary knowledge that they must use daily, i.e. reading and writing 
letters, etc. They will treasure such knowledge and  pass on to the other stages. They 
have no use for books which give them nothing of da ily use.  
Harijan, 22-6-1940  
 
 
Women's Education  
Women's Education   
Man and woman are of equal rank but they are not id entical. They are a peerless pair 
being supplementary to one another; each helps the other, so that without the one 
the existence of the other cannot be conceived, and  therefore it follows as a necessary 
corollary from these facts that anything that will impair the status of either of them 
will involve the equal ruin of them both. In framin g any scheme of women's education 
this cardinal truth must be constantly kept in mind . Man is supreme in the outward 
activities of a married pair and therefore it is in  the fitness of things that he should 
have a greater knowledge thereof. On the other hand , home life is entirely the sphere 
of woman and therefore in domestic affairs, in the upbringing and education of 
children, women ought to have more knowledge. Not t hat knowledge should be 
divided into watertight compartments, or that some branches of knowledge should be 
closed to any one; but unless courses of instructio n are based on a discriminating 
appreciation of these basic principles, the fullest  life of man and woman cannot be 
developed.  
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, pp. 425, 4 26 ; 20-2-1918  
 
Women and English Education  
I do not believe in women working for a living or u ndertaking commercial enterprises. 
The few women who may require or desire to have Eng lish education, can very easily 
have their way by joining the schools for men. To i ntroduce English education in 
schools meant for women could only lead to prolongi ng our helplessness. I have often 
read and heard people saying that the rich treasure s of English literature should be 
opened alike to men and women. I submit in all humi lity that there is some 
misapprehension in assuming such an attitude. No on e intends to close these 
treasures against women while keeping them open for  men. There is none on earth 
able to prevent you from studying the literature of  the whole world if you are fond of 
literary tastes. But when courses of education have  been framed with the needs of an entire society in view, you cannot supply the requi rements of the few who have 
cultivated a literary taste.  
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, pp. 426, 4 27; 20-2-1918  
 
Illiteracy among Women   
As for illiteracy among the women, its cause is not  mere laziness and inertia as in the 
case of men. A more potent cause is the status of i nferiority with which an 
immemorial tradition has, unjustly branded her. Man  has converted her into a 
domestic drudge and an instrument of his pleasure, instead of regarding her as his 
helpmate and 'better half'! The result is a semi-pa ralysis of our society. Woman has 
rightly been called the mother of the race. We owe it to her and to ourselves to undo 
the great wrong that we have done her.  
Harijan, 18-2-1939  
Harijan Education  
Harijan education is the most difficult of all. Be it in the crudest manner possible, a 
non-Harijan child receives some home culture. A Har ijan child, being shunned by 
society, has none. Even when, therefore, all primar y schools are open to Harijan 
children, as they must be sooner or later and in my  opinion sooner rather than later, 
preliminary schools will be needed for Harijan chil dren if they are not to labour under 
a perpetual handicap. This preliminary training can  be discovered and tried in all the 
numerous Harijan schools conducted under the aegis of Harijan Sevak Sanghas 
scattered throughout India. That preliminary traini ng should consist in teaching 
Harijan children manners, good speech and good cond uct. A Harijan child sits anyhow 
; dresses anyhow; his eyes, ears, teeth, hair, nail s, nose are often full of dirt; many 
never know what is to have a wash. I remember what I did when in 1915 I picked up 
a Harijan boy at Tranquebar (in Tamilnad) and took him with me to Kochrab where 
the Ashram was then situated. I had him shaved. He was then thoroughly washed and 
given a simple dhoti, vest and a cap. In a few minu tes in appearance he became 
indistinguishable from any child from a cultured ho me. His head, eyes, ears, nose 
were thoroughly cleaned. His feet which were laden with dust were rubbed and 
cleaned out. Such a process has to be gone through every day, if need be, with 
Harijan children attending schools. Their lesson sh ould begin for the first three months 
with teaching them cleanliness. They should be taug ht also how to eat properly, 
though as I write this sentence I recall what I had  seen during the walking pilgrimage 
in Orissa. Harijan boys and grown-ups, who were fed  at some of the stages, ate with 
much better cleanness than the others who soiled th eir fingers, scattered about the 
leavings and left their places in a messy condition . Harijans had no leavings, and their dishes were left thoroughly clean. Their fingers, w hilst they were eating, were after 
every morsel taken licked clean. I know that all Ha rijan children do not eat so cleanly 
as the particular ones I have described.  
If this preliminary training is to be given in all Harijan schools, pamphlets giving 
detailed instructions for teachers in their languag es should be prepared and 
distributed, and inspectors of schools be required during their inspection to examine 
teachers and pupils on this head and to send full r eports of the progress made in this 
direction.  
This programme involves care in the selection of te achers and the training of the 
present staff. But all this is well worth the atten tion, if the Sangh is to discharge its 
trust by the thousands of Harijan children that are  brought under its care.  
Harijan, 18-5-35  HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
 
National Education  
The national University* stands today as a protest against British injustice, and as a 
vindication of national honour. But it has come to stay. It draws its inspiration from 
the national ideals of a united India. It stands fo r a religion which is the Dharma of 
the Hindus and Islam of Mohammedans. It wants to re scue the Indian vernaculars 
from unmerited oblivion and make them the fountains  of national regeneration and 
Indian culture. It holds that a systematic study of  Asiatic cultures is no less essential 
than the study of Western sciences for a complete e ducation for life. The vast 
treasures of Sanskrit and Arabic, Persian and Pali,  and Magadhi have to be ransacked 
in order to discover wherein lies the source of str ength for the nation. It does not 
propose merely to feed on, or repeat, the ancient c ultures. It rather hopes to build a 
new culture based on the traditions of the past, en riched by the experience of later 
times. It stands for the synthesis of the different  cultures that have come to stay in 
India, that have influenced Indian life and that, i n their turn, have themselves been 
influenced by the spirit of the soil. This synthesi s will naturally be of the Swadeshi 
type where each culture is assured its legitimate p lace, and not of American pattern, 
where one dominant culture absorbs the rest, and wh ere the aim is not towards 
harmony, but towards an artificial and forced unity . That is why the University has 
desired a study of all the Indian religions by its students. The Hindus may thus have 
an opportunity of studying the Koran and the Muslim s of knowing what the Hindu 
Shastras contain. If the University has excluded an ything, it is the spirit of exclusion 
that regards any section of humanity as permanently  untouchable. The study of 
Hindustani, which is a national blend of Sanskrit, Hindi and Persianized Urdu, has 
been made compulsory. The spirit of independence wi ll be fostered not only through 
Religion, Politics and History but through vocation al training also, which alone can 
give the youths of the country economic independenc e and a backbone that comes 
out of a sense of self-respect. The University hope s to organize higher schools 
throughout the mofussil towns, so that education ma y be spread broadcast and 
filtered down to the masses as early as possible. T he use of Gujarati as the medium of 
education will facilitate this process and, ere lon g, the suicidal cleavage between the 
educated and the non-educated will be bridged. And as an effect of industrial 
education to the genteel folks, and literary educat ion for the industrial classes, the 
unequal distribution of wealth and the consequent s ocial discontent will be 
considerably checked. The greatest defect of the Go vernment Universities has been 
their alien control and the false values they have created as regards 'careers'. The Gujarat University by non-co-operating with the Gov ernment has automatically 
eradicated both these evils from its own system. If  the founders and promoters stick 
to this resolve till the Government becomes nationa lized, it will help them to cultivate 
a clear perception of national ideals and national needs.   
Tagore, pp. 445-57; 17-11-1920   
College Education not at State Expense   
I would revolutionize college education and relate it to national necessities. There 
would be degrees for mechanical and other engineers . They would be attached to the 
different industries which should pay for the train ing of the graduates they need. Thus 
the Tatas would be expected to run a college for tr aining engineers under the 
supervision of the State, the mill associations wou ld run among them a college for 
training graduates whom they need.  
Similarly for the other industries that may be name d. Commerce will have its college. 
There remains arts, medicine and agriculture. Sever al private arts colleges are today 
self-supporting. The State would, therefore, cease to run its own. Medical colleges 
would be attached to certified hospitals. As they a re popular among moneyed men 
they may be expected by voluntary contributions to support medical colleges. And 
agricultural colleges to be worthy of the name must  be self-supporting. I have a 
painful experience of some agricultural graduates. Their knowledge is superficial. They 
lack practical experience. But if they had their ap prenticeship on farms which are self-
sustained and answer the requirements of the countr y, they would not have to gain 
experience after getting their degrees and at the e xpense of their employers.  
Harijan, 31-7-1937  
 
 
 
Higher Education   
Higher education should be left to private enterpri se and for meeting national 
requirements whether in the various industries, tec hnical arts, belles-letters or fine 
arts.  
The State Universities should be purely examining b odies, self-supporting through the 
fees charged for examinations.  
Universities will look after the whole of the field  of education and will prepare and 
approve courses of studies in the various departmen ts of education. No private school 
should be run without the previous sanction of the respective Universities. University 
charters should be given liberally to any body of p ersons of proved worth and integrity, it being always understood that the Univ ersities will not cost the State 
anything except that it will bear the cost of runni ng a Central Education Department.  
The foregoing scheme does not absolve the State fro m running such seminaries as 
may be required for supplying State needs.  
Harijan, 2-10-1937  
 
(1) I am not opposed to education even of the highe st type attainable in the world.  
(2) The State must pay for it wherever it has defin ite use for it.  
(3) I am opposed to all higher education being paid  for from the general revenue.  
(4) It is my firm conviction that the vast amount o f the so-called education in arts, 
given in our colleges, is sheer waste and has resul ted in unemployment among the 
educated classes. What is more, it has destroyed th e health, both mental and 
physical, of the boys and girls who have the misfor tune to go through the grind in our 
colleges.  
(5) The medium of a foreign language through which higher education has been 
imparted in India has caused incalculable intellect ual and moral injury to the nation. 
We are too near our own times to judge the enormity  of the damage done. And we 
who have received such education have both to be vi ctims and judges—an almost 
impossible feat.  
Thus I claim that I am not an enemy of Higher Educa tion. But I am an enemy of 
Higher Education as it is given in this country. Un der my scheme there will be more 
and better libraries, more and better laboratories,  more and better research institutes. 
Under it we should have an army of chemists, engine ers and other experts who will be 
real servants of the nation, and answer the varied and growing requirements of a 
people who are becoming increasingly conscious of t heir rights and wants. And all 
these experts will speak, not a foreign language, b ut the language of the people. The 
knowledge gained by them will be the common propert y of the people. There will be 
truly original work instead of mere imitation. And the cost will be evenly and justly 
distributed.  
Harijan, 9-7-' 38  
 
An ex-professor writes a long letter on the above a rticle on Higher Education. From it 
I take the following relevant extract :  
"Your third conclusion about general revenue and cl aims of Higher Education and its 
corollary, viz. that Universities should be self-su pporting, has left me unconvinced. I 
believe that every country to be a progressive coun try must have sufficient facilities for the pursuit of all branches of knowledge—not me rely chemistry, medicine and 
engineering, but every kind of knowledge, literatur e, philosophy, history, sociology, 
both abstract and applied. All higher pursuits requ ire many facilities which cannot be 
had without State support. A country depending only  on voluntary effort for such 
pursuits is sure to fall behind and suffer. It can never hope to be free and be able to 
maintain that freedom. The State must be jealously watchful over the position of 
higher education in all fields. Voluntary effort mu st be there and we must have our 
Nuffields and Rockfellers, But the State cannot and  must not be allowed to remain a 
silent spectator. It must actively come forward to organize, help and direct. I wish you 
to clarify this aspect of the question.  
You say at the end of your article: 'Under my schem e there will more and better 
libraries.' I do not find The scheme you speak of i n your article, nor am I able to make 
out how 'more and better libraries and laboratories  will come into being there under. I 
am of opinion that such libraries and laboratories must be maintained, and so long as 
donors and voluntary agencies are not coming forwar d in sufficient numbers, the 
State cannot divest itself of this responsibility."   
My article is clear enough if the expression 'defin ite use' mentioned in it is given its 
extensive meaning. I have not pictured a poverty-st ricken India containing ignorant 
millions. I have pictured to myself an India contin ually progressing along the lines 
best suited to her genius. I do not, however, pictu re it as a third class or even a first 
class copy of the dying civilization of the West. I f my dream is fulfilled, and every one 
of the seven lakhs of villages become a well-living  republic in which there are no 
illiterates, in which no one is idle for want of wo rk, in which everyone is usefully 
occupied and has nourishing food, well-ventilated d wellings, and sufficient Khadi for 
covering the body, and in which all the villagers k now and observe the laws of 
hygiene and sanitation, such a State must have vari ed and increasing needs, which it 
must supply unless it would stagnate. I can therefo re well imagine the State financing 
all the education my correspondent mentions and muc h more that I could add. And if 
the State has such requirements, surely it will hav e corresponding libraries.  
What, however, according to my view the State will not have is an army of B.A.'s and 
M.A.'s with their brains sapped with too much cramm ing and minds almost paralyzed 
by the impossible attempt to speak and write Englis h like Englishmen. The majority of 
these have no work, no employment. And when they ha ve the latter, it is usually 
clerkships at which most of the knowledge gained du ring their twelve years of High 
Schools and Colleges is of no use whatsoever to the m.  
University training becomes self-supporting when it  is utilized by the State. It is 
criminal to pay for a training which benefits neith er the nation nor the individual. In my opinion there is no such thing as individual ben efit which cannot be proved to be 
also national benefit. And since most of my critics  seem to be agreed that the existing 
Higher Education, and for that matter both Primary and Secondary, are not connected 
with realities, it cannot be of benefit to the Stat e. When it is directly based on realities 
and is wholly given through the mother tongue, I sh all perhaps have nothing to say 
against it. To be based on realities is to be based  national, i.e. State, requirements. 
And the State will pay for it. Even when that happy  time comes, we shall find that 
many institutions will be conducted by voluntary co ntributions. They may or may not 
benefit the State. Much of what passes for educatio n today in India belongs to that 
category and would therefore not be paid for from t he general revenue, if I had the 
way.  
Harijan, 30-7-'' 38  
 
Reorientation of University Education   
Gandhiji remarked at the Conference of Education Mi nisters in Poona that what he had 
said about adult education applied to University ed ucation. It must be originally 
related to the Indian scene. It must therefore be a n extension and continuation of the 
Basic Education course. That was the central point.  If they did not see eye to eye with 
him on that point, he was afraid they would have li ttle use for his advice. If, on the 
other hand, they agreed with him that the present U niversity education did not fit 
them for independence but only enslaved them, they would be as impatient as he was 
to completely overhaul and scrap that system and re model it on new lines consonant 
with the national requirement.  
Today the youth educated in our universities either  ran after the Government jobs or 
fell into devious ways and sought outlet for their frustration by fomenting unrest. 
They were not even ashamed to beg or sponge upon ot hers. Such was their sad 
plight. The aim of University education should be t o turn out true servants of the 
people, who would live and die for the country's fr eedom. He was therefore of opinion 
that University education should be co-ordinated an d brought into line with Basic 
Education, by taking in teachers from the Talimi Sa ngh.  
Harijan, 25-8-1946  
 
On New Universities   
There seems to be a mania for establishing new univ ersities in the provinces. Gujarat 
wants one for Gujarati, Maharashtra for Marathi, Ka rnatic for Kannad, Orissa for 
Uriya, Assam for Assami and what not. I do believe that there should be such universities if these rich provincial languages and  the people who speak them are to 
attain their full height.  
At the same time I fear that we betray ourselves in to undue haste in accomplishing 
the object. The first step should be linguistic pol itical redistribution of provinces. Their 
separate administration will naturally lead to the establishment of universities where 
there are none.  
The province of Bombay absorbs three languages: Guj arati, Marathi and Kannad and, 
therefore, stunts their growth. Madras absorbs four : Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam and 
Kannad. Thus there is overlapping also. That Andhra desh has an Andhra University is 
true. In my opinion it does not occupy the place it  would, if Andhra was separate 
administrative unit, free from foreign control. Ind ia attained that freedom only two 
months ago. The same thing can be said of the Annam alai University. Who can say 
that Tamil has come to its own in that University?  
There should be a proper background for new univers ities. They should have feeders 
in the shape of schools and colleges which will imp art instruction through the medium 
of their respective provincial languages. Then only  can there be a proper milieu. 
University is at the top. A majestic top can only b e sustained if there is a sound 
foundation.  
Though we are politically free, we are hardly free from the subtle domination of the 
West. I have nothing to say to that school of polit icians who believe that knowledge 
can only come from the West. Nor do I subscribe to the belief that nothing good can 
come out of the West. I do fear, however, that we a re unable as yet to come to a 
correct decision in the matter. It is to be hoped t hat no one contends that because we 
seem to be politically free from foreign domination , the mere fact gives us freedom 
from the more subtle influence of the foreign langu age and foreign thought. Is it not 
wisdom, does not duty to the country dictate, that before we embark on new 
universities we should stop and fill our own lungs first with the ozone of our newly got 
freedom? A university never needs a pile of majesti c buildings and treasures of gold 
and silver. What it does need most of all is the in telligent backing of public opinion. It 
should have a large reservoir of teachers to draw u pon. Its founders should be 
farseeing.  
In my opinion it is not for a democratic State to f ind money for founding universities. 
If the people want them they will supply the funds.  Universities so founded will adorn 
the country which they represent. Where administrat ion is in foreign hands, whatever 
comes to the people comes from the top and thus the y become more and more 
dependent. Where it is broad-based on popular will,  everything goes from bottom 
upward and hence it lasts. It is good looking and s trengthens the people. In such a democratic scheme money invested in the promotion o f learning gives a tenfold return 
to the people even as a seed sown in good soil retu rns a luxuriant crop. Universities 
founded under foreign domination have run in the re verse direction. Any other result 
was perhaps impossible. Therefore, there is every r eason for being cautious about 
founding new universities till India has digested t he newly-acquired freedom.  
Then take the Hindu-Muslim question. The poison has  assumed dangerous 
proportions, such that it is difficult to forecast where it will land us. Assume that the 
unthinkable has happened and that not a single Musl im can remain in the Union safely 
and honorably and that neither Hindu nor Sikh can d o likewise in Pakistan. Our 
education will then wear a poisonous form. If, on t he other hand, Hindus, Muslims and 
all the others who may belong to different faiths c an live in either dominion with 
perfect safety and honour, then in the nature of th ings our education will take a shape 
altogether pleasing. Either people of different fai ths having lived together in friendship 
have produced a beautiful blend of cultures, which we shall strive to perpetuate and 
increasingly strengthen and shape, or we shall cast  about for the day when there was 
only one religion represented in Hindustan and retr ace our steps to that exclusive 
culture. It is just possible that we might not be a ble to find any such historical date 
and if we do and we retrace our steps, we shall thr ow our culture back to that ugly 
period and deservedly earn the execration of the un iverse. By way of example, if we 
make the vain attempt to obliterate the Muslim peri od, we shall have to forget that 
there was a mighty Juma Masjid in Delhi second to n one in the world, or that there 
was a Muslim University in Aligarh, or that there w as the Taj in Agra, one of the seven 
wonders of the world, or that there were the great forts of Delhi and Agra built during 
the Moghul period. We shall then have to rewrite ou r history with that end in view. 
Surely, today we have not the atmosphere which will  enable us to come to a right 
conclusion about the conflicting choices. Our two m onths' old freedom is struggling to 
get itself shaped. We do not know what shape it wil l ultimately take. Until we know 
this definitely, it should be enough if we make suc h charges as are possible in the 
existing universities and breathe in our existing e ducational institutions the quickening 
spirit of freedom. The experience we will thus gain  will be helpful when the time is 
ripe for founding new universities.  
Harijan, 2-11-1947  
Students  
Students May Forgo Higher Education   
When it is difficult for millions even to make the two ends meet, when millions are 
dying of starvation, it is monstrous to think of gi ving our relatives a costly education. 
Expansion of the mind will come from hard experienc e, not necessarily in the college or the school-room. When some of us deny ourselves and ours the so-called Higher 
Education, we shall find the true means of giving a nd receiving a really Higher 
Education. Is there not, may there not be, a way of  each boy paying for his own 
education ? There may be no such a way. Whether the re is or there is not such a way 
is irrelevant. But there is no doubt that when we d eny ourselves the way of expensive 
education, seeing that aspiration after Higher Educ ation is a laudable end, we shall 
find out a way of fulfilling it more in accord with  our surroundings. The golden rule to 
apply in all such cases is resolutely to refuse to have what millions cannot. This ability 
to refuse will not descend upon us all of a sudden.  The first thing is to cultivate the 
mental attitude that will not have possessions or f acilities denied to millions, and the 
next immediate thing is to re-arrange our lives as fast as possible in accordance with 
that mentality.  
Young India, 24-6-1926  
 
Self-study  
It is a gross superstition to suppose that knowledg e can be obtained only by going to 
schools and colleges. The world produced brilliant students before schools and 
colleges came into being. There is nothing so ennob ling or lasting as self-study. 
Schools and colleges make most of us mere receptacl es for holding the superfluities of 
knowledge. Wheat is left out and mere husk is taken  in. I do not wish to decry schools 
and colleges as such. They have their use. But we a re making altogether too much of 
them. They are but one of the many means of gaining  knowledge.  
Young India, 25-5-''31  
 
A Student's Difficulty   
A student asks : 
"What should a matriculate or an under-graduate who  is unfortunately father of two 
or three children do in order to produce a living w age, and what should he do when he 
is forced to marry against his will and before even  the age of twenty-five?" 
The simplest answer that occurs to me is that a stu dent who does not know to 
support his wife or children or who marries against  his will has studied to no purpose. 
But that is past history for him. The perplexed stu dent deserves a helpful answer. He 
does not say what his requirement is. If he does no t pitch it high because he is a 
matriculate and will put himself in level with an o rdinary labourer, he should have no 
difficulty in earning a livelihood. His intelligenc e should help his hands and feet and 
enable him to do better than the labourer who has h ad no opportunity of developing his intelligence. This is not to say that the labou rer who has never learnt English is 
devoid of intelligence. Unfortunately labour has ne ver been helped to develop the 
mind, and those who pass through schools do have th eir minds opened even though 
under a handicap not to be found in any part of the  world. Even this mental 
equipment is counterbalanced by false notions of di gnity inculcated during school and 
college days. And so students think that they can e arn their living only at the desk. 
The inquirer has therefore to realize the dignity o f labour and seek the maintenance of 
himself and his family in that field.   
And there is no reason why his wife should not add to the family income by utilizing 
her spare hours. Similarly if the children are at a ll able to do any work, they too 
should be in spanned for productive work. The utter ly false idea that intelligence can 
be developed only through book reading should give place to the truth that the 
quickest development of the mind can be achieved by  the artisan's work being learnt 
in a scientific manner. True development of the min d commences immediately the 
apprentice is taught at every step why a particular  manipulation of the hand or a tool 
is required. The problem of the unemployment of stu dents can be solved without 
difficulty, if they will rank themselves among the common labourers.   
Harijan, 9-1-1937   
 
Foreign Studies  
I have never been an advocate of our students going  abroad. My experience tells me 
that such, on return, find themselves to be square pegs in round holes. That 
experience is the richest and contributes most to g rowth which springs from the soil.  
Harijan, 8-9-1946  
 
Students and Politics   
If there is one compact students' organization. It can become a mighty instrument of 
service. Their objective can only be one : Never fo r the purpose of finding a lucrative 
career but fitting themselves for the service of th e motherland. If they were to do so, 
their knowledge would attain a great height. Agitat ion is only for those who have 
completed their studies. While studying , the only occupation of students must be to 
increase their knowledge. The education, as it is p rescribed today, is detrimental, 
conceived in terms of the masses of India. It is po ssible to show that the present 
education has been of some use to the country. I re gard it as negligible. Let no one be 
deceived by it. The acid test of its usefulness is this: Does it make, as it should, an 
effective contribution to the production of food an d clothing? What part does the 
student world play in allaying the present senseles s slaughter ? All education in a country has got to be demonstrably in promotion of the progress of the country in 
which it is given. Who will deny that education in India has not served that purpose ? 
Hence, one purpose of the organization should be to  discover the defects of the 
present education and seek to remove them, so far a s possible in their own persons. 
By their correct conduct they will be able to conve rt to their view the heads of 
education. If they do so, they will never be entang led in party politics. In the revised 
scheme, constructive and creative programme will na turally have its due place. 
Indirectly, their action will keep the politics of the country free of the spirit of 
exploitation.  
What I said in the matter of students' education at  the time of the country's battle for 
freedom is evidently forgotten. I did not invite th e students to devote themselves to 
politics whilst they were in schools and colleges. I had inculcated non-violent non-co-
operation. I had suggested that they should empty t hese educational institutions and 
throw themselves in the battle for freedom. I had e ncouraged national universities 
and national schools and colleges.  
Harijan, 7-9-1947  
 
Political Parties and Students   
Gandhiji referred to a letter by some students sayi ng that the proposed students' 
strike on the 9th was being organized by the Commun ist students, not Congress 
students. Gandhiji said that while he congratulated  the Congress students who had 
dissociated themselves from the proposed strike, he  would reiterate what he had 
already said about such strikes, viz. that for stud ents there should be no party 
politics. There should be no Socialist, Communist, Congress and other groups among 
students. They should be all students first and las t determined to gather as much 
knowledge as possible and that for the sake of the service of the people, not for the 
sake of getting jobs.  
Harijan, 18-1-1948  