 
TRUSTEESHIP 
 
 
Written by : M. K. Gandhi 
 
Compiled by : Ravindra Kelkar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Mudranalaya 
Ahmedabad 380 014  (INDIA) 
 Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 2 01. Fundamental Law of Nature 
 
I
  suggest  that  we  are  thieves  in  a  way.   If  I  take  anything  that  I  do  not  
need  for  my  own  immediate  use,  and  keep  it, I  thieve  it  from  somebody  
else.   I  venture  to  suggest  that  it  is  the  fundamental  law  of  Nature, without  
exception, that  Nature  produces  enough  for  our  wants  from  day-to-day, and  if  
only  everybody  took  enough  for  himself  and  nothing  more, there  would  be  
no  pauperism  in  this  world, there  would  be  no  man  dying  of  starvation  in  
this  world.   But  so  long  as  we  have  got  this  inequality  so  long  we  are  
thieving.   I  am  no  socialist  and  I  do  not  want  to  dispossess  those  who  have  
got  possessions; but  I  do  say  that,  personally, those  of  us  who want  to  see  
light  out  of  darkness  have  to  follow  this  rule.   I  do  not  want  to  dispossess  
anybody.   I  should  then  be  departing  from  the  rule  of  Ahimsa.   If  somebody  
else  possesses  more  than  I  do, let  him.   But  so  far  as  my  own  life  has  to  
be  regulated, I  do  say  that  I  dare  not  possess  anything  which  I  do  not  
want.   In  India  we  have  got  three  millions  of  people  having  to  be  satisfied  
with  one  meal  a  day, and  that  meal  consisting  of  a  chapatti  containing  no  
fat  in  it, and  a  pinch  of  salt.   You  and  I  have  no  right  to  anything  that  we  
really  have  until  these  three  millions  are  clothed  and  fed  better.   You  and  I, 
who  ought  to  know  better, must  adjust  our  wants, and  even  undergo  
voluntary  starvation  in  order  that  they  may  be  nursed, fed  and  clothed. 
Speeches  and  Writings  of  Mahatma  Gandhi,  4th  Edn.,  pp.384-85 
 
Enjoy  Thy  Wealth  by  Renouncing  It  
The  rich  should  ponder  well  as  to  what  is  t heir  duty  today.   They  who  
employ  mercenaries  to  guard  their  wealth  may  find  those  very  guardians  
turning  on  them.   The  moneyed  classes  have  got  to  learn  how  to  fight  
either  with  arms  or  with  the  weapon  of  non-violence.   For  those  who  wish  
to  follow  the  latter  way, the  best  and  most  effective  mantram  is: (Enjoy  
thy  wealth  by  renouncing  it).   Expanded  it  means: “Earn  your  crores  by  all  
means.   But  understand  that  your  wealth  is  not  yours; it  belongs  to  the  
people.   Take  what  you  require  for  your  legitimate  needs, and  use  the  
remainder  for  society.”   This  truth  has  hitherto  not  been  acted  upon; but, if  
the  moneyed  classes  do  not  even  act  on  it  in  these  times  of  stress, they  
will  remain  the  slaves  of  their  riches  and  passions  and  consequently  of  
those  who  over-power  them. 
I  see  coming  the  day  of  the  rule  of  the  poor, whether  that  rule  be  
through  force  of  arms  or  of  non-violence.   Let  it  be  remembered  that  
physical  force  is  transitory  even  as  the  body  is  transitory.   But  the  power  
of  the  spirit  is  permanent, even  as  the  spirit  is  everlasting.  
Harijan, 1-2-1942, p, 20 Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 3  
To  take  something  from  another  without  his  permission  is  theft  of course.    
But  it  is  also  theft  to  use  a  thing  for  a  purpose  different  from  the  one  
intended  by  the  lender  or  to  use  it  for  a  period  longer  than  that  which  
has  been  fixed  with  him.   The  profound  truth  upon  which  this  observance  
is  based  is  that  God  never  creates  more  than  what  is  strictly  needed  for  
the  moment.   Therefore  whoever  appropriates  more  than  the  minimum  that  
is  really  necessary  for  him  is  guilty  of  theft.  
Ashram  Observances  in  Action, p, 58, Edn. 1955 Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 4 02. Theory of Trusteeship 
 
S
upposing  I  have  come  by  a  fair  amount  of  wealth – either  by  way  of  
legacy, or  by  means  of  trade  and  industry – I  must  know  that  all  that  
wealth  does  not  belong  to me; what  belongs  to  me  is  the  right  to  an  
honourable  livelihood, no  better  than  that  enjoyed  by  millions  of  others.   
The  rest  of  my  wealth  belongs  to  the  community  and  must  be  used  for  
the  welfare  of  the  community.   I  enunciated  this  theory  when  the  socialist  
theory  was  placed  before  the  country  in  respect  to  the  possessions  held  by  
zamindars  and  ruling  chiefs.   They  would  do  away  with  these  privileged  
classes.   I  want  them  to  outgrow  their  greed  and  sense  of  possession, and  
to  come  down  in  spite  of  their  wealth  to  the  level  of  those  who  earn  
their  bread  by  labour.   The  labourer  has  to  realize  that  the  wealthy  man  
is  less  owner  of  his  wealth  than  the  labourer  is  owner  of  his  own, viz.,  
the  power  to  work. 
The  question  how  many  can  be  real  trustees  according  to this  definition  is  
beside the  point.   If  the  theory  is  true, it  is  immaterial  whether  many  live  
up  to  it  or  only  one  man  lives  up  to  it.   The question  is  of  conviction.   If  
you  accept  the  principle  of  Ahimsa, you  have  to  strive  to  live  up  to  it, no  
matter  whether  you  succeed  or  fail.   There  is  nothing  in  this  theory  which  
can  be  said  to  be  beyond  the  grasp  of  intellect, though  you  may  say  it  is  
difficult  of  practice. 
Harijan,  3-6-1939,  p.  145  
 
I  am  not  ashamed  to  own  that  many  capitalists  are  friendly  towards  me  
and  do  not  fear  me.   They  know  that  I  desire  to  end  capitalism, almost, if  
not  quite, as  much  as  the  most  advanced  Socialist  or  even  Communist.   But  
our  methods   differ, our  languages  differ.   My  theory  of  trusteeship  is  no  
make-shift, certainly  no  camouflage.  I  am  confident  that  it  will  survive  all  
other  theories.   It  has  the  sanction  of  philosophy  and  religion  behind  it.  .  .  
.No  other  theory  is  compatible  with  non-violence.  
Harijan, 16-12-1939, p. 376  
 
Statutory  Trusteeship  
“
You  have  asked  rich  men  to  be  trustees.   Is  it  implied  that  they  should  
give  up  private  ownership  in  their  property  and  create   out  of  it  a  trust  
valid  in  the  eyes  of  the  law  and  managed  democratically?   How  will  the  
successor  of  the  present  incumbent  be  determined  on  his  demise?” 
In  answer  Gandhiji  said  that  he  adhered  to  the  position  taken  by  him   
years  ago  that  everything  belonged  to  God  and  was  from  God.   Therefore  Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 5 it  was  for  His  people  as  a  whole, not  for  a  particular  individual.   When  an  
individual  had  more  than  his  proportionate  portion  he  became  a  trustee  of  
that  portion  for  God’s  people. 
God  who  was  all-powerful  had  no  need  to  store.   He  created  from  day  to  
day; hence  men  also  should  in  theory  live  from  day  to  day  and  not  stock  
things.   If  this  truth  was  imbibed  by  the  people  generally, it  would  become  
legalized  and  trusteeship  would  become  a  legalized  institution.  He  wished  it  
became  a  gift  from  India  to  the  world.   Then  there  would  be  no  
exploitation  and  no  reserves  as  in  Australia  and  other  countries  for  white  
men  and  their  posterity.  In  these  distinctions  lay  the  seed  of  a  war  more  
virulent  than  the  last  two.   As  to  the  successor, the  trustee  in  office  would  
have  the  right  to  nominate  his  successor  subject  to  legal  sanction. 
Harijan,  23-2-1947,  p.  39  
 
As  for  the  present  owners  of  wealth, they  would  have  to  make  their  choice  
between  class  war  and  voluntarily  converting  themselves  into  trustees  of  
their  wealth.   They  would  be  allowed  to  retain  the  stewardship  of  their  
possessions  and  to  use  their  talent  to  increase  the  wealth, not  for  their  
own  sakes, but  for  the  sake  of  the  nation  and, therefore, without  
exploitation.  The  State  would  regulate  the  rate  of  commission  which  they  
would  get  commensurate  with  the  service  rendered  and  its  value  to  
society.   Their  children  would  inherit  the  stewardship  only  if  they  proved  
their  fitness  for  it. 
Supposing  India  becomes  a  free  country  tomorrow, all  the  capitalists  will  
have  an  opportunity  of  becoming  statutory  trustees.   But  such  a  statute  will  
not  be  imposed  from  above.   It  will  have  to come  from  below.   When  the  
people  understand  the  implications  of  trusteeship  and  the  atmosphere  is  
ripe  for  it, the  people  themselves, beginning  with  Gram  Panchayats, will  
begin  to  introduce  such  statutes. Such a thing  coming  from  below  is  easy  to  
swallow.   Coming  from  above  it  is  liable  to  prove  a  dead  weight. 
Harijan,  31-3-1946,  pp.  63-64  Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 6 03. The Problem of the Rich  
 
[
Pierre Ceresole, Founder President of the International Voluntary Service, during 
his visit of India in 1935, expressed before Gandhiji some of his doubts about 
capitalism and non-violence as follows:]  
“
Could one lay down a rule of life for the wealthy? That is to say, could one define 
how much belongs to the rich and how much does not belong to them?” 
"Yes”, said Gandhiji, smiling. “Let the rich man take 5 per cent, or 10 per cent, or 
15 per cent.” 
“But not 85 per cent?” 
“Ah! I was thinking of going up to 25 per cent! But not even an exploiter must think 
of taking 85 per cent!” 
Pierre Ceresole’s tangible difficulty was how long one should wait in order to carry 
conviction to the rich man. 
“That is where I disagree with the communist,” said Gandhiji. “With me the 
ultimate test is non-violence. We have always to remember that even we were one 
day in the same position as the wealthy man. It has not been an easy process with 
us and as we bore with ourselves, even so should we bear with others. Besides, I 
have no right to assume that I am right and he is wrong. I have to wait until I 
convert him to my point of view. In the meanwhile if he says. ‘I am prepared to 
keep for myself 25 per cent and to give 75 per cent to charities,’ I close with the 
offer. For I know that 75 per cent voluntarily given is better than 100 per cent 
surrendered at the point of bayonet, and by thus being satisfied with 75 per cent I 
render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s. Non-violence must be the common 
factor between us. 
“You may argue that a man who surrenders by compulsion today will voluntarily 
accept the position tomorrow. That, to my mind, is a remote possibility on which I 
should not care to build much. What is certain is that if I use violence today, I shall 
be doubtless faced with greater violence. With non-violence as the rule, life will no 
doubt be a series of compromises. But it is better than an endless series of 
clashes.” 
"How would you in a word describe the rich man’s legitimate position?” 
“That of a trustee. I know a number of friends who earn and spend for the poor and 
who do not regard themselves as anything but trustees of their wealth.” 
“I too have a number of friends wealthy and poor. I do not possess wealth but 
accept money from my wealthy friends. How can I justify myself?” 
“You will accept nothing for yourself personally. That is to say, you will not accept 
a cheque to go to Switzerland for a change but you will accept a lakh of rupees for 
wells for Harijans or for schools and hospitals for them. All self has got to be 
eliminated and the problem is simplified.” Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 7 “But what about my personal expense?" 
“You have to act on the principle that a labourer is worthy of his hire. You must 
not hesitate to accept your minimum wage. Everyone of us is doing the same thing. 
Bhansali’s wage is just wheat flour and neem leaves. We cannot all be Bhansalis, 
but we can try to approximate to that life. Thus I will be satisfied with having my 
livelihood, but I must not ask a rich man to accommodate my son. My only concern 
is to keep my body and soul together so long as I serve the community.” 
“But so long as I draw that allowance from him, is it not my duty to remind him 
continually of the unenviableness of his position and to tell him that he must cease 
to be owner of all that he does not need for his bare living?” 
“Oh yes, that is your duty.” 
“But there are wealthy and wealthy. There are some who may have made their pile 
from alcoholic traffic.” 
“Yes, you will certainly draw a line. But whilst you will not accept money from a 
brewer, I do not know what will happen if you have made an appeal for funds. Will 
you tell the people that only those who have justly earned their money will pay? I 
would rather -withdraw the appeal than except any money on those terms. Who is 
to decide whether one is just or otherwise? And justice too is a relative term. If we 
will but ask ourselves, we will find that we have not been just all our lives. The 
Gita says in effect that every one is tarred with the same brush; so rather than 
judge others, live in the world untouched or unaffected by it. Elimination of self is 
the secret.” 
“Yes, I see,” said Pierre Ceresole, and remained silent for a few minutes. Then 
with a sigh he said: “But one sometimes finds himself in a most embarrassing 
position. I have met people in Bihar working from morning until evening for less 
than a couple of annas, sometimes less than an anna, and they have often told me 
that they would very much like to dispossess the wealthy around them of their ill-
gotten gains. I have stood speechless before them by reminding them of you.” 
Harijan, 1-6-1935, pp. 121-22  
 
Inherited Riches  
Q
. How is it possible to earn lakhs in a righteous way? Jamnalalji, the merchant 
prince, used to say it was not. Moreover, however careful a rich man is, he is 
bound to spend more on himself than his actual requirements merit. Therefore, 
why not lay more stress on not becoming wealthy than on trusteeship of riches? 
A. The question is apt and has been put to me before. What Jamnalalji could have 
meant was in the Gita sense that every action is tainted. It is my conviction that it 
is possible to acquire riches without consciously doing wrong. For example I may 
light on a gold mine in my one acre of land. But I accept the proposition that it is 
better not to desire wealth than to acquire it, and become its trustee. I gave up my Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 8 own long ago, which should be proof enough of what I would like others to do. But 
what am I to advise those who are already wealthy or who would not shed the 
desire for wealth? I can only say to them that they should use their wealth for 
service. It is true that generally the rich spend more on themselves than they need. 
But this can be avoided. Jamnalalji spent far less on himself than men of his own 
economic status and even than many middle-class men. I have come across 
innumerable rich persons who are stingy on themselves. For some it is a part of 
their nature to spend next to nothing on themselves, and they do not think that 
they acquire merit in so doing. 
The same applies to the sons of the wealthy. Personally I do not believe in 
inherited riches. The well-to-do should educate and bring up their children so that 
they may learn how to be independent. The tragedy is that they do not do so. Their 
children do get some education, they even recite verses in praise of poverty, but 
they have no Compunction about helping themselves to parental wealth. That 
being so, I exercise my common sense and advise what is practicable. Those of us, 
however, who consider it a duty to adopt poverty and believe in and desire 
economic equality may not be jealous of the rich but should exhibit real happiness 
in our poverty which others may emulate. The sad fact is that those who are thus 
happy are few and far between. 
Harijan, 8-3-1942, p. 67 Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 9 04. Riches not necessarily impure  
Thus writes Shri Shankarrao Deo :  
“
In the last issue of Harijan, in your article ‘A Deplorable Incident’, you say to the 
rich: ‘Earn your crores by all means. But understand that your wealth is not yours; 
it belongs to the people. Take what you require for your legitimate needs, and use 
the remainder for society.’ When I read this, the first question that arose in my 
mind was: Why first earn crores and then use them for society? As society today is 
constituted the means of earning crores are bound to be impure; and one who 
earns crores by impure means cannot be expected to follow the mantram: because 
in the very process of earning crores by impure means the man’s character is bound 
to be tainted or vitiated. And moreover you have always been emphasizing the 
purity of means. But I am afraid that there is a possibility of people 
misunderstanding that you are laying an emphasis here more on the ends than on 
the means. 
“I request you to emphasize as much, if not more, the purity of means of earning 
money as on spending. If purity of means is strictly observed, then, according to 
me, crores could not be accumulated at all and the difficulty of spending for 
society will assume a very minor prospect.” 
I must demur. Surely a man may conceivably make crores through strictly pure 
means, assuming that a man may legitimately 
possess riches. For the purpose of my argument, I have assumed that private 
possession itself is not held to be impure. If I own a mining lease and I tumble upon 
a diamond of rare value, I may suddenly find myself a millionaire without being 
held guilty of having used impure means. This actually happened when Cullinan 
diamond, much more valuable than the Kohinoor, was found. Such instances can be 
easily multiplied. My argument was surely addressed to such men. I have no 
hesitation in endorsing the proposition that generally rich men and for that matter 
most men are not particular as to the way they make money. In the application of 
the method of non-violence, one must believe in the possibility of every person, 
however depraved, being reformed under humane and skilled treatment. We must 
appeal to the good in human beings and expect response. Is it not conducive to the 
well-being of society that every member uses all his talents, only not for personal 
aggrandizement but for the good of all? We do not want to produce a dead equality 
where every person becomes or is rendered incapable of using his ability to the 
utmost possible extent. Such a society must ultimately perish. I therefore suggest 
that my advice that moneyed men may earn their crores (honestly only, of course) 
but so as to dedicate them to the service of all is perfectly sound. 
is a mantra based on uncommon knowledge. It is the surest method to evolve a new 
order of life of universal benefit in the place of the present one where each one 
lives for himself without regard to what happens to his neighbour. 
Harijan, 22-2-1942, p. 49  Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 10 05. Economic Equality 
 
W
orking for economic equality means abolishing the eternal conflict between 
capital and labour. It means the leveling down of the few rich in whose hands is 
concentrated the bulk of the nation’s wealth on the one hand, and a leveling up of 
the semi-starved, naked millions on the other. A non-violent system of government 
is clearly an impossibility so long as the wide gulf between the rich and the hungry 
millions persists. The contrast between the palaces of New Delhi and the miserable 
hovels of the poor labouring class nearby cannot last one day in free India in which 
the poor will enjoy the same power as the richest in the land. A violent and bloody 
revolution is a certainty one day, unless there is a voluntary abdication of riches 
and the power that riches give and sharing them for the common good. I adhere to 
my doctrine of trusteeship in spite of the ridicule that has been poured upon it. It 
is true that it is difficult to reach. So is non-violence difficult to attain. But we 
made up our minds in 1920 to negotiate that steep ascent. We have found it worth 
the effort. 
Constructive Programme, Edn. 1948, p. 20-21  
 
I have shown a better way than preaching. The constructive programme takes the 
country a long way towards the goal. This is the most auspicious time for it. The 
Charkha and the allied industries, if fully successful, practically abolish all 
inequalities, both social and economic. The rising consciousness of the strength 
which non-violence gives to the people, and their intelligent refusal to co-operate 
in their slavery must bring about equality. 
Harijan, 25-1-1942, p. 16  
 
The socialists and communists say they can do nothing to bring about economic 
equality today. They will just carry on propaganda in its favour and to that end 
they believe in generating and accentuating hatred. They say, ‘When they get 
control over the State they will enforce equality.’ Under my plan, The State will be 
there to carry out the will of the people, not to dictate to them or force them to 
do its will. I shall bring about economic equality through non-violence, by 
converting the people to my point of view by harnessing the forces of love as 
against hatred. I will not wait till I have converted the whole society to my view 
but will straightaway make a beginning with myself. It goes without saying that I 
cannot hope to bring about economic equality of my conception, if I am the owner 
of fifty motor cars or even of ten bighas of land. For that I have to reduce myself to 
the level of the poorest of the poor. That is what I have been trying to do for the 
last fifty years or more, and so, I claim to be a foremost Communist although I 
make use of cars and other facilities offered to me by the rich. They have no hold Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 11 on me and I can shed them at a moment’s notice, if the interests of the masses 
demand it.  
Harijan, 31-3-1946, p. 64  
 
“What exactly do you mean by economic equality,” Gandhiji was asked at the 
Constructive Worker’s Conference during his tour of Madras. Gandhiji’s reply was 
that economic equality of his conception did not mean that everyone would 
literally have the same amount. It simply meant that everybody should have 
enough for his or her needs. For istance. . .the elephant needs a thousand times 
more food than the ant, but that is not an indication of inequality. So the real 
meaning of economic equality was: “To each according to his need”. That was the 
definition of Marx. If a single man demanded as much as a man with wife and four 
children that would be a violation of economic equality. 
“Let no one try to justify the glaring difference between the classes and the 
masses, the prince and the pauper, by saying that the former need more. That will 
be idle sophistry and a travesty of my argument. The contrast between the rich and 
the poor today is a painful sight. The poor villagers are exploited by the foreign 
government and also by their own countrymen- the city-dwellers. They produce the 
food and go hungry. They produce milk and their children have to go without it. It 
is disgraceful. Everyone must have a balanced diet, a decent house to live in, 
facilities for the education of one’s children and adequate medical relief.” He did 
not want to taboo everything above and beyond the bare necessaries, but they 
must come after the essential needs of the poor are satisfied. First things must 
come first. 
Harijan, 31-3-1946, p. 63  Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 12 06. Doctrine of the Equal Distribution 
 
T
he real implication of equal distribution is that each man shall have the 
wherewithal to supply all his natural needs and no more. For example, if one man 
has a weak digestion and requires only a quarter of a pound of flour for his bread 
and another needs a pound, both should be in a position to satisfy their wants. To 
bring this ideal into being the entire social order has got to be reconstructed. A 
society based on non-violence cannot nurture any other ideal. We may not perhaps 
be able to realize the goal, but we must bear it in mind and work unceasingly to 
near it. To the same extent as we progress towards our goal we shall find 
contentment and happiness, and to that extent too shall we have contributed 
towards the bringing into being of a non-violent society. 
It is perfectly possible for an individual to adopt this way of life without having to 
wait for others to do so. And if an individual can observe a certain rule of conduct, 
it follows that a group of individuals can do likewise. It is necessary for me to 
emphasize the fact that no one need wait for anyone else in order to adopt a right 
course. Men generally hesitate to make a beginning if they feel that the objective 
cannot be had in its entirety. Such an attitude of mind is in reality a bar to 
progress. 
Now let us consider how equal distribution can be brought about through non-
violence. The first step towards it is for him who has made this ideal part of his 
being to bring about the necessary changes in his personal life. He would reduce his 
wants to a minimum, bearing in mind the poverty of India. His earnings would be 
free of dishonesty. The desire for speculation would be renounced. His habitation 
would be in keeping with the new mode of life. There would be self-restraint 
exercised in every sphere of life. When he has done all that is possible in his own 
life, then only will he be in a position to preach this ideal among his associates and 
neighbours. 
Indeed at the root of this doctrine of equal distribution must lie that of the 
trusteeship of the wealthy for the superfluous wealth possessed by them. For 
according to the doctrine they may not possess a rupee more than their neighbours. 
How is this to be brought about? Non-violently? Or should the wealthy be 
dispossessed of their possessions? To do this we would naturally have to resort to 
violence. This violent action cannot benefit society. Society will be the poorer, for 
it will lose the gifts of a man who knows how to accumulate wealth. Therefore the 
non-violent way is evidently superior. The rich man will be left in possession of his 
wealth, of which he will use what he reasonably requires for his personal needs and 
will act as a trustee for the remainder to be used for society. In this argument 
honesty on the part of the trustee is assumed. 
As soon as a man looks upon himself as a servant of society, earns for its sake, 
spends for its benefit, then purity enters into his earnings and there is Ahimsa in his Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 13 venture. Moreover, if men’s minds turn towards this way of life, there will come 
about a peaceful revolution in society, and that without any bitterness. 
It may be asked whether history at any time records such a change in human 
nature. Such changes have certainly taken place in individuals. One may not 
perhaps be able to point to them in a whole society. But this only means that up 
till now there has never been an experiment on a large scale on non-violence. 
Somehow or other the wrong belief has taken possession of us that Ahimsa is pre-
eminently a weapon for individuals and its use should, therefore, be limited to that 
sphere. In fact this is not the case. Ahimsa is definitely an attribute of society. To 
convince people of this truth is at once my effort and my experiment. In this age of 
wonders no one will say that a thing or idea is worthless because it is new. To say it 
is impossible because it is difficult, is again not in consonance with the spirit of the 
age. Things undreamt of are daily being seen, the impossible is ever becoming 
possible. We are constantly being astonished these days at the amazing discoveries 
in the field of violence. But I maintain that far more undreamt of and seemingly 
impossible discoveries will be made in the field of non-violence. The history of 
religion is full of such examples. 
If, however, in spite of the utmost effort, the rich do not become guardians of the 
poor in the true sense of the term and the latter are more and more crushed and 
die of hunger, what is to be done? In trying to find the solution to this riddle I have 
lighted on non-violent non-co-operation and civil disobedience as the right and 
infallible means. The rich cannot accumulate wealth without the co-operation of 
the poor in society. Man has been conversant with violence from the beginning, for 
he has inherited this strength from the animal in his nature. It was only when he 
rose from the state of a quadruped (animal) to that of a biped (man) that the 
knowledge of the strength of Ahimsa entered into his soul. This knowledge has 
grown within him slowly but surely. If this knowledge were to penetrate to and 
spread amongst the poor, they would become strong and would learn how to free 
themselves by means of non-violence from the crushing inequalities which have 
brought them to the verge of starvation. 
Harijan, 25-8-1940, p. 260-1  Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 14 07. Trusteeship : Not a Legal Fiction 
 
L
ove and exclusive possession can never go together. Theoretically when there is 
perfect love, there must be perfect non-possession. The body is our last possession. 
So a man can only exercise perfect love and be completely dispossessed, if he is 
prepared to embrace death and renounce his body for the sake of human service. 
But that is true in theory only. In actual life, we can hardly exercise perfect love, 
for the body as a possession will always remain with us. Man will ever remain 
imperfect, and it will always be his part to try to be perfect. So that perfection in 
love or non-possession will remain an unattainable ideal as long as we are alive, 
but towards which we must ceaselessly strive. 
Those who own money now, are asked to behave like trustees holding their riches 
on behalf of the poor. You may say that trusteeship is a legal fiction. But if people 
meditate over it constantly and try to act up to it, then life on earth would be 
governed far more by love than it is at present. Absolute trusteeship is an 
abstraction like Euclid’s-definition of a point, and is equally unattainable. But if we 
strive for it, we shall be able to go further in realizing a state of equality on earth 
than by any other method. 
Q. I f you say that private possession is incompatible with non-violence, why do 
you put up with it?  
A
. That is a concession one has to make to those who earn money but who would 
not voluntarily use their earnings for the benefit of the mankind. 
Q. W hy then not have State-ownership in place of private property and thus 
minimize violence?  
A
. It is better than private ownership. But that, too, is Objectionable on the ground 
of violence. It is my firm conviction that if the State suppressed capitalism by 
violence, it will be caught in the evils of violence itself and fail to develop non-
violence at any time. The State represents violence in a concentrated and 
organized form. The individual has a soul, but as the State is soulless machine, it 
can never be weaned from violence to which it owes its very existence. Hence I 
prefer the doctrine of trusteeship. 
Q. Let us come to a specific instance. Suppose some artist leaves certain 
pictures to a son who does not appreciate their value for the nation and sells 
them or wastes them, so that the nation stands to lose something precious 
through one person’s folly. If you are assured that the son would never be a 
trustee in the sense you would like to have him, do you not think that the State 
would be justified in taking away those things from him with the minimum use 
of violence?  
A
. Yes, the State will, as a matter of fact, take away those things and I believe it 
will be justified if it uses the minimum of violence. But the fear is always there 
that the State may use too much violence against those who differ from it. I would Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 15 be very happy indeed if the people concerned behaved as trustees; but if they fail, 
I believe we shall have to deprive them of their possessions through the State with 
the minimum exercise of violence. That is why I said at the Round Table 
Conference that every vested interest must be subjected to scrutiny, and 
confiscation ordered where necessary with or without compensation as the case 
demanded. 
What I would personally prefer would be not a centralization of power in the hands 
of the State, but an extension of the sense of trusteeship, as, in my opinion, the 
violence of private ownership is less injurious than the violence of the State. 
However, if it is unavoidable, I would support a minimum of State-ownership.  
While admitting that man actually lives by habit, I hold that it is better for him to 
live by the exercise of will. I also believe that men are capable of developing their 
will to an extent that will reduce exploitation to a minimum. I look upon an 
increase of the power of the State with the greatest fear, because although while 
apparently doing good by minimizing exploitation, it does the greatest harm to 
mankind by destroying individuality, which lies at the root of all progress. We know 
of so many cases where men have adopted trusteeship, but none where the State 
has really lived for the poor.  
The Modern Review, October, 1935, p. 412  Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 16 08. Labour should know its strength 
 
Q
. How can workers obtain justice without violence? If capitalist use force to 
suppress their efforts, why should the workers not try to destroy their 
oppressors?  
A
.This of course is the old law, the law of the jungleblow against blow; I am 
endeavouring to make the nonviolent experiment, which I consider essential viz., 
that of getting rid of the law of the jungle which is illsuited to man. 
You may not know that I am supposed to be the Chief Adviser of a Labour Union in 
a place called Ahmedabad which has commanded the unsolicited testimony of 
many labour experts, who have visited the place. Through this Labour Union, we 
have been endeavouring to enforce this method of non violence in connection with 
questions arising between capital and labour for the past fifteen years. Therefore, 
what I am now about to tell you is based upon actual experience, in the very line 
about which the question has been asked. In my humble opinion labour can always 
vindicate itself if labour is sufficiently united and selfsacrificing. No matter how 
oppressive the capitalists may be, I am convinced that those who are connected 
with labour and guide the labour movement have themselves no idea of the 
resources that labour can command and which capital can never command. If 
labour would only understand and recognize that capital is perfectly helpless 
without labour, labour will immediately come to its own. 
We have unfortunately come under the hypnotic suggestion and the hypnotic 
influence of capital, so that we have come to believe that capital is all in all on 
this earth. But a moment’s thought would show that labour has at its disposal 
capital which the capitalists will never possess. Ruskin taught in his age that labour 
had unrivalled opportunities. But he spoke above our heads. At the present 
moment there is an Englishman, Sir Daniel Hamilton who is really making that very 
experiment. He is an economist. He is a capitalist also, but through his economic 
research and experiments he has come to  the same conclusion as Ruskin had 
arrived at intuitively, and he has brought to labour a vital message. He says it is 
wrong to think that a piece of metal constitutes capital. He says it is wrong even to 
think that so much produce is capital, but he adds that if we go to the very source, 
it is labour that is capital, and that living capital is inexhaustible. It is upon that 
law that we have been working in the Labour Union at Ahmedabad. It has been that 
law under which we have been working in our fight against the Government. It is 
that law, the recognition of which delivered 1,700,000 people in Champaran inside 
six months from a century long tyranny. I must not tarry to tell you what that 
tyranny was, but those who are interested in that problem will be able to study 
every one of the facts that I have put before them. Now I will tell you what we 
have done. There is in English a very potent word, and you have it in French also, 
all the languages of the world have itit is “NO”, and the secret that we have hit 
upon is that when capital wants labour to say “Yes”, labour roars out “No”, if it Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 17 means “NO”. And immediately labour comes to recognize that it has got the choice 
before it of saying “Yes”, when it wants to say “Yes” and “No” when it wants to 
say “No”, labour is free of capital and capital has to woo labour. And it would not 
matter in the slightest degree that capital has guns and even poison gas at its 
disposal. Capital would still be perfectly helpless if labour would assert its dignity 
by making good its “No”. Then labour does not need to  retaliate but labour stands 
defiant receiving the bullets and poison gas and still insists upon its “No”. The 
whole reason why labour  so often fails is that instead of sterilizing capital as I have 
suggested, labour, (I am speaking as a labour myself) wants to seize that capital 
and become capitalist itself in the worst sense of the term. And the capitalist 
therefore who is properly entrenched and organized, finding among the labourers 
also candidates for the same office, makes use of a portion of these to suppress 
labour. If we really were not under this hypnotic spell, everyone of us, men and 
women, would recognize this rock bottom truth without the slightest difficulty. 
Having proved it for myself, through a series of experiments carried on in different 
departments of life, I am speaking to you with authority (you will pardon me for 
saying so) that when I put this scheme before you, it was not as something 
superhuman but as something within the grasp of every labourer, man or woman. 
Again, you will see that what labour is called upon to do under this scheme of non 
violence is nothing more than the Swiss soldier does under gun fire or the ordinary 
soldier who is armed from top to toe is called upon to do. While he undoubtedly 
seeks to inflict death and destruction upon his adversary, he also carries his own 
life in his pocket. I want labour, then, to copy the courage of the soldier without 
copying the brute in the soldier, namely the ability to inflict death, and I suggest to 
you that a labourer who courts death and has the courage to die without even 
carrying arms, with no weapons of self- defense, shows a courage of a much higher 
degree than a man who is armed from top to toe. 
Young India, 14-1-1932, p. 178  Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 18 09. Choice before Capitalists 
 
T
hey (zamindars  and  talukdars)  must  regard  themselves, even  as  the  
Japanese  nobles  did, as  trustees  holding  their  wealth  for  the  good  of  their  
wards  the  ryots.   Then  they  would  take  no  more  than  a  reasonable  amount  
as  commission  for  their  labours.   At  present  there  is  no  proportion  between  
the  wholly  unnecessary  pomp  and  extravagance  of  the  moneyed  class  and  
the  squalid  surroundings  and  the  grinding  pauperism  of  the  ryots  in  whose  
midst  the  former  are  living….If  only  the  capitalist  class  will  read  the  signs  
of  the  times, revise  their  notions  of  God-given  right  to  all  they  possess, in  
an  incredibly  short  space  of  time  the  seven  hundred  thousand  dung-heaps  
which  today  pass  muster  as  villages, can  be  turned  into  abodes  of  peace, 
health  and  comfort.   I  am  convinced  that  the  capitalist, if  he  follows  the  
Samurai  of  Japan, has  nothing  really  to  lose  and  everything  to  gain.   There  
is  no  other  choice  than  between  voluntary  surrender  on  the  part  of  the  
capitalist  of  the superfluities  and  consequent  acquisition  of  the  real  
happiness  of  all  on  the  one  hand, and  on  the  other  the  impending  chaos  
into  which, if  the  capitalist  does  not  wake  up  betimes, awakened  but  
ignorant, famishing  millions  will  plunge  the  country  and  which, not  even  the  
armed  force, that  a  powerful  Government  can  bring  into  play, can  avert. 
Young  India,  5-12-1929.  p. 396  
 
I  expect  to  convert  the  zamindars  and  other  capitalists  by  the  non-violent  
method, and  therefore  there  is  for  me  nothing  like  an  inevitability  of  class  
conflict.   For  it  is  an  essential  part  of  non-violence   to  go  along  the  line  
of  least  resistance.   The  moment  the  cultivators  of  the  soil  realize  their  
power, the  zamindari  evil  will  be  sterilized.   What  can  the  poor  zamindar  
do  when  they  say  that  they  will  simply  not  work  the  land  unless  they  are  
paid  enough  to  feed  and  clothe  and  educate  themselves  and  their  children  
in  a  decent  manner?   In  reality  the  toiler  is  the  owner  of  what  he  
produces.   If  the  toilers  intelligently  combine, they  will  become  an  
irresistible  power.   That  is  how  I  do  not  see  the  necessity  of  class  
conflict.   If  I  thought  it  inevitable  I  should  not  hesitate  to  preach  it  and  
teach  it. 
Harijan,  5-12-1936,  p. 339  Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 19 10. The Non-Violent Sanction  
 
Q
. What is the place of Satyagraha in making the rich realize their duty towards 
the poor?  
A
. The same as against the foreign power. Satyagraha is a law of universal 
application. Beginning with the family its use can be extended to every other 
circle. Supposing a landowner exploits his tenants and mulcts them of the fruit of 
their toil by appropriating it to his own use. 
When they expostulate with him he does not listen and raises objections that he 
requires so much for his wife, so much for his children and so on.The tenants or 
those who have espoused their cause and have influence will make an appeal to his 
wife to expostulate with her husband.She would probably say that for herself she 
does not need his exploited money.The children will say likewise that they would 
earn for themselves what they need. 
Supposing further that he listens to nobody or that his wife and children combine 
against the tenants, they will not submit.They will quit if asked to do so but they 
will make it clear that the land belongs to him who tills it. The owner cannot till all 
the land himself and he will have to give in to their just demands.It may, however, 
be that the tenants are replaced by others. Agitation short of violence will then 
continue till the replacing tenants see their error and make common cause with the 
evicted tenants.Thus Satyagraha is a process educating public opinion, such that it 
covers all the elementsofsociety and in the end makes itself irresistible. Violence 
interrupts the process and prolongsthe real revolution of the whole social 
structure. 
The conditions necessary for the success of Satyagraha are:  
(1)The Satyagrahi should not have any hatred in his heart against the opponent;  
(2) The issue must be true and substantial; (3) The Satyagrahi must be prepared to 
suffer till the end for his cause. 
Harijan, 31-3-1946, p. 64  
 
Q.You say that a Raja, a zamindar or a capitalist sh ould be a trustee for the 
poor. Do you think that any such exists today? Or do you expect them to be so 
transformed?  
A
.I think that some very few exist even today, though not in the full sense of the 
term. They are certainly moving in that direction. It can, however, be asked 
whether the present Rajas and others can be expected to become trustees of the 
poor. If they do not become trustees of their own accord, force of circumstances 
will compel the reform unless they court utter destruction. When Panchayat Raj is 
established, public opinion will do what violence can never do. The present power 
of the zamindars, the capitalists and the Rajas can hold sway so long as the Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 20 common people do not realize their own strength. If the people non-co-operate 
with the evil of zamindari or capitalism, it must die of inanition. In Panchayat Raj 
only the Panchayat will be obeyed and the Panchayat can only work through the 
law of their making. 
Harijan, 1-6-1947, p. 172 Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 21 11. Some Questions 
 
Q. From your writings, one gathers the notion that y our ‘trustee’ is not anything 
more than a very benevolent philanthropist and donor, such as the first Parsi 
Baronet, the Tatas, and Wadias, the Birlas, Shri Bajaj and the like. Is that so? 
Will you please explain whom you regard as the primary or rightful beneficiaries 
of the possessions of a rich man? Is there to be a limit to the amount or part of 
the income and capital which he can spend upon himself, his kith and kin and 
for non-public purposes? Can one who exceeds such limit be prevented from 
doing so? If he is incompetent or otherwise fails to discharge his obligations as a 
trustee, can he be removed and called upon to render accounts by a beneficiary 
or the State? Do the same principles apply to princes and zamindars, or is their 
trusteeship of a different nature?  
A
. If the trusteeship idea catches, philanthropy, as we know it, will disappear. Of 
those you have named only Jamnalalji came near, but only near it. A trustee has no 
heir but the public. In a State built on the basis of non-violence, the commission of 
trustees will be regulated. Princes and zamindars will be on a par with the other 
men of wealth. 
Harijan, 12-4-1942, p. 116  
 
Q. Is the accumulation of capital possible except th rough violence whether 
open or tacit?  
A
. Such accumulation by private persons was impossible except through violent 
means but accumulation by the State in a non-violent society was not only possible, 
it was desirable and inevitable. 
 
Q. Whether a man accumulates material or moral wealt h, he does so only 
through the help or cooperation of other members of society. Has he then the 
moral right to use any of it mainly for personal advantage?  
A
. No, he has no moral right. 
 
Q. How would the successor of a trustee be determine d? Will he only have the 
right of proposing a name, the right of finalization being vested in the State?  
A
. Choice should be given to the original owner who became the first trustee, but 
the choice must be finalized by the State. Such arrangement puts a check on the 
State as well as the individual. 
 
Q. When the replacement of private by public propert y thus takes place 
through the operation of the theory of trusteeship, will the ownership vest in Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 22 the State, which is an instrument of violence or in associations of a voluntary 
character like village communes and municipalities, which may of course derive 
their final authority from State-made laws?  
A
. That question involved some confusion of thought. Legal ownership in the 
transformed condition vested in the trustee, not in the State. It was to avoid 
confiscation that the doctrine of trusteeship came into play retaining for the 
society the ability of the original owner in his own right. Nor did he, the speaker, 
hold that the State must always be based on violence. It might be so in theory but 
the practice of the theory demanded a State which would for the most part be 
based on non-violence. 
Harijan, 16-2-1947, p. 25  Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 23 12. Not waiting till Greek Kalends  
(By Pyarelal)  
 
D
uring our last detention at Poona in 1942, I had the opportunity to discuss at 
length with Gandhiji various aspects of his ideal of trusteeship, and how it could be 
realized in our present-day world. In the course of our talk one day he remarked: 
“The only democratic way of achieving it today is by cultivating opinion in its 
favour.” 
I put it to him that perhaps the reason why he had presented trusteeship basis to 
the owning class was that while non-violence could command many sacrifices from 
the people, it was not reasonable to expect anyone to present his own head in a 
charger. “So instead of asking the owning class to do the impossible, you presented 
them with a reasonable and practicable alternative.” 
Gandhiji:  “I refuse to admit that non-violence knows any limi t to the sacrifice that 
it can demand or command. The doctrine of trusteeship stands on its own merits.” 
Pyarelal: “Surely, you do not mean that the change would depen d upon the 
sufferance of the owning class and we shall have to wait till their conversion is 
complete? If social transformation is effected by a slow, gradual process, it will kill 
the revolutionary fervour which an abrupt break with the past creates. That is why 
our Marxist friends say that a true social revolution can come only through a 
proletarian dictatorship. You too have taught us that in politics reformism kills 
revolution. Does this not equally apply to social change? Anyway, if non-violence 
has the power to induce the opponent even to immolate himself for the sake of a 
higher principle, as you maintain that it can, why cannot we get the owning class 
to renounce their vast possession? You concede that vast possessions are today 
largely the result of exploitation? Why bring in trusteeship? Many people honestly 
believe, it will prove to be no more than a make-believe. Or is it that, after all, 
there is a limit to the power of non-violence?” 
Gandhiji: “Perhaps you have the example of Russia in mind. W holesale 
expropriation of the owning class and distribution of its assets among the people 
there did create a tremendous amount of revolutionary fervour. But I claim that 
ours will be an even bigger revolution. We must not underrate the business talent 
and know-how which the owning class have acquired through generations of 
experience and specialization.  
Free use of it would accrue to the people under my plan. So long as we have no 
power, conversion is our weapon by necessity, but after we get power, conversion 
will be our weapon of choice. Conversion must precede legislation. Legislation in 
the absence of conversion remains a dead letter. As an illustration, we have today 
the power to enforce rules of sanitation but we can do nothing with it because the 
public is not ready.” Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 24 Pyarelal : “You say conversion must precede reform. Whose Con version? If you 
mean the conversion of the people, they are ready even today. If, on the other 
hand, you mean that of the owning class, we may as well wait till the Greek 
Kalends.” 
Gandhiji: “I mean the conversion of both.” 
N
oting the look of surprise on my face, he proceeded: “You see, if the owning class 
does not accept the trusteeship basis voluntarily, its conversion must come under 
the pressure of public opinion. For that public opinion is not yet sufficiently 
organized.” 
Going back to what he had said only a little while ago, I asked: “What do you mean 
by power?” 
Gandhiji: “By power I mean voting power for the people-so br oad-based that the 
will of the majority can be given effect to.” 
Pyarelal : “Can the masses at all come into power by parliame ntary activity?” 
Gandhiji: “Not by parliamentary activity alone. My reliance ultimately is on the 
power of non-violent non-co-operation, which I have been trying to build up for the 
last twenty-two years.” 
Pyarelal : “Is the capture of power possible through non-viol ence? Our Socialist 
friends say that they have now been convinced of the matchless potency of non-
violence-up to a point. But they say, they do not see how it can enable the people 
to seize power. You also have said the same thing. Therein, argue the Socialists, 
lies the inadequacy of non-violence.” 
Gandhiji: “In a way they are right. By its very nature, non- violence cannot ‘sieze’ 
power, nor can that be its goal. But non-violence can do more; it can effectively 
control and guide power without capturing the machinery of government. That is 
its beauty. There is an exception of course. If the non-violent non-co-operation of 
the people is so complete that the administration ceases to function or if the 
administration crumbles under the impact of a foreign invasion and a vacuum 
results, the people’s representatives will then step in and fill it. Theoretically that 
is possible.” 
It reminded me of what Gandhiji had once told Mirabehn: “Non-violence does not 
seize power. It does not even seek power; power accrues to it.” 
Continuing his argument Gandhiji said: “Moreover, I do not agree that government 
cannot be carried on except by the use of violence.” 
Pyarelal : “Does not the very concept of the State imply the use of power?” 
Gandhiji: “Yes. But the use of power need not necessarily be  violent. A father 
wields power over his children; he may even punish inflicting violence. The most 
effective exercise of power is that which irks least. Power rightly exercised must 
sit light as a flower ; no one should feel the weight of it. The people accepted the 
authority of the Congress willingly. I was on more than one occasion invested with Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 25 the absolute power of dictatorship. But everybody knew that my power rested on 
their willing acceptance. They could set me aside at any time and I would have 
stepped aside without a murmur. In the Khilafat days my authority, or the 
authority of the Congress, did not irk anybody. The Ali Brothers used to call me 
Sarkar. Yet they knew they had me in their pocket. What was true about me or the 
Congress then can be true about the government also.” 
I conceded that a non-violent State or even a non-violent minority dictatorship- a 
dictatorship resting on the moral authority of a few-was possible in theory. But it 
called for a terrible self-discipline, self-denial and penance. In the eleventh 
chapter of the Bhagavata, there is the description of a non-violent law-giver or 
head of a State. He is a person who has severed all domestic ties; he is unaffected 
by fear or favour, anger or attachment; he is the personification of humility and 
self-effacement. Through constant discipline he has inured his body to all 
conceivable rigours of the weather, fatigue and want. But suppose, the author 
poses the question, the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak. If through old age or 
illness his constitution is undermined so that he can no longer withstand the rigours 
of his penance, what then? To that hypothetical question the unrelenting answer 
given is: Let him in that event mount a pyre which he himself has made and 
immolate himself rather than indulge in weak self-pity and molly-coddle himself. 
“Personally I agree,” I concluded, “that such a person alone is fit to be a dictator 
under non-violence. If anyone is frightened by such a description, let him look at 
the Russians fighting in temperatures below 40 degrees frost. Why should we 
expect a softer solution under non-violence? Rather we should be prepared for 
more hardships.” 
Gandhiji confirmed that under non-violence people have to be prepared for heavier 
sacrifices if only because the good aimed at is higher. “There is no short-cut to 
salvation,” he said. 
“That would mean,” interpolated my sister, “that only a Jesus, a Mohammad or a 
Buddha can be the head of a non-violent State.” 
Gandhiji demurred. “That is not correct. Prophets and superman are born only 
once in an age. But if even a single individual realizes the ideal of Ahimsa in its 
fullness, he covers and redeems the whole society. Once Jesus had blazed the trail, 
his twelve disciples could carry on his mission without his presence. It needed the 
perseverance and genius of so many generations of scientists to discover the laws 
of electricity but today everybody, even children, use electric power in their daily 
life. Similarly, it will not always need a perfect being to administer an ideal State, 
once it has come into being. What is needed is thorough social awakening to begin 
with. The rest will follow. To take an instance nearer home, I have presented to 
the working class the truth that true capital is not silver or gold but the labour of 
their hands and feet and their intelligence. Once labour develops that awareness, 
it would not need my presence to enable it to make use of the power that it will 
release.” Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 26 He ended up by saying that if only we could make people conscious of their power - 
the power of non-violent non-co-operation-the realization of the ideal of 
trusteeship would follow as surely as morning follows night. 
Towards New Horizons, pp. 90-93  Trusteeship 
 
www.mkgandhi.org P age 27 13. Practical Trusteeship Formula  
(By Pyarelal)  
 
O
n our release from prison, we took up the question where we had left it in the 
Aga Khan Palace Detention Camp. Kishorlalbhai and Naraharibhai joined in drawing 
up a simple, practical trusteeship formula. It was placed before Bapu who made a 
few changes in it. The final draft read as follows: 
1. Trusteeship provides a means of transforming the present capitalist order of 
society into an egalitarian one. It gives no quarter to capitalism, but gives the 
present owning class a chance of reforming itself. It is based on the faith that 
human nature is never beyond redemption. 
2. It does not recognize any right of private ownership of property except so far as 
it may be permitted by society for its own welfare. 
3. It does not exclude legislative regulation of the ownership and use of wealth. 
4. Thus under State-regulated trusteeship, an individual will not be free to hold or 
use his wealth for selfish satisfaction or in disregard of the interests of society. 
5. Just as it is proposed to fix a decent minimum living wage, even so a limit 
should be fixed for the maxmum income that would be allowed to any person in 
society. The difference between such minimum and maximum incomes should 
be reasonable and equitable and variable from time to time so much so that the 
tendency would be towards obliteration of the difference. 
6. Under the Gandhian economic order the character of production will be 
determined by social necessity and not by personal whim or greed. 
Harijan, 25-10-1952 
 
***** 
 