 
Truth is God 
[Gleanings from the writings of Mahatma Gandhi bear ing on 
God, God-Realization and the Godly way] 
 
 
Written by : M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Compiled by : R. K. Prabhu 
 
 
Rs. 20/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Tel. 91-79-2754 0635 
Email: jitnavjivan10@gmail.com   
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
FOREWORD 
The Navajivan Managing Trustee has fallen a victim to the prevailing fashion 
and illusion. He wants a 'Foreword' from me to a bo ok of selections from Gandhiji's 
writings dealing with religion and God. The subject  as well as the author ought to 
have saved Shri Jivanji from this foreword-hunger. But so strong is fashion that in 
spite of everything he has done like others and wan ts me to do what is wholly 
unnecessary. 
God and therefore religion are fundamental necessit ies for normal healthy 
life—to the individual as well as to nations. Here in this book the reader will find 
Gandhiji speaking from his heart on various occasio ns in the course of thirty years 
of the maturest period of his life. What a modern m an who did very great things 
thought on the subject of God and religion cannot f ail to be instructive to 
educated men and women in these difficult days. 
"We the human families are not all philosophers. So mehow or other we want 
something which we can touch, something which we ca n see, something before 
which we can kneel down. It does not matter whether  it is a book or an empty 
stone-building or a stone-building inhabited by num erous figures": so wrote 
Gandhiji, defending temple-worship on the backgroun d of other prevailing 
religions. 
"Hindu Dharma is like a boundless ocean teeming wit h priceless gems. The 
deeper you dive, the more treasures you find," said  Gandhiji. 
Anyone who desires to understand what sort of a man  the Father of the Nation 
was, must read this book. 
One may not want to learn anything about religion t hat is not in our Shastras 
or in other religious books. But here is a facet of  the mind of a great man we love 
and to whom the nation is grateful. It has a value over and above a book of 
religious instruction. 
Madras, 11-4-'55        C. Rajagopalachari Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3   
TO THE READER 
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wr itings and to others who are 
interested in them that I am not at all concerned w ith appearing to be consistent. 
In my search after Truth I have discarded many idea s and learnt many new things. 
Old as I am in age, I have no feeling that I have c eased to grow inwardly or that 
my growth will stop at the dissolution of the flesh . What I am concerned with is 
my readiness to obey the call of Truth, my God, fro m moment to moment, and 
therefore, when anybody finds any inconsistency bet ween any two writings of 
mine, if he has still faith in my sanity, he would do well to choose the later of the 
two on the same subject. 
Harijan,  29-4-'33, p. 2      M.  K. GANDHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4   
1. MY QUEST 
I am but a seeker after Truth. I claim to have foun d a way to it. I claim to be 
making a ceaseless effort to find it. But I admit t hat I have not yet found it. To 
find Truth completely is to realize oneself and one 's destiny, i.e. to become 
perfect. I am painfully conscious of my imperfectio ns, and therein lies all the 
strength I possess, because it is a rare thing for a man to know his own limitations. 
Young India , 17-11-'21 
 
If I was a perfect man, I own I should not feel the  miseries of neighbours as I 
do. As a perfect man I should take note of them, pr escribe a remedy, and compel 
adoption by the force of unchallengeable Truth in m e. But as yet I only see as 
through a glass darkly and therefore have to carry conviction by slow and laborious 
processes, and then, too, not always with success. That being so, I would be less 
than human if, with all my knowledge of avoidable m isery pervading the land and 
of the sight of mere skeletons under the very shado w of the Lord of the Universe, I 
did not feel with and for all the suffering but dum b millions of India. 
Young India,  17-11-'21 
 
I am but a poor struggling soul yearning to be whol ly good—wholly truthful and 
wholly non-violent in thought, word and deed, but e ver failing to reach the ideal 
which I know to be true. It is a painful climb, but  the pain of it is a positive 
pleasure to me. Each step upward makes me feel stro nger and fit for the next. 
Young India , 9-4-'25 
 
I know the path. It is straight and narrow. It is l ike the edge of a sword. I 
rejoice to walk on it. I weep when I slip. God's wo rd is: 'He who strives never Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5  perishes.' I have implicit faith in that promise. T hough, therefore, from my 
weakness I fail a thousand times, I will not lose f aith but hope that I shall see the 
Light when the flesh has been brought under perfect  subjection as some day it 
must. 
Young India , 17-6-'26 
 
I have not seen Him, neither have I known Him. I ha ve made the world's faith 
in God my own and as my faith is ineffaceable, I re gard that faith as amounting to 
experience. However, as it may be said that to desc ribe faith as experience is to 
tamper with truth, it may perhaps be more correct t o say that I have no word for 
characterizing my belief in God. 
Autobiography , 1948, p. 341 
 
I claim to be a votary of truth from my childhood. It was the most natural 
thing to me. My prayerful search gave me the reveal ing maxim  Truth is God , 
instead of the usual one  God is Truth.  That maxim enables me to see God face to 
face as it were. I feel Him pervade every fibre of my being. 
Harijan, 9-8-'42 
 
Ahimsa is my God, and Truth is my God. When I look for Ahimsa, Truth says, 
'Find it through me.' When I look for Truth, Ahimsa  says, 'Find it out through me.' 
Young India , 4-6-'25 
 
To see the universal and all-pervading spirit of Tr uth face to face one must be 
able to love the meanest of creation as oneself. An d a man who aspires after that 
cannot afford to keep out of any field of life. Tha t is why my devotion of Truth has 
drawn me into the field of politics; and I can say without the slightest hesitation, Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6  and yet in all humility, that those who say that re ligion has nothing to do with 
politics do not know what religion means. 
Autobiography , 1948, p. 615 
 
I am endeavoring to see God through service of huma nity, for I know that God 
is neither in heaven, nor down below, but in every one. 
Autobiography , 1948, p. 615 
 
I have no desire for the perishable kingdom of eart h. I am striving for the 
Kingdom of Heaven which is Moksha. To attain my end  it is not necessary for me to 
seek the shelter of a cave. I carry one about me, i f I would but know it. A cave-
dweller can build castles in the air whereas a dwel ler in a palace like Janak has no 
castles to build. The cave- dweller who hovers roun d the world on the wings of 
thought has no peace. A Janak though living in the midst of 'pomp and 
circumstance’ may have peace that passeth understan ding. For me the road to 
salvation lies through incessant toil in the servic e of my country and there through 
of humanity. I want to identify myself with everyth ing that lives. 
Young India , 3-4-'24 
 
I want to realize brotherhood or identity not merel y with the beings called 
human, but I want to realize identity with all life , even with such things as crawl 
upon earth. I want, if I don't give you a shock, to  realize identity with even the 
crawling things upon earth, because we claim descen t from the same God, and 
that being so, all life in whatever form it appears  must be essentially one. 
Young India , 4-4-'29 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  There is no such thing as 'Gandhism', and I do not want to leave any sect after 
me. I do not claim to have originated any new princ iple of doctrine. I have simply 
tried in my own way to apply the eternal truths to our daily life and problems. 
Truth and non-violence are as old as the hills. All  I have done is to try experiments 
in both on as vast a scale as I could do. In doing so I have sometimes erred and 
learnt by my errors. Life and its problems have thu s become to me so many 
experiments in the practice of truth and non-violen ce. 
Harijan, 28-3-'36 
 
My faith in truth and non-violence is ever-growing,  and as I am ever trying to 
follow them in my life, I too am growing every mome nt. I see new implications 
about them. I see them in a newer light every day a nd read in them a newer 
meaning.  
Harijan, 2-3-'40 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8   
2. GOD IS 
There is an indefinable mysterious Power that perva des everything. I feel it, 
though I do not see it. It is this unseen Power whi ch makes itself felt and yet 
defies all proof, because it is so unlike all that I perceive through my senses. It 
transcends the senses. 
But it is possible to reason out the existence of G od to a limited extent. Even 
in ordinary affairs we know that people do not know  who rules or why, and how he 
rules. And yet they know that there is a power that  certainly rules. In my tour last 
year in Mysore I met many poor villagers and I foun d upon inquiry that they did not 
know who ruled Mysore. They simply said some god ru led it. If the knowledge of 
these poor people was so limited about their ruler I, who am infinitely lesser than 
God, than they than their ruler, need not be surpri sed if I do not realize the 
presence of God, the King of kings. Nevertheless I do feel as the poor villagers felt 
about Mysore that there is orderliness in the unive rse, there is an unalterable Law 
governing everything and every being that exists or  lives. It is not a blind law; for 
no blind law can govern the conduct of living being s, and thanks to the marvelous 
researches of Sir. J. C. Bose, it can now be proved  that even matter is life. That 
Law then which governs all life is God. Law and the  Lawgiver are one. I may not 
deny the Law or the Lawgiver, because I know so lit tle about It or Him. Even as my 
denial or ignorance of the existence of an earthly power will avail me nothing, so 
will not my denial of God and His Law liberate me f rom its operation; whereas 
humble and mute acceptance of divine authority make s life's journey easier even 
as the acceptance of earthly rule makes life under it easier. 
I do dimly perceive that whilst everything around m e is ever changing, ever 
dying, there is underlying all that change a living  power that is changeless, that 
holds all together, that creates, dissolves and re- creates. That informing power or Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  spirit is God. And since nothing else I see merely through the senses can or will 
persist, He alone is. 
And is this power benevolent or malevolent? I see i t is purely benevolent. For I 
can see that in the midst of death life persists, i n the midst of untruth truth 
persists, in the midst of darkness light persists. Hence I gather that God is Life, 
Truth, Light. He is Love. He is the Supreme Good. 
But He is no God who merely satisfies the intellect , if He ever does. God to be 
God must rule the heart and transform it. He must e xpress Himself in every 
smallest act of His votary. This can only be done t hrough a definite realization 
more real than the five senses can ever produce. Se nse perceptions can be, often 
are, false and deceptive, however real they may app ear to us. Where there is 
realization outside the senses it is infallible. It  is proved not by extraneous 
evidence but in the transformed conduct and charact er of those who have felt the 
real presence of God within. 
Such testimony is to be found in the experiences of  an unbroken line of 
prophets and sages in all countries and climes. To reject this evidence is to deny 
oneself. 
This realization is preceded by an immovable faith.  He who would in his own 
person test the fact of God's presence can do so by  a living faith. And since faith 
itself cannot be proved by extraneous evidence, the  safest course is to believe in 
the moral government of the world and therefore in the supremacy of the moral 
law, the law of Truth and Love. Exercise of faith w ill be the safest where there is 
a clear determination summarily to reject all that is contrary to Truth and Love. 
I cannot account for the existence of evil by any r ational method. To want to 
do so is to be coequal with God. I am therefore hum ble enough to recognize evil as 
such. And I call God long suffering and patient pre cisely because He permits evil in 
the world. I know that He has no evil. He is the au thor of it and yet untouched by 
it. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  I know too that I shall never know God if I do not wrestle with and against evil 
even at the cost of life itself. I am fortified in the belief by my own humble and 
limited experience. The purer I try to become, the nearer I feel to be to God. How 
much more should I be, when my faith is not a mere apology as it is today but has 
become as immovable as the Himalayas and as white a nd bright as the snows on 
their peaks? Meanwhile I invite the correspondent t o pray with Newman who sang 
from experience: 
Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom, Lead  Thou me on.  
The night is dark and I am far from home, Lead Thou  me on. 
Keep Thou my feet, I do not ask to see 
The distant scene; one step enough for me. 
Young India,  11-10-'28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11   
3. GOD ALONE IS 
To me God is Truth and Love; God is ethics and mora lity; God is fearlessness. 
God is the source of Light and Life and yet He is a bove and beyond all these. God 
is conscience. He is even the atheism of the atheis t. For in His boundless love God 
permits the atheist to live. He is the searcher of hearts. He transcends speech and 
reason. He knows us and our hearts better than we d o ourselves. He does not take 
us at our word for He knows that we often do not me an it, some knowingly and 
others unknowingly. He is a personal God to those w ho need His personal pre-
sence. He is embodied to those who need His touch. He is the purest essence. He 
simply Is to those who have faith. He is all things  to all men. He is in us and yet 
above and beyond us. One may banish the word 'God' from the Congress but one 
has no power to banish the thing itself. What is a solemn affirmation, if it is not 
the same thing as in the name of God? And surely co nscience is but a poor and 
laborious paraphrase of the simple combination of t hree letters called God. He 
cannot cease to be because hideous immoralities or inhuman brutalities are 
committed in His name. He is long suffering. He is patient but He is also terrible. 
He is the most exacting personage in the world and the world to come. He metes 
out the same measure to us as we mete out to our ne ighbours—men and brutes. 
With Him ignorance is no excuse. And withal He is e ver forgiving for He always 
gives us the chance to repent. He is the greatest d emocrat the world knows, for 
He leaves us 'unfettered' to make our own choice be tween evil and good. He is the 
greatest tyrant ever known, for He often dashes the  cup from our lips and under 
cover of free will leaves us a margin so wholly ina dequate as to provide only mirth 
for Himself at our expense. Therefore it is that Hi nduism calls it all His sport—Lila, 
or calls it all an illusion—Maya. We are  not. He alone Is. And if we will be, we must 
eternally sing His praise and do His will. Let us d ance to the tune of His Bansi—
flute, and all would be well. 
Young India , 5-3-'25 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12   
Advaitism and God  
[In answer to a friend's questions, Gandhiji wrote: ] 
I am Advaitist and yet I can support Dvaitism (dual ism). The world is changing 
every moment, and is therefore unreal, it has no pe rmanent existence. But though 
it is constantly changing, it has a something about  it which persists and it is 
therefore to that extent real. I have therefore no objection to calling it real and 
unreal, and thus being called an Anekantavadi or a Syadvadi. But my Syadvada is 
not the Syadvada of the learned, it is peculiarly m y own. I cannot engage in a 
debate with them. It has been my experience that I am always true from my point 
of view, and am often wrong from the point of view of my honest critics. I know 
that we are both right from our respective points o f view. And this knowledge 
saves me from attributing motives to my opponents o r critics. The seven blind men 
who gave seven different descriptions of the elepha nt were all right from their 
respective points of view, and wrong from the point  of view of one another, and 
right and wrong from the point of view of the man w ho knew the elephant. I very 
much like this doctrine of the manyness of reality.  It is this doctrine that has 
taught me to judge a Mussalman from his own standpo int and a Christian from his. 
Formerly I used to resent the ignorance of my oppon ents. Today I can love them 
because I am gifted with the eye to see myself as o thers see me and vice versa. I 
want to take the whole world in the embrace of my l ove. My Anekantavada is the 
result of the twin doctrine of Satyagraha and Ahims a. 
I talk of God exactly as I believe Him to be. I bel ieve Him to be creative as 
well as non-creative. This too is the result of my acceptance to the doctrine of the 
manyness of realty. From the platform of the Jains I prove the non creative aspect 
of God, and from that of Ramanuja the creative aspe ct. As a matter of fact we are 
all thinking of the Unthinkable, describing the Ind escribable, seeking to know the 
Unknown, and that is why our speech falters, is ina dequate and even often 
contradictory. That is why the Vedas describe Brahm an as 'not this', 'not this'. But Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13  if He or It is not this, He or It  is. If we exist, if our parents and their parents have  
existed, then it is proper to believe in the Parent  of the whole creation. If He is 
not, we are nowhere. And that is why all of us with  one voice call one God 
differently as Paramatma, Ishwara, Shiva, Vishnu, R ama, Allah, Khuda, Dada 
Hormuzda, Jehova, God, and an infinite variety of n ames. He is one and yet many; 
He is smaller than an atom, and bigger than the Him alayas. He is contained even 
in a drop of the ocean, and yet not even the seven seas can compass Him. Reason 
is powerless to know Him. He is beyond the reach or  grasp of reason. But I need 
not labour the point. Faith is essential in this ma tter. My logic can make and 
unmake innumerable hypotheses. An atheist might flo or me in a debate. But my 
faith runs so very much faster than my reason that I can challenge the whole world 
and say, 'God is, was and ever shall be.' 
But those who want to deny His existence are at lib erty to do so. He is 
merciful and compassionate. He is not an earthly ki ng needing an army to make us 
accept His sway. He allows us freedom, and yet His compassion commands 
obedience to His will. But if any one of us disdain  to bow to His will, He says: 'So 
be it. My sun will shine no less for thee, my cloud s will rain no less for thee. I need 
not force thee to accept my sway.' Of such a God le t the ignorant dispute the 
existence. I am one of the millions of wise men who  believe in Him and am never 
tired of bowing to Him and singing His glory. 
Young India , 21-1-'26 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14   
4. TRUTH IS GOD 
[Replying to a question asked of him at a meeting i n Switzerland on his way back from the 
Round Table Conference in London, Gandhiji said :] 
You have asked me why I consider that God is Truth.  In my early youth I was 
taught to repeat what in Hindu scriptures are known  as one thousand names of 
God. But these one thousand names of God were by no  means exhaustive. We 
believe—and I think it is the truth—that God has as  many names as there are 
creatures and, therefore we also say that God is na meless and since God has many 
forms we also consider Him formless, and since He s peaks to us through many 
tongues we consider Him to be speechless and so on.  And so when I came to study 
Islam I found that Islam too had many names for God . I would say with those who 
say God is Love, God is Love. But deep down in me I  used to say that though God 
may be Love, God is Truth, above all. If it is poss ible for the human tongue to give 
the fullest description of God, I have come to the conclusion that for myself, God 
is Truth. But two years ago I went a step further a nd said that Truth is God. You 
will see the fine distinction between the two state ments, viz. that God is Truth 
and Truth is God. And I came to that conclusion aft er a continuous and relentless 
search after Truth which began nearly fifty years a go. I then found that the 
nearest approach to Truth was through love. But I a lso found that love has many 
meanings in the English language at least and that human love in the sense of 
passion could become a degrading thing also. I foun d too that love in the sense of 
Ahimsa had only a limited number of votaries in the  world. But I never found a 
double meaning in connection with truth and even at heists had not demurred to 
the necessity or power of truth. But in their passi on for discovering truth, the 
atheists have not hesitated to deny the very existe nce of God—from their own 
point of view rightly. And it was because of this r easoning that I saw that rather 
than say that God is Truth, I should say that Truth  is God. I recall the name of 
Charles Bradlaugh who delighted to call himself an atheist, but knowing as I do Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  something of him, I would never regard him as an at heist. I would call him a God-
fearing man, though I know that he would reject the  claim. His face would redden 
if I would say "Mr. Bradlaugh, you are a truth-fear ing man, and so a God-fearing 
man." I would automatically disarm his criticism by  saying that Truth is God, as I 
have disarmed criticisms of many a young man. Add t o this the great difficulty 
that millions have taken the name of God and in His  name committed nameless 
atrocities. Not that scientists very often do not c ommit cruelties in the name of 
truth. I know how in the name of truth and science inhuman cruelties are 
perpetrated on animals when men perform vivisection . There are thus a number of 
difficulties in the way, no matter how you describe  God. But the human mind is a 
limited thing, and you have to labour under limitat ions when you think of a being 
or entity who is beyond the power of man to grasp. 
And then we have another thing in Hindu philosophy,  viz. God alone is and 
nothing else exists, and the same truth you find em phasized and exemplified in 
the Kalma of Islam. There you find it clearly state d—that God alone is and nothing 
else exists. In fact the Sanskrit word for Truth is  a word which literally means that 
which exists—Sat. For this and several other reason s that I can give you, I have 
come to the conclusion that the definition, 'Truth is God', gives me the greatest 
satisfaction. And when you want to find Truth as Go d the only inevitable means is 
Love, i.e. non-violence, and since I believe that u ltimately the means and end are 
convertible terms, I should not hesitate to say tha t God is Love. 
'What then is Truth?’ 
A difficult question, but I have solved it for myse lf by saying that it is what the 
voice within tells you. How, then, you ask, differe nt people think of different and 
contrary truths? Well, seeing that the human mind w orks through innumerable 
media and that the evolution of the human mind is n ot the same for all, it follows 
that what may be truth for one may be untruth for a nother, and hence those who 
have made these experiments have come to the conclu sion that there are certain 
conditions to be observed in making those experimen ts. Just as for conducting Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16  scientific experiments there is an indispensable sc ientific course of instruction, in 
the same way strict preliminary discipline is neces sary to qualify a person to make 
experiments in the spiritual realm. Everyone should , therefore, realize his 
limitations before he speaks of his Inner Voice. Th erefore we have the belief 
based upon experience, that those who would make in dividual search after Truth 
as God, must go through several vows, as for instan ce, the vow of truth, the vow 
of Brahmacharya (purity)—for you cannot possibly di vide your love for Truth and 
God with anything else—, the vow of non-violence, o f poverty and non-possession. 
Unless you impose on yourselves the five vows you m ay not embark on the 
experiment at all. There are several other conditio ns prescribed, but I must not 
take you through all of them. Suffice it to say tha t those who have made these 
experiments know that it is not proper for everyone  to claim to hear the voice of 
conscience, and it is because we have at the presen t moment everybody claiming 
the right of conscience without going through any d iscipline whatsoever and there 
is so much untruth being delivered to a bewildered world, all that I can, in true 
humility, present to you is that truth is not to be  found by anybody who has not 
got an abundant sense of humility. If you would swi m on the bosom of the ocean 
of Truth you must reduce yourself to a zero. Furthe r than this I cannot go along 
this fascinating path. 
Young India,  31-12-'31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17   
5. GOD IS LOVE 
Scientists tell us that without the presence of the  cohesive force amongst the 
atoms that comprise this globe of ours, it would cr umble to pieces and we cease 
to exist; and even as there is cohesive force in bl ind matter, so must there be in 
all things animate and the name for that cohesive f orce among animate beings is 
Love. We notice it between father and son, between brother and sister, friend and 
friend. But we have to learn to use that force amon g all that lives, and in the use 
of it consists our knowledge of God. Where there is  love there is life; hatred leads 
to destruction. 
Young India , 5-5-'20 
 
Though there is enough repulsion in Nature, she  lives by attraction. Mutual 
love enables Nature to persist. Man does not live b y destruction. Self-love compels 
regard for others. Nations cohere because there is mutual regard among 
individuals composing them. Some day we must extend  the national law to the 
universe, even as we have extended the family law t o form nations—a larger 
family. 
Young India , 2-3-'22 
 
I have found that life persists in the midst of des truction and, therefore, there 
must be a higher law than that of destruction. Only  under that law would a well-
ordered society be intelligible and life worth-livi ng. And if that is the law of life, 
we have to work it out in daily life. Where- ever t here are jars, wherever you are 
confronted with an opponent, conquer him with love.  In this crude manner, I have 
worked it out in my life. That does not mean that a ll my difficulties are solved. 
Only I have found that this law of love has answere d as the law of destruction has 
never done. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  Young India , 1-10-'31 
 
I believe that the sum total of the energy of manki nd is not to bring us down 
but to lift us up, and that is the result of the de finite, if unconscious, working of 
the law of love. The fact that mankind persists sho ws that the cohesive force is 
greater than the disruptive force, centripetal forc e greater than centrifugal.  
Young India , 12-11-'31 
 
If love or non-violence be not the law of our being  . . . there is no escape from 
a periodical recrudescence of war, each succeeding one outdoing the preceding 
one in ferocity. 
Harijan,  26-9-'36 
 
All the teachers that ever lived have preached that  law with more or less vigour. If 
love was not the law of life, life would not have p ersisted in the midst of death. 
Life is a perpetual triumph over the grave. If ther e is a fundamental distinction 
between man and beast, it is the former's progressi ve recognition of the law and 
its application in practice to his own personal lif e. All the saints of the world, 
ancient and modern, were each according to his ligh t and capacity a living 
illustration of that supreme law of our being. That  the brute in us seems so often 
to gain an easy triumph is true enough. That, howev er, does not disprove the law. 
It shows the difficulty of practice. How should it be otherwise with a law which is 
as high as truth itself? When the practice of the l aw becomes universal, God will 
reign on earth as He does in Heaven. I need not be reminded that earth and 
Heaven are in us. We know the earth, we are strange rs to the Heaven within us. If 
it is allowed that for some the practice of love is  possible, it is arrogance not to 
allow even the possibility of its practice in all t he others. Not very remote 
ancestors of ours indulged in cannibalism and many other practices which we Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19  would today call loathsome. No doubt in those days too there were Dick Sheppards 
who must have been laughed at and possibly pillorie d for preaching the (to them) 
strange doctrine of refusing to eat fellow men. 
Harijan,  26-9-'36 
 
God is not a Power residing in the clouds. God is a n unseen Power residing 
within us and nearer to us than finger-nails to the  flesh. There are many powers 
lying hidden within us and we discover them by cons tant struggle. Even so may we 
find this Supreme Power if we make diligent search with the fixed determination 
to find Him. One such way is the way of Ahimsa. It is so very necessary because 
God is in every one of us and, therefore, we have t o identify ourselves with every 
human being without exception* This is called cohes ion or attraction in scientific 
language. In the popular language it is called love . It binds us to one another and 
to God. Ahimsa and love are one and the same thing.  
From a private letter dated,  1-6-'42 
Harijan,  28-3-'53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20   
6. GOD IS TRUTH—KNOWLEDGE—BLISS 
The word Satya (Truth) is derived from  Sat, which means 'being'. Nothing is or 
exists in reality except Truth. That is why  Sat or Truth is perhaps the most 
important name of God. In fact it is more correct t o say that Truth is God, than to 
say that God is Truth. But as we cannot do without a ruler or a general, such 
names of God as 'King of kings' or 'The Almighty' a re and will remain generally 
current. On deeper thinking, however, it will be re alized, that  Sat or Satya is the 
only correct and fully significant name for God. 
And where there is Truth, there also is knowledge w hich is true. Where there 
is no Truth, there can be no true Knowledge. That i s why the word  Chit or 
Knowledge is associated with the name of God. And w here there is true 
Knowedge, there is always Bliss ( Ananda). Their sorrow has no place. And even as 
Truth is eternal, so is the Bliss derived from it. Hence we know God as  Sat-Chit-
Ananda, One who combines in Himself Truth, Knowledge and Bl iss. 
Devotion to this Truth is the sole justification fo r our existence. All our 
activities should be centred in Truth. Truth should  be the very breath of our life. 
When once this stage in the pilgrim's progress is r eached, all other rules of correct 
living will come without effort, and obedience to t hem will be instinctive. But 
without Truth it is impossible to observe any princ iples or rules in life. 
Generally speaking, observation of the law of Truth  is understood merely to 
mean that we must speak the truth. But we in the As hram should understand the 
word Satya or Truth in a much wider sense. There sh ould be Truth in thought, 
Truth in speech, and Truth in action. To the man wh o has realized this Truth in its 
fullness, nothing else remains to be known, because  all knowledge is necessarily 
included in it. What is not included in it is not T ruth, and so not true knowledge; 
and there can be no inward peace without true knowl edge. If we once learn how 
to apply this never-failing test of Truth, we will at once be able to find out what is 
worth doing, what is worth seeing, what is worth re ading. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21  But how is one to realize this Truth, which may be likened to the philosopher's 
stone or the cow of plenty? By single-minded devoti on (abhyasa) and indifference 
to all other interests in life ( vairagya) —replies the Bhagavad-gita. In spite, 
however, of such devotion, what may appear as truth  to one person will often 
appear as untruth to another person. But that need not worry the seeker. Where 
there is honest effort, it will be realized that wh at appear to be different truths 
are like the countless and apparently different lea ves of the same tree. Does not 
God Himself appear to different individuals in diff erent aspects? Still we know that 
He is one. But Truth is the right designation of Go d. Hence there is nothing wrong 
in every man following Truth according to his light s. Indeed it is his duty to do so. 
Then if there is a mistake on the part of anyone so  following Truth, it will be 
automatically set right. For the quest of Truth inv olves tapas—self-suffering, 
sometimes even unto death. There can be no place in  it for even a trace of self- 
interest. In such selfless search for Truth nobody can lose his bearings for long. 
Directly he takes to the wrong path he stumbles, an d is thus redirected to the 
right path. Therefore the pursuit of Truth is true  bkakti (devotion). It is the path 
that leads to God. There is no place in ii for cowa rdice, no place for defeat. It is 
the talisman by which death itself becomes the port al to life eternal. 
In this connection it would be well to ponder over the lives and examples of 
Harishchandra, Prahlad, Ramachandra, Imam Hasan and  Imam Hussain, the 
Christian saints, etc. How beautiful it would be, i f all of us, men and women, 
devoted ourselves wholly to Truth in all that we mi ght do in our waking hours, 
whether working, eating, drinking, or playing, till  dissolution of the body makes us 
one with Truth? God as Truth has been for me a trea sure beyond price: may He be 
so to every one of us. 
From Yeravda Mandir,  Chapter I. 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22   
7. GOD AND NATURE 
We do not know all the laws of God nor their workin g. Knowledge of the tallest 
scientist or the greatest spiritualist is like a pa rticle of dust. If God is not a 
personal being for me like my earthly father, He is  infinitely more. He rules me in 
the tiniest detail of my life. I believe literally that not a leaf moves but by His 
will. Every breath I take depends upon His sufferan ce. 
Harijan,  16-2-'34 
 
He and His Law are one. The Law is God. Anything at tributed to Him is not a 
mere attribute. He is the attribute. He is Truth, L ove and Law and a million other 
things that human ingenuity can name. 
Harijan, 16-2-'34 
 
The laws of Nature are changeless, unchangeable, an d there are no miracles in the 
sense of infringement or interruption of Nature's l aws. But we limited beings fancy 
all kinds of things and impute our limitations to G od. We may copy God, but not 
He us. We may not divide Time for Him. Time for Him  is eternity. For us there is 
past, present and future. And what is human life of  a hundred years but less than 
a mere speck in the eternity of Time?  
Harijan,  17-4-'37 
 
God Himself has reserved no right of revision of Hi s own laws nor is there any 
need for Him for any such revision. He is all-power ful, all-knowing. He knows at 
the same time and without any effort the past, the present and the future. He has 
therefore nothing to reconsider, nothing to revise,  nothing to alter and nothing to 
amend. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23  Young India,  25-11-'26 
 
This earthly existence of ours is more brittle than  the glass bangles that ladies 
wear. You can keep glass bangles or thousands of ye ars if you treasure them in a 
chest and kept them remain untouched. But this eart hly existence is so fickle that 
it may be wiped out in the twinkling of an eye. The refore, while we get breathing 
time, let us get rid of the distinctions of high an d low, purify our hearts and be 
ready to face our Maker when an earthquake or some natural calamity or death in 
the ordinary course overtakes us. 
Harijan,  2-2-'34 
 
I share the belief with the whole world—civilized a nd uncivilized—that calamities 
(such as the Bihar earthquake of 1934) come to mank ind as chastisement for their 
sins. When that conviction comes from the heart, pe ople pray, repent and purify 
themselves... I have but a limited knowledge of His  purpose. Such calamities are 
not a mere caprice of the Deity or Nature. They obe y fixed laws as surely as the 
planets move in obedience to laws governing their m ovement. Only we do not 
know the laws governing these events and, therefore , call them calamities or 
disturbances. 
Harijan,  2-2-'34 
 
There is a divine purpose behind every physical cal amity. That perfected 
science will one day be able to tell us beforehand when earthquakes will occur, as 
it tells us today of eclipses, is quite possible. I t will be another triumph of the 
human mind. But such triumph even indefinitely mult iplied can bring about no 
purification of self without which nothing is of an y value. 
Harijan,  8-6-35 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24   
I ask those who appreciate the necessity of inward purification to join in the 
prayer that we may read the purpose of God behind s uch visitations, that they 
may humble us and prepare us to face our Maker when ever the call comes, and 
that we may be ever ready to share the sufferings o f our fellows whosoever they 
may be. 
Harijan, 8-6-'35 
 
To say that God permits evil in this world may not be pleasing to the ear. But 
if He is held responsible for the good, it follows that He has to be responsible for 
the evil too. Did not God permit Ravana to exhibit unparalleled strength? Perhaps 
the root cause of the perplexity arises from a lack  of the real understanding of 
what God is. God is not a person. He transcends des cription. He is the Lawmaker, 
the Law and the Executor. No human being can well a rrogate these powers to 
himself. If he did, he would be looked upon as an u nadulterated dictator. They 
become only Him whom we worship as God. 
Harijan, 24-2-'46 
 
In a strictly scientific sense God is at the bottom  of both good and evil. He directs 
the assassin's dagger no less than the surgeon's kn ife. But for all that good and evil 
are, for human purposes, from each other distinct a nd incompatible, being 
symbolical of light and darkness, God and Satan.  
Harijan, 20-2-'37 
 
I do not regard God as a person. Truth for me is Go d, and God's Law and God 
are not different things or facts, in the sense tha t an earthly king and his law are 
different. Because God is an idea, Law Himself. The refore, it is impossible to 
conceive God as breaking the Law. He, therefore, do es not rule our actions and Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25  withdraw Himself. When we say He rules our actions,  we are simply using human 
language and we try to limit Him. Otherwise He and His Law abide everywhere and 
govern everything. Therefore, I do not think that H e answers in every detail every 
request of ours, but there is no doubt that He rule s our action, and I literally 
believe that not a blade of grass grows or moves wi thout His will. The free will we 
enjoy is less than that of a passenger on a crowded  deck. 
"Do you feel a sense of freedom in your communion w ith God?" 
I do. I do not feel cramped as I would on a boat fu ll of passengers. Although I 
know that my freedom is less than that of a passeng er, I appreciate that freedom 
as I have imbibed through and through the central t eaching of the Gita that man is 
the maker of his own destiny in the sense that he h as freedom of choice as to the 
manner in which he uses that freedom. But he is no controller of results. The 
moment he thinks he is, he comes to grief. 
Harijan 23-3-'40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26   
8. GOD AS DARIDRANARAYAN 
Daridranarayan is one of the millions of names by w hich humanity knows God 
who is unnameable and unfathomable by human underst anding and it means God 
of the poor, God appearing in the hearts of the poo r. 
Young India , 4-4-'29 
 
For the poor the economic is the spiritual. You can not make any other appeal 
to those starving millions. It will fall flat on th em. But you take food to them and 
they will regard you as their God. They are incapab le of any other thought. 
Young India , 5-5-'27 
 
With this very hand I have collected soiled pies fr om them tied tightly in their 
rags. Talk to them of modern progress. Insult them by taking the name of God 
before them in vain. They will call you and me fien ds if we talk about God to 
them. They know, if they know God at all, a God of terror, vengeance, a pitiless 
tyrant. 
Young India , 15-9-'27 
 
I dare not take before them the message of God. I m ay as well place before 
the dog over there the message of God as before tho se hungry millions who have 
no lustre in their eyes and whose only God is their  bread. I can take before them a 
message of God only by taking the message of sacred  work before them. It is good 
enough to talk of God whilst we are sitting here af ter a nice breakfast and looking 
forward to a nicer luncheon, but how am I to talk o f God to the millions who have 
to go without two meals a day? To them God can only  appear as bread and butter. 
Well, the peasants of India were getting their brea d from their soil. I offered them Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27  the spinning wheel in order that they may get butte r and if I appear today ... in 
my loin-cloth it is because I come as the sole repr esentative of those half-starved, 
half-naked dumb millions. 
Young India , 15-10-'31 
 
I claim to know my millions. All the hours of the d ay I am with them. They are 
my first care and last because I recognize no God e xcept that God that is to be 
found in the hearts of the dumb millions. They do n ot recognize His presence; I 
do. And I worship the God that is Truth or Truth wh ich is God through the service 
of these millions. 
Harijan,  11-3-'39 
I suggest that we are thieves in a way. If I take a nything that I do not need for 
my own immediate use and keep it, I thieve it from somebody else. It is the funda-
mental law of Nature, without exception, that Natur e produces enough for our 
wants from day to day; and if only everybody took e nough for himself and nothing 
more, there would be no pauperism in this world, th ere would be no man dying of 
starvation. 
Mahatma Gandhi  (1918), p. 189 
 
In India we have got many millions of people who ha ve to be satisfied with one 
meal a day and that meal consisting of a Chapati co ntaining no fat in it and a 
pinch of salt. You and I have no right to anything that we really have until these 
millions are clothed and fed. You and I ought to kn ow better, must adjust our 
wants, and even undergo voluntary privation in orde r that they may be nursed, fed 
and clothed. 
Mahatma Gandhi  (1918), p. 189 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28   
9. THE VOICE OF GOD 
My claim to hear the voice of God is no new claim. Unfortunately there is no 
way that I know of proving the claim except through  results. God will not be God if 
He allowed Himself to be an object of proof by His creatures. But He does give His 
willing slave the power to pass through the fieries t of ordeals. I have been a 
willing slave to this most exacting Master for more  than half a century. His voice 
has been increasingly audible as years have rolled fey. He has never forsaken me 
even in my darkest hour. He has saved me often agai nst myself and left me not a 
vestige of independence. The greater the surrender to Him, the greater has been 
my joy. 
Harijan, 6-5-'33 
 
Nobody has to my knowledge questioned the possibili ty of the Inner Voice 
speaking to some, and it is a gain to the world eve n if one person's claim to speak 
under the authority of the Inner Voice can be reall y sustained. Many men make the 
claim, but not all will be able to substantiate it.  But, it cannot and ought not to 
be suppressed for the sake of preventing false clai mants. There is no danger what-
soever if many people could truthfully represent th e Inner Voice. But, 
unfortunately, there is no remedy against hypocrisy . Virtue must not be 
suppressed because many will feign it. Men have alw ays been found throughout 
the world claiming to speak for the Inner Voice. Bu t no harm has yet overtaken the 
world through their short lived activities. Before one is able to listen to that 
Voice, one has to go through a long and fairly seve re course of training, and when 
it is the Inner Voice that speaks, it is unmistakab le, The world cannot be 
successfully fooled for all time. There is, therefo re, no danger of anarchy setting 
in because a humble man like me will not be suppres sed and will dare to claim the 
authority of the Inner Voice, when he believes that  he has heard it. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29  Harijan, 18-3-'33 
 
For me the Voice of God, of Conscience, of Truth or  the Inner Voice or 'the 
still small Voice' mean one and the same thing. I s aw no form. I have never tried, 
for I have always believed God to be without form. But what I did hear was like a 
Voice from afar and yet quite near. It was as unmis takable as some human voice 
definitely speaking to me, and irresistible. I was not dreaming at the time I heard 
the Voice. The hearing of the Voice was preceded by  a terrific struggle within me. 
Suddenly the Voice came upon me. I listened, made c ertain that it was the Voice, 
and the struggle ceased. I was calm. The determinat ion was made accordingly; the 
date and the hour of the fast were fixed. Joy came over me. This was between 11 
and 12 midnight. I felt refreshed and began to writ e the note about it which the 
reader must have seen.  
Harijan, 8-7-'33 
 
Could I give any further evidence that it was truly  the Voice that I heard and 
that it was not an echo of my own heated imaginatio n? I have no further evidence 
to convince the sceptic. He is free to say that it was all self- delusion or 
hallucination. It may well have been so. I can offe r no proof to the contrary. But I 
can say this—that not the unanimous verdict of the whole world against me could 
shake me from the belief that what I heard was the true Voice of God. 
Harijan, 8-7-'33 
 
But some think that God Himself is a creation of ou r own imagination. If that 
view holds good, then nothing is real, everything i s of our own imagination. Even 
so, whilst my imagination dominates me, I can only act under its spell. Realest Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  things are only relatively so. For me the Voice was  more real than my own 
existence. It has never failed me, and for that mat ter, anyone else. 
Harijan, 8-7-'33 
 
And every one who wills can hear the Voice. It is w ithin every one. But like 
everything else, it requires previous and definite preparation. 
Harijan, 8-7-'33 
 
There is no question of hallucination. I have state d a simple scientific truth, 
thus to be tested by all who have the will and the patience to acquire the 
necessary qualifications, which are again incredibl y simple to understand and easy 
enough to acquire where there is determination. I c an only say : "You have to 
believe no one but yourselves. You must try to list en to the Inner Voice, but if you 
won't have the expression 'Inner Voice', you may us e the expression 'dictates of 
reason', which you should obey, and if you will not  parade God, I have no doubt 
you will parade something else which in the end wil l prove to be God, for 
fortunately, there is no one and nothing else but G od in this universe." I would also 
submit that it is not every one claiming to act on the urge of the Inner Voice (who) 
has that urge. After all, like every other faculty,  this faculty for listening to the 
still small Voice within requires previous effort, and training, perhaps much 
greater than what is required for the acquisition o f any other faculty, and even if 
out of thousands of claimants only a few succeed in  establishing their claim, it is 
well worth running the risk of having and toleratin g doubtful claimants. A person 
falsely claiming to act under divine inspiration or  the promptings of the Inner 
Voice without having any such, will fare worse than  the one falsely claiming to act 
under the authority of an earthly sovereign. Wherea s the latter on being exposed 
will escape with injury to his body the former may perish body and soul together. 
Charitable critics impute no fraud to me, but sugge st that I am highly likely to be Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31  acting under some hallucination. The result for me,  even then, will not be far 
different from what it would be if I was laying a f alse claim. A humble seeker that 
I claim to be has need to be most cautious and, to preserve the balance of mind, 
he has to reduce himself to zero before God will gu ide him. Let me not labour this 
point. 
The Bombay Chronicle , 18-11-'33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32   
10. GOD-REALIZATION 
For me Truth is the sovereign principle, which incl udes numerous other 
principles. This Truth is not only truthfulness in word, but truthfulness in thought 
also, and not only the relative truth of our concep tion, but the Absolute Truth, the 
Eternal Principle that is God. There are innumerabl e definitions of God, because 
His manifestations are innumerable. They overwhelm me with wonder and awe 
and for a moment stun me. But I worship God as Trut h only. I have not yet found 
Him, but I am seeking after Him. I am prepared to s acrifice the things dearest to 
me in pursuit of this quest. Even if the sacrifice demanded be my very life I hope I 
may be prepared to give it. But as long as I have n ot realized this Absolute Truth, 
so long must I hold by the relative truth as I have  conceived it. That relative truth 
must, meanwhile, be my beacon, my shield and buckle r. Though this path is 
straight and narrow and sharp as the razor's edge, for me it has been the quickest 
and easiest. Even my Himalayan blunders have seemed  trifling to me because I 
have kept strictly to this path. For the path has s aved me from coming to grief, 
and I have gone forward according to my light. Ofte n in my progress I have had 
faint glimpses of the Absolute Truth, God, and dail y the conviction is growing upon 
me that He alone is real and all else is unreal. 
Autobiography , (1948) pp. 6-7 
 
The further conviction has been growing upon me tha t whatever is possible for 
me is possible even for a child, and I have found s ound reasons for saying so. The 
instruments for the quest of Truth are as simple as  they are difficult. They may 
appear quite impossible to an arrogant person, and quite possible to an innocent 
child. The seeker after Truth should be humbler tha n the dust. The world crushes 
the dust under its feet, but the seeker after Truth  should so humble himself that Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  even the dust could crush him. Only then, and not t ill then, will he have a glimpse 
of Truth. 
Autobiography , (1948,) pp. 6-7 
 
This belief in God has to be based on faith which t ranscends reason. Indeed; 
even the so-called realization has at bottom an ele ment of faith without which it 
cannot be sustained. In the very nature of things i t must be so. Who can transgress 
the limitations of his being? I hold that complete realization is impossible in this 
embodied life. Nor is it necessary. A living immova ble faith is all that is required 
for reaching the full spiritual height attainable b y human beings. God is not 
outside this earthly case of ours. Therefore, exter ior proof is not of much avail, if 
any at all. We must ever fail to perceive Him throu gh the senses, because He is 
beyond them. We can feel Him, if we will but withdr aw ourselves from the senses. 
The divine music is incessantly going on within our selves, but the loud senses 
drown the delicate music, which is unlike an infini tely superior to anything we can 
perceive or hear with our senses. 
Harijan, 13-6-'36 
 
I have seen and believe that God never appears to y ou in person, but in action 
which can only account for your deliverance in your  darkest hour. 
Harijan, 13-6-'36 
 
My uniform experience has convinced me that there i s no other God than 
Truth. . . . The little fleeting glimpses . . . tha t I have been able to have of Truth 
can hardly convey an idea of the indescribable lust re of Truth, a million times 
more intense than that of the sun we daily see with  our eyes. In fact, what I have 
caught is only the faintest glimmer of that mighty effulgence. But this much I can Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  say with assurance as a result of all my experiment s, that a perfect vision of Truth 
can only follow a complete realization of Ahimsa. 
Young India,  7-2-'29 
 
I have no special revelation of God's will. My firm  belief is that He reveals 
Himself daily to every human being but we shut our ears to the still small Voice. 
We shut our eyes to the Pillar of Fire in front of us. I realize His omnipresence. 
Young India,  25-5-'21 
 
Man's ultimate aim is the realization of God and al l his activities, social, 
political, religious, have to be guided by the ulti mate aim of the vision of God. 
The immediate service of all human beings becomes a  necessary part of the 
endeavour, simply because the only way to find God is to see Him in his creation 
and be one with it. This can only be done by servic e of all. I am a part and parcel 
of the whole and I cannot find Him apart from the r est of humanity. My 
countrymen are my nearest neighbours. They have bec ome so helpless, so 
resourceless, so inert that I must concentrate myse lf on serving them. If I could 
persuade myself that I could find Him in a Himalaya n cave I would proceed there 
immediately. But I know that I cannot find Him apar t from humanity. 
Harijan, 29-8-'36 
 
The impenetrable darkness that surrounds us is not a curse but a blessing. He 
has given us power to see only the step in front of  us, and it should be enough if 
Heavenly light reveals that step to us. We can then  sing with Newman, 'One step 
enough for me'. And we may be sure from our past ex perience that the next step 
will always be in view. In other words, the impenet rable darkness is nothing so 
impenetrable as we imagine. But it seems impenetrab le when, in our impatience, 
we want to look beyond that one step.  Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35  Harijan, 20-4-'34 
 
I am surer of His existence than of the fact that y ou and I are sitting in this 
room. Then I can also testify that I may live witho ut air and water but not without 
Him. You may pluck out my eyes, but that cannot kil l me. You may chop off my 
nose, but that will not kill me. But blast my belie f in God, and I am dead. You may 
call this a superstition, but I confess it is a sup erstition that I hug, even as I used 
to do the name of Rama in my childhood when there w as any cause of danger or 
alarm. That was what an old nurse had taught me. 
Harijan, 14-5-'38 
 
God is the hardest taskmaster I have known on earth , and he tries you through 
and through. And when you find that your faith is f ailing or your body is failing 
you, and you are sinking, He comes to your assistan ce somehow or other and 
proves to you that you must not lose faith and that  He is always at your beck and 
call, but on His terms, not on your terms. So I hav e found. I cannot recall a single 
instance when, at the eleventh hour, He has forsake n me. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi  (1933), p. 1069 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36   
11. THE PATH OF AHIMSA 
The path of Truth is as narrow as it is straight. E ven so is that of Ahimsa. It is 
like balancing oneself on the edge of a sword. By c oncentration an acrobat can 
walk on a rope. But the concentration required to t read the path of Truth and 
Ahimsa is far greater. The slightest inattention br ings one tumbling to the ground. 
One can realize Truth and Ahimsa only by ceaseless striving. . . . 
Ahimsa is not the crude thing it has been made to a ppear. Not to hurt any 
living things is no doubt a part of Ahimsa. But it is its least expression. The 
principle of Ahimsa is hurt by every evil thought, by undue haste, by lying, by 
hatred, by wishing ill to anybody. It is also viola ted by our holding on to what the 
world needs. But the world needs even what we eat d ay by day. In the place 
where we stand there are millions of a micro-organi sms to whom the place 
belongs, and who are hurt by our presence there. Wh at should we do then? Should 
we commit suicide? Even that is no solution, if we believe, as we do, that so long 
as the spirit is attached to the flesh, on every de struction of body it weaves for 
itself another. The body will cease to be only when  we give up all attachment to 
it. This freedom from all attachment is the realiza tion of God as Truth. Such 
realization cannot be attained in a hurry. The body  does not belong to us. While it 
lasts we must use it as a trust handed over to our charge. Treating in this way the 
things of the flesh, we may one day expect to becom e free from the burden of the 
body. Realizing the limitations of the flesh, we mu st strive day by day towards the 
ideal with what strength we have in us. 
It is perhaps clear from the foregoing, that withou t Ahimsa it is not possible to 
seek and find Truth. 
Ahimsa and Truth are so interwined that it is pract ically impossible to 
disentangle and separate them. They are like the tw o sides of a coin, or rather of 
a smooth unstamped metallic disc. Who can say, whic h is the obverse, and which Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37  is the reverse? Nevertheless, Ahimsa is the means; Truth is the end. Means to be 
means must always be within our reach, and so Ahims a is our supreme duty. If we 
take care of the means, we are bound to reach the e nd sooner or later. When once 
we have grasped this point, final victory is beyond  question. Whatever difficulties 
we encounter, whatever apparent reverses we sustain , we may not give up the 
quest for Truth which alone is, being God Himself. 
From Yeravda Mandir, Chapter II 
 
Non-violence is an active force of the highest orde r. It is soul-force or the power 
of Godhead within us. Imperfect man cannot grasp th e whole of that essence—he 
would not be able to bear its full blaze, but even an infinitesimal fraction of it, 
when it becomes active within us, can work wonders.  The sun in the heavens fills 
the whole universe with its life-giving warmth. But  if one went too near it, it 
would consume him to ashes. Even so, it is with God head. We become Godlike to 
the extent we realize non-violence, but we can neve r become wholly God. Non-
violence is like radium in its action. An infinites imal quantity of it embedded in a 
malignant growth, acts continuously, silently and c easelessly till it has 
transformed the whole mass of the diseased tissue i nto a healthy one. Similarly, 
even a little of true non-violence acts in a silent , subtle, unseen way and leavens 
the whole society. 
Harijan, 12-ll-'38 
 
Truth without humility would be an arrogant caricat ure. He who wants to 
practise truth knows how hard it is. The world may applaud his so-called triumphs. 
Little does the world know his falls. A truthful ma n is a chastened being. He has 
need to be humble. A man who wants to love the whol e world including one who 
calls himself his enemy knows how impossible it is to do so in his own strength. He 
must be as mere dust before he can understand the e lements of Ahimsa. He is Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  nothing if he does not daily grow in humility as he  grows in love.... And no one can 
see God face to face who has aught of the I in him.  He must become a cypher if he 
would see God. Who shall dare say in this storm-tos sed universe, 'I have won’? God 
triumphs in us, never we. . . .What is true of the physical world is true of the 
spiritual. If in order to gain a worldly battle, Eu rope sacrificed several million lives 
during the late war, itself a transitory event, wha t wonder that in the spiritual 
battle millions have to perish in the attempt so th at one complete example may 
be left to the world ? 
Young India , 25-6-'25 
 
Non-violence is the greatest force at the disposal of mankind. It is mightier than 
the mightiest weapon of destruction devised by the ingenuity of man. Destruction 
is not the law of the humans. Man lives freely by h is readiness to die, if need be, 
at the hands of his brother, never by killing him. Every murder or injury, no 
matter for what cause, committed or inflicted on an other is a crime against 
humanity. 
Harijan, 20-7-'35 
 
The virtues of mercy, non-violence, love and truth in any man can be truly 
tested only when they are pitted against ruthlessne ss, violence, hate and untruth. 
If this is true, then it is incorrect to say that A himsa is of no avail before a 
murderer. It can certainly be said that to experime nt with Ahimsa in face of a 
murderer is to seek self-destruction. But this is t he real test of Ahimsa. He who 
gets himself killed out of sheer helplessness, howe ver, can in no wise be said to 
have passed the test. He who when being killed bear s no anger against this 
murderer and even asks God to forgive him is truly non-violent. History relates this 
of Jesus Christ. With his dying breath on his cross , he is reported to have said: 
"Father, forgive them for they know not what they d o." We can get similar Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39  instances from other religions but the quotation is  given because it is world 
famous. 
It is another matter that our non-violence has not reached such heights. It 
would be wholly wrong for us to lower the standard of Ahimsa by reason of our 
own fault or lack of experience. Without true under standing of the ideal, we can 
never hope to reach it. It is necessary for us, the refore, to apply our reason to 
understand the power of non-violence. 
Harijan, 28-4-'46 
 
Ahimsa is a comprehensive principle. We are helples s mortals caught in the 
conflagration of Himsa. The saying that life lives on life has a deep meaning in it. 
Man cannot for a moment live without consciously or  unconsciously committing 
outward Himsa. The very fact of his living— eating,  drinking and moving about—
necessarily involves some Himsa, destruction of lif e, be it ever so minute. A votary 
of Ahimsa therefore remains true to his faith if th e spring of all his actions is 
compassion, if he shuns to the best of his ability the destruction of the tiniest 
creature, tries to save it, and thus incessantly st rives to be free from the deadly 
coil of Himsa. He will be constantly growing in sel f-restraint and compassion, but 
he can never become entirely free from outward Hims a. 
Autobiography  (1948), pp. 427-28 
 
Then again, because underlying Ahimsa is the unity of all life, the error of one 
cannot but affect all, and hence man cannot be whol ly free from Himsa. So long as 
he continues to be a social being, he cannot but pa rticipate in the Himsa that the 
very existence, of society involves. When two natio ns are fighting, the duty of a 
votary of Ahimsa is to stop the war. He who is not equal to that duty, he who has 
no power of resisting war, he who is not qualified to resist war, may take part in Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40  war, and yet whole-heartedly try to free himself, h is nation and the world from 
war. 
Autobiography  (1948), p. 428 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41   
12. PRAYER—THE ESSENCE OF RELIGION 
I believe that prayer is the very soul and essence  of religion, and therefore 
prayer must be the very core of the life of man, fo r no man can live without 
religion. There are some who in the egotism of thei r reason declare that they have 
nothing to do with religion. But it is like a man s aying that he breathes but that he 
has no nose. Whether by reason, or by instinct, or by superstition, man acknow-
ledges some sort of relationship with the divine. T he rankest agnostic or atheist 
does acknowledge the need of a moral principle, and  associates something good 
with its observance and something bad with its non- observance. Bradlaugh, whose 
atheism is well known, always insisted on proclaimi ng his innermost conviction. He 
had to suffer a lot for thus speaking the truth, bu t he delighted in it and said that 
truth is its own reward. Not that he was quite inse nsible to the joy resulting from 
the observance of truth. This joy however is not al l worldly, but springs out of 
communion with the divine. That is why I have said that even a man who disowns 
religion cannot and does not live without religion.  
Now I come to the next thing, viz. that prayer is t he very core of man's life, as 
it is the most vital part of religion. Prayer is ei ther petitional or in its wider sense 
is inward communion. In either case the ultimate re sult is the same. Even when it 
is petitional, the petition should be for the clean sing and purification of the soul, 
for freeing it from the layers of ignorance and dar kness that envelop it. He 
therefore who hungers for the awakening of the divi ne in him must fall back on 
prayer. But prayer is no mere exercise of words or of the ears, it is no mere re-
petition of empty formula. Any amount of repetition  of Ramanama is futile if it 
fails to stir the soul. It is better in prayer to h ave a heart without words than 
words without a heart. It must be in clear response  to the spirit which hungers for 
it. And even as a hungry man relishes a hearty meal , a hungry soul will relish a 
heartfelt prayer. And I am giving you a bit of my experience and that of my 
companions when I say that he who has experienced t he magic of prayer may do Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42  without food for days together but not a single mom ent without prayer. For 
without prayer there is no inward peace. 
If that is the case, someone will say, we should be  offering our prayers every 
minute of our lives. There is no doubt about it, bu t we erring mortals, who find it 
difficult to retire within ourselves for inward com munion even for a single 
moment, will find it impossible to remain perpetual ly in communion with the 
divine. We therefore fix some hours when we make a serious effort to throw off 
the attachments of the world for a while, we make a  serious endeavour to remain, 
so to say, out of the flesh. You have heard Surdas' s hymn. It is the passionate cry 
of a soul hungering for union with the divine. Acco rding to our standards he was a 
saint, but according to his own he was a proclaimed  sinner. Spiritually he was 
miles ahead of us, but he felt the separation from the divine so keenly that he has 
uttered that anguished cry* in lothing and despair.  
I have talked of the necessity for prayer, and ther e through I have dealt with 
the essence of prayer. We are born to serve our - f ellowmen, and we cannot 
properly do so unless we are wide awake. There is a n eternal struggle raging in 
man's breast between the powers of darkness and of light, and he who has not the 
sheet-anchor of prayer to rely upon will be a victi m to the powers of darkness. 
The man of prayer will be at peace with himself and  with the whole world; the 
man who goes about the affairs of the world without  a prayerful heart will be 
miserable and will make the world also miserable. A part therefore from its 
bearing on man's condition after death, prayer has incalculable value for man in 
this world of the living. Prayer is the only means of bringing about orderliness and 
peace and repose in our daily acts. Take care of th e vital thing and other things 
will take care of themselves. Rectify one angle of a square, and the other angles 
will be automatically right. 
Begin therefore your day with prayer, and make it s o soulful that it may 
remain with you until the evening. Close the day wi th prayer so that you may have 
a peaceful night free from dreams and nightmares. D o not worry about the form of Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43  prayer. Let it be any form, it should be such as ca n put us into communion with 
the divine. Only, whatever be the form, let not the  spirit wander while the words 
of prayer run on out of your mouth. 
All things in the universe, including the sun and t he moon and the stars, obey 
certain laws. Without the restraining influence of these laws the world would not 
go on for a single moment. You, whose mission in li fe is service of your fellowmen, 
will go to pieces if you do not impose on yourselve s some sort of discipline, and 
prayer is a necessary spiritual discipline. It is d iscipline and restraint that 
separates us from the brute. If we will be men walk ing with our heads erect and 
not walking on all fours, let us understand and put  ourselves under voluntary 
discipline and restraint. 
Young India , 23-l-'30 
 
* मो सम कौन क ु/glyph466टल खल कामी । 
'Who is so corrupt, wicked and lustful as I !’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44   
13. WHY PRAY? 
Why pray at all? Does not God, if there be One, kno w what has happened? 
Does He stand in need of prayer to enable Him to do  His duty? 
No, God needs no reminder. He is within every one. Nothing happens without 
His permission. Our prayer is a heart search. It is  a reminder to ourselves that we 
are helpless without His support. No effort is comp lete without prayer,—without a 
definite recognition that the best human endeavour is of no effect if it has not 
God's blessing behind it. Prayer is a call to humil ity. It is a call to self- 
purification, to inward search. 
Harijan,  8-6-'35 
 
In my opinion, Rama, Rahaman, Ahurmazda, God or Kri shna are all attempts 
on the part of man to name that invisible force whi ch is the greatest of all forces. 
It is inherent in man, imperfect though he be, ceas elessly to strive after 
perfection. In the attempt he falls into reverie. A nd, just as a child tries to stand, 
falls down again and again and ultimately learns ho w to walk, even so man, with 
all his intelligence, is a mere infant as compared to the infinite and ageless God. 
This may appear to be an exaggeration but is not. M an can only describe God in his 
own poor language. The power we call God defies des cription. Nor does that 
power stand in need of any human effort to describe  Him. It is man who requires 
the means whereby he can describe that power which is vaster than the ocean. If 
this premise is accepted, there is no need to ask w hy we pray. Man can only 
conceive God within the limitations of his own mind . If God is vast and boundless 
as the ocean, how can a tiny drop like man imagine what He is? He can only 
experience what the ocean is like, if he falls into  and is merged in it. This 
realization is beyond description. In Madame Blavat sky's language man, in praying, 
worships his own glorified self. He can truly pray,  who has the conviction that God Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45  is within him. He who has not, need not pray. God w ill not be offended, but I can 
say from experience that he who does not pray is ce rtainly a loser. What matters 
then whether one man worships God as a Person and a nother as Force? Both do 
right according to their lights. None knows and per haps never will know what the 
absolutely proper way to pray is. The ideal must al ways remain the ideal. One 
need only remember that God is the Force among all the forces. All other forces 
are material. But God is the vital force or spirit which is all-pervading, all-
embracing and therefore beyond human ken. 
Harijan,  18-8-'46 
 
A Dialogue with a Buddhist  
Dr. Fabri, a follower of Buddha, called on Gandhiji  at Abbottabad, and 
enquired : 
"Could the Divine Mind be changed by prayer? Could one find it out by prayer?” 
"It is a difficult thing to explain fully what I do  when I pray,'' said Gandhiji.”But 
I must try to answer your question. The Divine Mind  is unchangeable, but that 
Divinity is in everyone arid everything—animate and  inanimate. The meaning of 
prayer is that I want to evoke that Divinity within  me. Now I may have that 
intellectual conviction, but not a living touch. An d so when I pray for Swaraj or 
Independence for India I pray or wish for adequate power to gain that Swaraj or to 
make the largest contribution I can towards winning  it, and I maintain that I can 
get that power in answer to prayer." 
"Then you are not justified in calling it prayer; t o pray means to beg or 
demand," said Dr. Fabri. 
"Yes, indeed. You may say I beg it of myself, of my  Higher self, the Real self 
with which I have not yet achieved complete identif ication. You may, therefore, 
describe it as a continual longing to lose oneself in the Divinity which comprises 
all." Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46  "What about the people who cannot pray?" asked Dr. Fabri. 
"Be humble," said Gandhiji, "I would say to them, a nd do not limit even the 
real Buddha by your own conception of Buddha. He co uld not have ruled the lives 
of millions of men that he did and does today if he  was not humble enough to 
pray. There is something infinitely higher than int ellect that rules us and even the 
sceptics. Their scepticism and philosophy does not help them in critical periods of 
their lives. They need something better, something outside them that can sustain 
them. And so if someone puts a conundrum before me,  I say to him, 'You are not 
going to know the meaning of God or prayer unless y ou reduce yourself to a 
cipher. You must be humble enough to see that in sp ite of your greatness and 
gigantic intellect you are but a speck in the unive rse. A merely intellectual 
conception of the things of life is not enough. It is the spiritual conception which 
eludes the intellect, and which alone can give one satisfaction. Even moneyed 
men have critical periods in their lives. Though th ey are surrounded by everything 
that money can buy and affection can give, they fin d themselves at  certain 
moments in their lives utterly distracted. It is in  these moments that we have a 
glimpse of God, a vision of Him who is guiding ever y one of our steps in life. It is 
prayer.' " 
"You mean what we might call a true religious exper ience which is stronger 
than intellectual conception," said Dr. Fabri. "Twi ce in life I had that experience, 
but I have since lost it. But I now find great comf ort in one or two sayings of 
Buddha : 'Selfishness is the cause of sorrow', and 'Remember, monks, everything is 
fleeting'. To think of these takes almost the place  of belief." 
"That is prayer," repeated Gandhiji with an insiste nce that could not but have 
gone home. 
Harijan, 19-8-'39 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47   
14. HOW, TO WHOM AND WHEN TO PRAY 
'Often, Sir, do you ask us to worship God, to pray but never tell us how to and 
to whom to do so. Will you kindly enlighten me?' as ks a reader of the  Navajivan . 
Worshipping God is singing the praise of God. Praye r is a confession of one's 
unworthiness and weakness. God has a thousand names , or rather, He is Nameless. 
We may worship or pray to Him by whichever name tha t pleases us. Some call Him 
Rama, some Krishna, others call Him Rahim, and yet others call Him God. All 
worship the same spirit, but as all foods do not ag ree with all, all names do not 
appeal to all. Each chooses the name according to h is associations, and He being 
the In-Dweller, All-Powerful and Omniscient knows o ur innermost feelings and 
responds to us according to our deserts. 
Worship or prayer, therefore, is not to be performe d with the lips, but with 
the heart. And that is why it can be performed equa lly by the dumb and the sta- 
mmerer, by the ignorant and the stupid. And the pra yers of those whose tongues 
are nectared but whose hearts are full of poison ar e never heard. He, therefore, 
who would pray to God, must cleanse his heart. Rama  was not only on the lips of 
Hunuman, He was enthroned in his heart. He gave Han uman exhaustless strength. 
In His strength he lifted the mountain and crossed the ocean. It is faith that steers 
us through stormy seas, faith that moves mountains and faith that jumps across 
the ocean. That faith is nothing but  a living, wideawake consciousness of God 
within. He who has achieved that faith wants nothin g. Bodily diseased he is spiri-
tually healthy, physically pure, he rolls in spirit ual riches. 
'But how is the heart to be cleansed to this extent ?' one might well ask. The 
language of the lips is easily taught; but who can teach the language of the heart? 
Only the  bhakta —the true devotee—knows it and can teach it. The Gi ta has 
defined the  bhakta in three places and talked of him generally everyw here. But a 
.knowledge of the definition of a  bhakta is hardly a sufficient guide. They are rare Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48  on this earth. I have therefore suggested the Relig ion of Service as the means. God 
of Himself seeks for His scat the heart of him who serves his fellowmen. That is 
why Narasinha Mehta who 'saw and knew' sang 'He is a true Vaishnava  who knows 
to melt at other's woe.' Such was Abu Ben Adhem. He  served his fellowmen, and 
therefore his name topped the list of those who ser ved God. 
But who are the suffering and the woebegone? The su ppressed and the 
poverty-stricken. He who would be a bhakta, therefore, must serve these by body, 
soul and mind. How can he who regards the 'suppress ed' classes as untouchables 
serve them by the body? He who does not even condes cend to exert his body to 
the extent of spinning for the sake of the poor, an d trots out lame excuses, docs 
not know the meaning of service. An able-bodied wre tch deserves no alms, but an 
appeal to work for his bread. Alms debase him. He w ho spins before the poor 
inviting them to do likewise serves God as no one e lse does. 'He who gives Me even 
a trifle such as a fruit or a flower or even a leaf  in the spirit of  bhakti is My 
servant,' says the Lord in the Bhagawadgita. And He  hath his footstool where live 
the humble, the lowliest and the lost.' Spinning, t herefore, for such is the greatest 
prayer, the greatest worship, the greatest sacrific e. 
"Prayer, therefore, may be done by any name. A pray erful heart is the vehicle 
and service makes the heart prayerful. Those Hindus  who in this age serve the un-
touchables from a full heart truly pray; the Hindus  and those others who spin 
prayerfully for the poor and the indigent truly pra y. 
Young India , 24-9-'25 
 
There can be no fixed rule laid down as to the time  these devotional acts 
should take. It depends upon individual temperament . These are precious 
moments in one's daily life. The exercises are inte nded to sober and humble us 
and enable us to realize that nothing happens witho ut His will and that we are but 
'clay in the hands of the Potter'. These are moment s when one reviews one's Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49  immediate past, confesses one's weaknesses, asks fo r forgiveness and strength to 
be and do better. One minute may be enough for some , twenty-four hours may be 
too little for others. For those who are filled wit h the presence of God in them, to 
labour is to pray. Their life is one continuous pra yer or act of worship. For those 
others who act only to sin, to indulge themselves, and live for self, no time is too 
much. If they had patience and faith and the will t o be pure, they would pray till 
they feel the definite purifying presence of God wi thin them. For us ordinary 
mortals there must be a middle path between these t wo extremes. We are not so 
exalted as to be able to say that all our acts are a dedication, nor perhaps are we 
so far gone as to be living purely for self. Hence have all religions set apart times 
for general devotion. Unfortunately these have nowa days become merely 
mechanical and formal, where they are not hypocriti cal. What is necessary is the 
correct attitude to accompany these devotions. 
For definite personal prayer in the sense of asking  God for something, it should 
certainly be in one's own tongue. Nothing can be gr ander than to ask God to make 
us act justly towards everything that lives. 
Young India , 10-6-'26 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50   
15. FASTS 
A genuine fast cleanses body, mind and soul. It cru cifies the flesh and to that 
extent sets the soul free. A sincere prayer can wor k wonders. It is an intense 
longing of the soul for its even greater purity. Pu rity thus gained when it is utilized 
for a noble purpose becomes a prayer. The mundane u se of the Gayatri, its 
repetition for healing the sick, illustrates the me aning we have given to prayer. 
When the same Gayatri  japa is performed with a humble and concentrated mind i n 
an intelligent manner in times of national difficul ties and calamities, it becomes a 
most potent instrument for warding off danger. Ther e can be no greater mistake 
than to suppose that the recitation of the Gayatri,  the Namaz or the Christian 
prayer are superstitions fit to be practised by the  ignorant and the credulous. 
Fasting and prayer therefore are a most powerful pr ocess of purification and that 
which purifies necessarily enables us the better to  do our duty and to attain our 
goal. If therefore fasting and prayer seem at times  not to answer, it is not because 
there is nothing in them but because the right spir it is not behind them. 
A man who fasts and gambles away the whole of the d ay as do so many on 
Janmashtami day, naturally, not only obtains no res ult from the fast in the shape 
of greater purity but such a dissolute fast leaves him on the contrary degraded. A 
fast to be true must be accompanied by readiness to  receive pure thoughts and 
determination to resist all Satan's temptations. Si milarly a prayer to be true has to 
be intelligible and definite. One has to identify o neself with it. Counting beads 
with the name of Allah on one's lips whilst the min d wanders in all directions is 
worse than useless. 
Young India , 24-3-'20 
 
Of course, it is not to be denied that fasts can be  really coercive. Such are fasts 
to attain a selfish object. A fast undertaken to wr ing money from a person or for Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51  fulfilling some such personal end would amount to t he exercise of coercion or 
undue influence. I would unhesitatingly advocate re sistance of such undue 
influence. I have myself successfully resisted it i n the fasts that have been 
undertaken or threatened against me. And if it is a rgued that the dividing line 
between a selfish and an unselfish end is often ver y thin, I would urge that a 
person who regards the end of a fast to be selfish or otherwise base should 
resolutely refuse to yield to it, even though the r efusal may result in the death of 
the fasting person. If people will cultivate the ha bit of disregarding fasts which in 
their opinion are taken for unworthy ends, such fas ts will be robbed of the taint of 
coercion and undue influence. Like all human instit utions, fasting can be both 
legitimately and illegitimately used. But as a grea t weapon in the armoury of 
Satyagraha, it cannot be given up because of its po ssible abuse. Satyagraha has 
been designed as an effective substitute for violen ce. This use is in its infancy 
and, therefore, not yet perfected. But as the autho r of modern Satyagraha I 
cannot give up any of its manifold uses without for feiting my claim to handle it in 
the spirit of a humble seeker. 
Harijan, 9-9-'33 
 
Christian Objections  
[With reference to a letter from C. F. Andrews expr essing moral repulsion amongst 
Christians in England against 'fasting unto death',  Gandhiji wrote:] 
Hindu religious literature is replete with instance s of fasting, and thousands of 
Hindus fast even today on the slightest pretext. It  is the one thing that does the 
least harm. There is no doubt that, like everything  that is good, fasts are abused. 
That is inevitable. One cannot forbear to do good, because sometimes evil is done 
under its cover. 
My real difficulty is with my Christian Protestant friends, of whom I have so 
many and whose friendship I value beyond measure. L et me confess to them that, Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52  though from my very first contact with them I have known their dislike for fasts, I 
have never been able to understand it. 
Mortification of the flesh has been held all the wo rld over as a condition of 
spiritual progress. There is no prayer without fast ing, taking fasting in its widest 
sense. A complete fast is a complete and literal de nial of self. It is the truest 
prayer. "Take my life and let it be always, only, a ll for Thee" is not, should not be, 
a mere lip or figurative expression. It has to be a  reckless and joyous giving 
without the least reservation. Abstention from food  and even water is but the 
mere beginning, the least part of the surrender. 
Whilst I was putting together my thoughts for this article, a pamphlet written 
by Christians came into my hands wherein was a chap ter on the necessity of 
example rather than precept. In this occurs a quota tion from the 3rd Chapter of 
Jonah. The prophet had foretold that Nineveh, the g reat city, was to be destroyed 
on the fortieth day of his entering it: 
"So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclai med a fast, and put on 
sack-cloth, from the greatest of them even to the l east of them. For word came 
unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his thr one, and he laid his robe from 
him, and covered him with sack-cloth, and sat in as hes. And he caused it to be 
proclaimed and published through Nineveh by the dec ree of the king and the 
nobles saying, 'Let neither man nor beast, herd nor  flock, taste anything; let them 
not feed, nor drink water. But let man and beast be  covered with sack-cloth, and 
cry mightily unto God: yea, let them turn everyone from his evil way, and from 
the violence that is in their hands. Who can tell i f God will turn and repent, and 
turn away from his fierce anger that we perish not? ' And God saw their works that 
they turned from their evil way; and God repented o f the evil that he had said 
that he would do unto them; and he did it not." 
Thus this was a 'fast unto death'. But every fast u nto death is not suicide. This 
fast of the king and the people of Nineveh was a gr eat and humble prayer to God 
for deliverance. It was to be either deliverance or  death. Even so was my fast, if I Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53  may compare it to the Biblical fast. This chapter f rom the book of Jonah reads like 
an incident in the Ramayana. 
Harijan, 15-4-'33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54   
16. THE ETERNAL DUEL 
Man's destined purpose is to conquer old habits, to  overcome the evil in him 
and to restore good to its rightful place. If relig ion does not teach us how to 
achieve this conquest, it teaches us nothing. But t here is no royal road to success 
in this the truest enterprise in life. Cowardice is  perhaps the greatest vice from 
which we suffer and is also possibly the greatest v iolence, certainly far greater 
than bloodshed and the like that generally go under  the name of violence. For it 
comes from want of faith in God and ignorance of Hi s attributes . . . But I can give 
my own testimony and say that a heartfelt prayer is  undoubtedly the most potent 
instrument that man possesses for overcoming coward ice and all other bad old 
habits. Prayer is impossibility without a living fa ith in the presence of God within. 
Christianity and Islam describe the same process as  a duel between God and 
Satan, not outside but within; Zoroastrianism as a duel between Ahurmazd and 
Ahriman; Hinduism as a duel between forces of good and forces of evil. We have 
to make our choice whether we should ally ourselves  with the forces of evil or 
with the forces of good. And to pray to God is noth ing but that sacred alliance bet-
ween God and man whereby he attains his deliverance  from the clutches of the 
prince of darkness. But a heartfelt prayer is not a  recitation with the lips. It is a 
yearning from within which expresses itself in ever y word, every act, nay, every 
thought of man. When an evil thought successfully a ssails him, he may know that 
he has offered but a lip prayer and similarly with regard to an evil word escaping 
his lips or an evil act done by him. Real prayer is  an absolute shield and protection 
against this trinity of evils. Success does not alw ays attend the very first effort at 
such real living prayer. We have to strive against ourselves, we have to believe in 
spite of ourselves, because months are as our years . We have therefore to 
cultivate illimitable patience if we will realize t he efficacy of prayer. There will 
be darkness, disappointment and even worse; but we must have courage enough Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55  to battle against all these and not succumb to cowa rdice. There is no such thing as 
retreat for a man of prayer. 
What I am relating is not a fairy tale. I have not drawn an imaginary picture. I 
have summed up the testimony of men who have by pra yer conquered every diffi-
culty in their upward progress, and I have added my  own humble testimony that 
the more I live the more I realize how much I owe t o faith and prayer which is one 
and the same thing for me. And I am quoting an expe rience not limited to a few 
hours, or days or weeks, but extending over an unbr oken period of nearly 40 years. 
I have had my share of disappointments, uttermost d arkness, counsels of despair, 
counsels of caution, subtlest assaults of pride, bu t I am able to say that my faith,—
and I know that it is still little enough, by no me ans as great as I want it to be,—
has ultimately conquered every one of these difficu lties up to now. If we have 
faith in us, if we have a prayerful heart, we may n ot tempt God, may not make 
terms with Him. . . . Not until we have reduced our selves to nothingness can we 
conquer the evil in us. God demands nothing less th an complete self-surrender as 
the price for the only real freedom that is worth h aving. And when a man thus 
loses himself, he immediately finds himself m the s ervice of all that lives. It 
becomes his delight and his recreation. He is a new  man never weary of spending 
himself in the service of God's creation.  
Young India , 20-12-'28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56   
17. SELF-PURIFICATION 
Love and Ahimsa are matchless in their effect. But,  in their play there is no 
fuss, show, noise or placards. They presuppose self -confidence which in its turn 
presupposes self-purification. Men of stainless cha racter and self-purification will 
easily inspire confidence and automatically purify the atmosphere around them. 
Young India , 6-9-'28 
 
Identification with everything that lives is imposs ible without self-purification; 
without self-purification the observance of the law  of Ahimsa must remain an 
empty dream; God can never be realized by one who i s not pure of heart. Self-
purification, therefore, must mean purification in all the walks of life. And 
purification being highly infectious, purification of oneself necessarily leads to the 
purification of one's surroundings. 
Autobiography , 1948; p. 615 
 
But the path of purification is hard and steep. To attain to perfect purity one 
has to become absolutely passion-free in thought, s peech, and action; to rise 
above the opposing currents of love and hatred, att achment and repulsion. I know 
that I have not in me as yet that triple purity, in  spite of constant, ceaseless 
striving for it. That is why the world's praise fai ls to move me, indeed it very often 
stings me. To conquer the subtle passions seems to me to be harder far than the 
physical conquest of the world by the force of arms . 
Autobiography , (1948); p. 616 
 
Never own defeat in a sacred cause and make up your  minds henceforth that you 
will be pure and that you will find a response from  God. But God never answers Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57  the prayers of the arrogant, nor the prayers of tho se who bargain with Him. ... If 
you would ask Him to help you, you would go to Him in all your nakedness, 
approach Him without reservation, also without fear  or doubts as to how He can 
help a fallen being like you. He who helped million s who have approached Him, is 
He going to desert you? He makes no exceptions what soever and you will find that 
every one of your prayers will be answered. The pra yer of even the most impure 
will be answered. I am telling you this out of my p ersonal experience, I have gone 
through the purgatory. Seek first the Kingdom of He aven and everything will be 
added unto you. 
Young India , 4-4-'29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58   
18. VALUE OF SILENCE 
It has often occurred to me that a seeker after tru th has to be silent. I know the 
wonderful efficacy of silence. I visited a Trappist  monastery in South Africa. A 
beautiful place it was. Most of the inmates of that  place were under a vow of 
silence. I inquired of the Father the motive of it and he said the motive is 
apparent: 'We are frail human beings. We do not kno w very often what we say. If 
we want to listen to the still small Voice that is always speaking within us, it will 
not be heard if we continually speak.' I understood  that precious lesson. I know 
the secret of silence. 
Young India , 6-8-'25 
 
Experience has taught me that silence is a part of the spiritual discipline of a 
votary of truth. Proneness to exaggerate, to suppre ss or modify the truth, 
wittingly or unwittingly, is a natural weakness of man, and silence is necessary in 
order to surmount it. A man of few words will rarel y be thoughtless in his speech; 
he will measure every word. We find so many people impatient to talk. There is no 
chairman of a meeting who is not pestered with note s for permission to speak. And 
whenever the permission is given the speaker genera lly exceeds the time limit, 
asks for more time, and keeps on talking without pe rmission. All this talking can 
hardly be said to be of any benefit to the world. I t is so much waste of time. 
Autobiography  (1948), p. 84 
 
When one comes to think of it one cannot help feeli ng that nearly half the 
misery of the world would disappear if we, fretting  mortals, knew the virtue of 
silence. Before modern civilization came upon us, a t least six to eight hours of 
silence out of twenty-four were vouchsafed to us. M odern civilization has taught 
us to convert night into day and golden silence int o brazen din and noise. What a Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59  great thing it would be if we in our busy lives cou ld retire into ourselves each day 
for at least a couple of hours and prepare our mind s to listen in to the Voice of the 
Great Silence. The Divine Radio is always singing i f we could only make ourselves 
ready to listen to it, but it is impossible to list en without silence. St. Theresa has 
used a charming image to sum up the sweet result of  silence: 
"You will at once feel your senses gather themselve s together; they seem like 
bees which return to the hive and there shut themse lves up to work without effort 
or care on your part. God thus rewards the violence  which your soul has been 
doing to itself; and gives to it such a domination over the senses that a sign is 
enough when it desires to recollect itself, for the m to obey and so gather 
themselves together. At the first call of the will they come back more and more 
quickly. At last after many and many exercises of t his kind God disposes them to a 
state of absolute repose and of perfect contemplati on." 
Harijan,  24-9-'38 
 
It (silence) has now become both a physical and spi ritual necessity for me. 
Originally it was taken to relieve the sense of pre ssure. Then I wanted time for 
writing. After, however, I had practised it for som e time, I saw the spiritual value 
of it. It suddenly flashed across my mind that that  was the time when I could best 
hold communion with God. And now I feel as though I  was naturally built for 
silence. 
Harijan, 10-12-'38 
 
Silence is a great help to a seeker after truth lik e myself. In the attitude of 
silence the soul finds the path in a clearer light,  and what is elusive and deceptive 
resolves itself into crystal clearness. Our life is  a long and arduous quest after 
Truth, and the soul requires inward restfulness to attain its full height. 
Harijan,  10-12-'38 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60   
19. EQUALITY OF RELIGIONS 
Religions are different roads converging to the sam e point. What does it 
matter that we take different roads, so long as we reach the same goal? In reality, 
there are as many religions as there are individual s. 
Hind Swaraj  (1946), p. 36 
 
I believe that all the great religions of the world  are true more or less. I say 
'more or less' because I believe that everything th at the human hand touches, by 
reason of the very fact that human beings are imper fect, becomes imperfect. 
Perfection is the exclusive attribute of God and it  is indescribable, untranslatable. 
I do believe that it is possible for every human be ing to become perfect even as 
God is perfect. It is necessary for us all to aspir e after perfection, but when that 
blessed state is attained, it becomes indescribable ; indefinable. And, I, therefore, 
admit, in all humility, that even the Vedas, the Ko ran and the Bible are imperfect 
word of God and, imperfect beings that we are, sway ed to and fro by a multitude 
of passions, it is impossible for us even to unders tand this word of God in its 
fullness. 
Young India , 22-9-'27 
 
Belief in one God is the corner-stone of all religi ons. But I do not foresee a time 
when there would be only one religion on earth in p ractice. In theory, since there 
is one God, there can be only one religion. But in practice, no two persons I have 
known have had the same identical conception of God . Therefore, there will, 
perhaps, always be different religions answering to  different temperaments and 
climatic conditions. 
Harijan,  2-2-'34 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61   
The need of the moment is not one religion, but mut ual respect and tolerance 
of the devotees of the different religions. We want  to reach not the dead level, 
but unity in diversity. Any attempt to root out tra ditions, effects of heredity, 
climate and other surroundings is not only bound to  fail but is a sacrilege. The soul 
of religions is one, but it is encased in a multitu de of forms. The latter will persist 
to the end of time. Wise men will ignore the outwar d crust and see the «same soul 
living under a variety of crusts. 
Young India,  25-9-'25 
 
There is in Hinduism room enough for Jesus, as ther e is for Mohammed, 
Zoroaster and Moses. For me the different religions  are beautiful flowers from the 
same garden, or they are branches of the same majes tic tree. Therefore they are 
equally true, though being received and interpreted  through human instruments 
equally imperfect. It is impossible for me to recon cile myself to the idea of 
conversion after the style that goes on in India an d elsewhere today. It is an error 
which is perhaps the greatest impediment to the wor ld's progress towards peace. 
"Warring creeds" is a blasphemous expression. And i t fitly describes the state of 
things in India, the mother, as I believe her to be , of Religion or religions. If she is 
truly the mother, the motherhood is on trial. Why s hould a Christian want to 
convert a Hindu to Christianity and vice versa? Why  should he not be satisfied if 
the Hindu is a good or godly man? If the morals of a man are a matter of no 
concern, the form of worship in a particular manner  in a church, a mosque or a 
temple is an empty formula; it may even be a hindra nce to individual or social 
growth, and insistence on a particular form or repe tition of a credo may be a 
potent cause of violent quarrels leading to bloodsh ed and ending in utter disbelief 
in Religion, i.e. God Himself. 
Harijan, 30-1-'37 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62   
But it is no business of mine to criticize the scri ptures of other faiths, or to point 
out their defects. It is and should be, however, my  privilege to proclaim and 
practise the truths that there may be in them. I ma y not, therefore, criticize or 
condemn things in the Koran or the life of the Prop het that I cannot understand. 
But I welcome every opportunity to express my admir ation for such aspects of his 
life as I have been able to appreciate and understa nd. As for things that present 
difficulties, I am content to see them through the eyes of devout Mussalman 
friends, while I try to understand them with the he lp of the writings of eminent 
Muslim expounders of Islam. It is only through such  a reverential approach to 
faiths other than mine that I can realize the princ iple of equality of all religions. 
But it is both my right and duty to point out the d efects in Hinduism in order to 
purify it and to keep it pure. But when non-Hindu c ritics set about criticizing 
Hinduism and cataloguing its faults they only blazo n their own ignorance of 
Hinduism and their incapacity to regard it from the  Hindu view-point. It destorts 
their vision and vitiates their judgment. Thus my o wn experience of the non-Hindu 
critics of Hinduism brings home to me my limitation s and teaches me to be wary of 
launching on a criticism of Islam or Christianity a nd their founders. 
Harijan,  13-3-'37 
 
The Allah of Islam is the same as the God of Christ ians and the Ishwara of 
Hindus. Even as there are numerous names of God in Hinduism, there are as many 
names of God in Islam. The names do not indicate in dividuality but attributes, and 
little man has tried in his humble way to describe mighty God by giving Him 
attributes, though He is above all attributes, Inde scribable, Inconceivable, 
Immeasurable. Living faith in this God means accept ance of the brotherhood of 
the mankind. It also means equal respect for all re ligions. 
Harijan,  14-5-'38 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63   
20. TOLERANCE 
I do not like the word tolerance, but could not thi nk of a better one. 
Tolerance implies a gratuitous assumption of the in feriority of other faiths to one's 
own, whereas Ahimsa teaches us to entertain the sam e respect for the religious 
faiths of others as we accord to our own, thus admi tting the imperfection of the 
latter. This admission will readily be made by a se eker of Truth who follows the 
law of love. If we had attained the full vision of Truth, we would no longer be 
seekers, but become one with God, for Truth is God.  But being only seekers, we 
prosecute our quest and are conscious of our imperf ection. And if we are 
imperfect ourselves, religion as conceived by us mu st also be imperfect. We have 
not realized religion in its perfection, even as we  have not realized God. Religion 
of our conception, thus imperfect, is always subjec t to a process of evolution and 
re-interpretation. Progress towards Truth, towards God, is possible only because 
of such evolution. And if all faiths outlined by me n are imperfect, the question of 
comparative merit does not arise. All faiths consti tute a revelation of Truth, but 
all are imperfect and liable to error. Reverence to  other faiths need not blind us 
to their faults. We must be keenly alive to the def ects of our own faith, and must 
not leave it on that account but try to overcome th ose defects. Looking at all 
religions with an equal eye, we would not only not hesitate but would think it our 
duty to adopt into our faith every acceptable featu re of other faiths. 
The question then arises — Why should there be so m any faiths? We know that 
there are a large variety of them. The soul is one,  but the bodies which she 
animates are many. We cannot reduce the number of b odies; yet we recognize the 
unity of the soul. Even as a tree has a single trun k, but many branches and leaves, 
there is one Religion, but any number of faiths. Al l faiths are a gift of God, but 
partake of human imperfection, as they pass through  the medium of humanity. 
God-given religion is beyond all speech. Imperfect men put it into such language Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64  as they can command, and their words are interprete d by other men equally 
imperfect. Whose interpretation must be held to be the right one ? Everyone is 
right from his own standpoint, but it is not imposs ible that everyone is wrong. 
Hence the necessity for tolerance, which does not m ean indifference towards 
one's own faith, but a more intelligent and purer l ove for it. Tolerance gives us 
spiritual insight, which is as far from fanaticism as the North Pole is from the 
south. True knowledge of religion breaks down the b arriers between faith and 
faith and gives rise to tolerance. Cultivation of t olerance for other faiths will 
impart to us a truer understanding of our own. 
Tolerance obviously does not disturb the distinctio n between right and wrong, 
or good and evil. The reference here throughout has  been to the principal faiths of 
the world, which are all based on identical fundame ntal principles, and which can 
all point to saintly men and women who held them in  the past and hold them now. 
In the case of good and evil, we have to cultivate charity for the wicked no less 
than for the good, the sinner no less than the sain t, all the while we cherish 
inveterate hatred towards wickedness and sin. 
Young India , (Bulletin), 2-10-'30 
 
 The golden rule of conduct, therefore, is mutual t oleration, seeing that we 
will never all think alike and we shall see Truth i n fragment and from different 
angles of vision. Conscience is not the same thing for all. Whilst, therefore, it is a 
good guide for individual conduct, imposition of th at conduct upon all will be an 
insufferable interference with everybody's freedom of conscience. 
Young India , 23-9-'26 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65   
21. Conversion 
[From an address to foreign missionaries:] 
You, the missionaries, come to India thinking that you come to a land of 
heathens, of idolaters, of men who do not know God.  One of the greatest of 
Chrsitian Divines, Bishop Hebber, wrote the two lin es which have always left the 
sting with me: 'Where every prospect pleases, and M an alone is vile'. I wish he had 
not written them. My own experience in my travels t hroughout India has been to 
the contrary. I have gone from one end of the count ry to the other, without any 
prejudice in a relentless search after truth, and I  am not able to say that here in 
this fair land, watered by the great Ganga, the Bra hmaputra and the Yamuna, man 
is vile. He is not vile. He is as much a seeker aft er truth as you and I are, possibly 
more so. This reminds me of a French book translate d for me by a French friend. It 
is an account of an imaginary expedition in search of knowledge. One party landed 
in India and found Truth and God personified, in a little Pariah's hut. I tell you 
there are many such huts belonging to the untouchab les where you will certainly 
find God. They do not reason but they persist in th e belief that God is. They 
depend upon God for His assistance and find it too.  There are many stories told 
throughout the length and breadth of India about th ese noble untouchables. Vile 
as some of them may be there are noblest specimens of humanity in their midst. 
But does my experience exhaust itself merely with t he untouchables? No. I am 
here to tell you that there are non-Brahmanas, ther e are Brahmanas who are as 
fine specimens of humanity as you will find in any place on the earth. There are 
Brahmanas today in India who are embodiments of sel f-sacrifice, godliness and 
humility. There are Brahmanas who are devoting them selves body and soul to the 
service of untouchables, with no expectation of rew ard from the untouchables, 
but with execration from orthodoxy. They do not min d it because in serving 
Pariahs they are serving God. I can quote chapter a nd verse from my experience. I 
place these facts before you in all humility for th e simple reason that you may Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66  know this land better, the land to which you have c ome to serve. You are here to 
find out the distress of the people of India and re move it. But I hope you are here 
also in a receptive mood and if there is anything t hat India has to give, you will 
not stop your ears, you will not close your eyes an d steel your hearts but open up 
your ears, eyes and most of all your hearts to rece ive all that may be good in this 
land. I give you my assurance that there is a great  deal of good in India. Do not 
flatter yourselves with the belief that a mere reci tal of that celebrated verse in 
St. John makes a man a Christian. If I have read th e Bible correctly, I know many 
men who have never heard the name of Jesus Christ o r have even rejected the 
official interpretation of Christianity, who will, probably, if Jesus came in our 
midst today in the flesh, be owned by him more than  many of us. I therefore ask 
you to approach the problem before you with open-he artedness and humility. 
I cannot help recalling to you the conversation I r elated in Darjeeling at the 
Missionary Language School. Lord Salisbury was wait ed upon by a deputation of 
missionaries in connection with China and this depu tation wanted protection. I 
cannot recall the exact words but give you the purp ort of the answer Lord 
Salisbury gave. He said, 'Gentlemen, if you want to  go to China to preach the 
message of Christianity, then do not ask for assist ance of temporal power. Go with 
your lives in your hands and if the people of China  want to kill you, imagine that 
you have been killed in the service of God.' Lord S alisbury was right. Christian 
missionaries come to India under the shadows or, if  you like, under the protection 
of a temporal power, and it creates an impassable b ar. 
If you give me statistics that so many orphans have  been reclaimed and 
brought to the Christian faith, I would accept them  but I do not feel convinced 
thereby that it is your mission. In my opinion your  mission is infinitely superior to 
that. You want to find men in India and if you want  to do that, you have to go to 
the lowly cottages not to give them something, migh t be to take something from 
them. A true friend as I claim to be of the mission aries of India and of the 
Europeans, I speak to you what I feel from the bott om of my heart. I miss Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67  receptiveness, humility, willingness on your part t o identify yourselves with the 
masses of India. I have talked straight from my hea rt. May it find a response from 
your hearts. 
Young India , 6-8-25 
 
I hold that proselytizing under the clock of humani tarian work is, to say the 
least, unhealthy. It is most certainly resented by the people here. Religion after 
all is a deeply personal matter, it touches the hea rt. Why should I change my 
religion because a doctor who professes Christianit y as his religion has cured me of 
some disease or why should the doctor expect or sug gest such a change whilst I am 
under his influence? Is not medical relief its own reward and satisfaction? Or why 
should I whilst I am in a missionary educational in stitution have Christian teaching 
thrust upon me? In my opinion these are not uplifti ng and give rise to suspicion if 
not even secret hostility. The methods of conversio n must be like Caesar's wife 
above suspicion. Faith is not imparted like secular  subjects. It is given through the 
language of the heart. If a man has a living faith in him, it spreads its aroma like 
the rose its scent. Because of its invisibility, th e extent of its influence is far wider 
than that of the visible beauty of the colour of th e petals. 
I am, then, not against conversion. But I am agains t the modern methods of it. 
Conversion nowadays has become a matter of business , like any other. I remember 
having read a missionary report saying how much it cost per head to convert and 
then presenting a budget for 'the next harvest'. 
Yes, I do maintain that India's great faiths are al l sufficing for her. Apart from 
Christianity and Judaism, Hinduism and its offshoot s, Islam and Zoroastrianism are 
living faiths. No one faith is perfect. All faiths are equally dear to their respective 
votaries. What is wanted therefore is living friend ly contact among the followers 
of the great religions of the world and not a clash  among them in the fruitless 
attempt on the part of each community to show the s uperiority of its faith over Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68  the rest. Through such friendly contact it will be possible for us all to rid our res-
pective faiths of shortcomings and excrescences. 
It follows from what I have said above that India i s in no need of conversion of 
the kind I have in mind. Conversion in the sense of  self-purification, self-
realization is the crying need of the times. That, however, is not what is ever 
meant by proselytizing. To those who would convert India, might it not be said, 
'Physician, heal thyself'?  
Young India , 23-4-'31 
 
When I was a youth I remember a Hindu having become  a convert to 
Christianity. The whole town understood that the in itiation took the shape of this 
well-bread Hindu partaking of beef and brandy in th e name of Jesus Christ and 
discarding his national costume. I learnt in later years, that such a convert, as so 
many of my missionary friends put it, came to a lif e of freedom out of a life of 
bondage, to a life of plenty out of one of penury. As I wander about throughout 
the length and breadth of India I see many Christia n Indians almost ashamed of 
their birth, certainly of their ancestral religion,  and of their ancestral dress. The 
aping of Europeans on the part of Anglo-Indians is bad enough, but the aping of 
them by Indian converts is a violence done to their  country and, shall I say, even 
to their new religion. There is a verse in the New Testament to bid Christians 
avoid meat if it would offend their neighbours. Mea t here, I presume, includes 
drink and dress. I can appreciate uncompromising av oidance of all that is evil in 
the old, but where there is not only no question of  anything evil but where an 
ancient practice may be even desirable, it would be  a crime to part with it when 
one knows for certain that the giving up would deep ly hurt relatives and friends. 
Conversion must not mean denationalization. Convers ion should mean a definite 
giving up of the evil of the old, adoption of all t he good of the new and a 
scrupulous avoidance of everything evil in the new.  Conversion, therefore, should Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69  mean a life of greater dedication to one's own coun try, greater surrender to God, 
greater self-purification. . . .Is it not truly dep lorable that many Christian Indians 
discard their own mother-tongue, bring up their chi ldren only to speak in English? 
Do they not thereby completely cut themselves adrif t from the nation in whose 
midst they have to live? 
Young India , 20-8-'25 
 
To live the gospel is the most effective way... mos t effective in the beginning, 
in the middle and in the end. 
Preaching jars on me and makes no appeal to me, and  I get suspicious of 
missionaries who preach. But I love those who never  preach but live the life 
according to their lights. Their lives are silent, yet most effective, testimonies. 
Therefore I cannot say what to preach, but I can sa y that a life of service and 
uttermost simplicity is the best preaching. A rose does not need to preach. It 
simply spreads its fragrance. The fragrance is its own sermon. If it had human 
understanding and if it could engage a number of pr eachers, the preachers would 
not be able to sell more roses than the fragrance i tself could do. The fragrance of 
religious and spiritual life is much finer and subt ler than that of the rose.  
Harijan, 29-3-'35 
 
I could no more think of asking a Christian or Muss alman or a Parsi or a Jew to 
change his faith than I would think of changing my own. This makes me no more 
oblivious of the limitations of the professors of t hose faiths, than it makes me of 
the grave limitations of the professors of mine. An d seeing that it takes all my 
resources in trying to bring my practice to the lev el of my faith and in preaching 
the same to my co-religionists, I do not dream of p reaching to the followers of 
other faiths. 'Judge not lest ye be judged' is a so und maxim for one's conduct. It is Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70  a conviction daily growing upon me that the great a nd rich Christian missions will 
render true service to India, if they can persuade themselves to confine their 
activities to humanitarian service without the ulte rior motive of converting India 
or at least her unsophisticated villagers to Christ ianity, or destroying their social 
superstructure, which notwithstanding its many defe cts has stood now from time 
immemorial the onslaughts upon it from within and f rom without. Whether they—
the missionaries—and we wish it or not, what is tru e in the Hindu faith will abide, 
what is untrue will fall to pieces. Every living fa ith must have within itself the 
power of rejuvenation if it is to live. 
Harijan, 28-9-'35 
 
Shuddhi and Tabligh 
In my opinion there is no such thing as proselytism  in Hinduism as it is 
understood in Christianity or to a lesser extent in  Islam. The Arya Samaj has, I 
think, copied the Christians in planning its propag anda. The modern method does 
not appeal to me. It has done more harm than good. Though regarded as a matter 
of the heart purely and one between the Maker and o neself, it has degenerated 
into an appeal to the selfish instinct. . . My Hind u instinct tells me that all 
religions are more or less true. All proceed from t he same God but all are 
imperfect because they have come down to us through  imperfect human 
instrumentality. The real Shuddhi movement should c onsist in each one trying to 
arrive at perfection in his or her own faith. In su ch a plan character would be the 
only test. What is the use of crossing from one com partment to another, if it does 
not mean a moral rise? What is the meaning of my tr ying to convert to the service 
of God (for that must be the implication of Shuddhi  or Tabligh.) when those who 
are in my fold are everyday denying God by their ac tions? "Physician, heal thyself" 
is more true in matters religious than mundane. 
Young India , 29-5-'24 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71   
22. WHY I AM A HINDU 
Believing as I do in the influence of heredity, bei ng born in a Hindu family, I 
have remained a Hindu. I should reject it, if I fou nd it inconsistent with my moral 
sense or my spiritual growth. On examination I have  found it to be the most 
tolerant of all religions known to me. Its freedom from dogma makes a forcible 
appeal to me inasmuch as it gives the votary the la rgest scope for self- expression. 
Not being an exclusive religion, it enables the fol lowers of that faith not merely to 
respect all the other religions, but it also enable s them to admire and assimilate 
whatever may be good in the other faiths. Non-viole nce is common to all religions, 
but it has found the highest expression and applica tion in Hinduism. (I do not 
regard Jainism or Buddhism as separate from Hinduis m.) Hinduism believes in the 
oneness not of merely all human life but in the one ness of all that lives. Its 
worship of the cow is, in my opinion, its unique co ntribution to the evolution of 
humanitarianism. It is a practical application of t he belief in the oneness and, 
therefore, sacredness, of all life. The great belie f in transmigration is a direct 
consequence of that belief. Finally the discovery o f the law of Varnashrama is a 
magnificent result of the ceaseless search for trut h. 
Young India , 20-10-'27 
 
I call myself a Sanatani Hindu, because, 
1. I believe in the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Puranas  and all that goes by the 
name of Hindu scriptures, and therefore in Avataras  and rebirth; 
2. I believe in the Varanshrama Dharma in a sense, in my opinion, strictly 
Vedic but not in its present popular and crude sens e; 
3. I believe in the protection of the cow in its much larger sense than the 
popular; Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72  4. I do not disbelieve in idol-worship. 
The reader will note that I have purposely refraine d from using the word divine 
origin in reference to the Vedas or any other scrip tures. For I do not believe in the 
exclusive divinity of the Vedas. I believe the Bibl e, the Koran, and the Zend Avesta 
to be as much divinely inspired as the Vedas. My be lief in the Hindu scriptures 
does not require me to accept every word and every verse as divinely inspired. Nor 
do I claim to have any first-hand knowledge of thes e wonderful books. But I do 
claim to know and feel the truths of the essential!  teaching of the scriptures. I de-
cline to be bound by any interpretation, however le arned it may be, if it is 
repugnant to reason or moral sense. I do not emphat ically repudiate the claim (if 
they advance any such) of the present Shankarachary as and Shastris to give a 
correct interpretation of the Hindu scriptures. On the contrary I believe that our 
present knowledge of these books is in a most chaot ic state. I believe implicitly in 
the Hindu aphorism, that no one truly knows the Sha stras who has not attained 
perfection in Innocence (Ahimsa), Truth (Satya) and  Self-control (Brahmacharya) 
and who has not renounced all acquisition or posses sion of wealth. I believe in the 
institution of Gurus, but in this age millions must  go without a Guru, because it is 
a rare thing to find a combination of perfect purit y and perfect learning. But one 
need not despair of ever knowing the truth of one's  religion, because the 
fundamentals of Hinduism, as of every great religio n, are unchangeable and easily 
understood. Every Hindu believes in God and His one ness, in rebirth and 
salvation.... I am a reformer through and through. But my zeal never takes me to 
the rejection of any of the essential things of Hin duism. I have said I do not 
disbelieve in idol- worship. An idol does not excit e any feeling of veneration in 
me. But I think that idol-worship is part of human nature. We hanker after 
symbolism. Why should one be more composed in a chu rch than elsewhere? Images 
are an aid to worship. No Hindu considers an image to be God. I do not consider 
idol-worship a sin. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73  It is clear from the foregoing that Hinduism is not  an exclusive religion. In it 
there is room for the worship of all the prophets o f the world. It is not a 
missionary religion in the ordinary sense of the te rm. It has no doubt absorbed 
many tribes in its fold, but this absorption has be en of an evolutionary, 
imperceptible character. Hinduism tells everyone to  worship God according to his 
own faith or Dharma, and so it lives at peace with all the religions.  
Young India , 6-10-'21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74   
23. BUDDHISM, CHRISTIANITY AND ISLAM 
I have heard it contended times without number and I have read in books also 
claiming to express the spirit of Buddhism that Bud dha did not believe in God. In 
my humble opinion such a belief contradicts the ver y central fact of Buddha's 
teaching. . . .The confusion has arisen over his re jection and just rejection of all 
the base things that passed in his generation under  the name of God. He 
undoubtedly rejected the notion that a being called  God was actuated by malice, 
could repent of his actions, and like the kings of the earth could possibly be open 
to temptations and bribes and could possibly have f avourites. His whole soul rose 
in mighty indignation against the belief that a bei ng called God required for his 
satisfaction the living blood of animals in order t hat he might be pleased—animals 
who were his own creation. He, therefore, reinstate d God in the right place and 
dethroned the usurper who for the time being seemed  to occupy that White 
Throne. He emphasized and re-declared the eternal a nd unalterable existence of 
the moral government of this universe. He unhesitat ingly said that the law was 
God Himself. 
Young India , 24-11-'27 
 
God's laws are eternal and unalterable and not sepa rable from God Himself. It 
is an indispensable condition of His very perfectio n. And hence the great confusion 
that Buddha disbelieved in God and simply believed in the moral law, and because 
of this confusion about God Himself, arose the conf usion about the proper 
understanding of the great word Nirvana. Nirvana is  undoubtedly not utter extinc-
tion. So far as I have been able to understand the central fact of Buddha's life, 
Nirvana is utter extinction of all that is base in us, all that is vicious in us, all that 
is corrupt and corruptible in us. Nirvana is not li ke the black, dead peace of the Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75  grave, but the living peace, the living happiness o f a soul which is conscious of 
itself, and conscious of having found its own abode  in the heart of the Eternal. 
Young India , 24-11-'27 
 
Great as Buddha's contribution to humanity was in r estoring God to His eternal 
place, in my humble opinion, greater still was his contribution to humanity in his 
exacting regard of all life, be it ever so low. 
Young India , 20-1-'27 
 
I may say that I have never been interested in a hi storical Jesus. I should not 
care if it was proved by someone that the man calle d Jesus never lived, and that 
(what) was narrated in the Gospels was a fragment o f the writer's imagination. For 
the Sermom on the Mount would still be true for me.  
Young India , 31-12-'31 
 
I cannot ascribe exclusive divinity to Jesus. He is  as divine as Krishna or Rama 
or Muhammad or Zoroaster. Similarly I do not regard  every word of the Bible as 
the inspired word of God even as I do not regard ev ery word of the Vedas or the 
Koran as inspired. The sum total of each of these b ooks is certainly inspired, but I 
miss that inspiration in many of the things taken i ndividually. The Bible is as much 
a book of religion with me as the Gita and the Kora n. 
Harijan,  6-3-'37 
 
What... does Jesus mean to me? To me, He was one of  the greatest teachers 
humanity has ever had. To His believers, He was God 's only begotten Son. Could 
the fact that I do or do not accept this belief mak e Jesus have any more or less Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76  influence in my life? Is all the grandeur of His te aching and of His doctrine to be 
forbidden to me? I cannot believe so. 
The Modern Review, October , '41 
 
I believe that it is impossible to estimate the mer its of the various religions of 
the world, and, moreover, I believe that it is unne cessary and harmful even to 
attempt it. But each one of them, in my judgement, embodies a common 
motivating force : the desire to uplift man's life and give it purpose. And because 
the life of Jesus has the significance and the tran scendency to which I have 
alluded, I believe that He belongs not solely to Ch ristianity, but to the entire 
world, to all races and people—it matters little un der what flag, name or doctrine 
they may work, profess a faith or worship a god inh erited from their ancestors. 
The Modern Review, October , '41 
 
I have not been able to see any difference between the Sermon on the Mount 
and the Bhagavad Gita. What the Sermon describes in  a graphic manner, the 
Bhagavad Gita reduces to a scientific formula. It m ay not be a scientific book in 
the accepted sense of the term, but it has argued o ut the law of love—the law of 
abandon as I would call it —in a scientific manner.  The Sermon on the Mount gives 
the same law in wonderful language. The New Testame nt gave me comfort and 
boundless joy, as it came after the repulsion that parts of the Old had given me. 
Today supposing I was deprived of the Gita and forg ot all its contents but had a 
copy of the Sermon, I should derive the same joy fr om it as I do from the Gita. 
Young India , 22-12-'27 
 
I do regard Islam to be a religion of peace in the same sense as Christianity, 
Buddhism and Hinduism are. No doubt there are diffe rences in degrees, but the 
object of these religions is peace. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77  Young India , 20-1-'27 
 
 Islam's distinctive contribution to India's nation al culture is its unadulterated 
belief in the oneness of God and a practical applic ation of the truth of the 
brotherhood of man for those who are nominally with in its fold. I call these two 
distinctive contributions. For in Hinduism the spir it of brotherhood has become too 
much philosophized. Similarly though philosophical Hinduism has no other god but 
God, it cannot be denied that practical Hinduism is  not so emphatically 
uncompromising as Islam. 
Young India,  21-3-'29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78   
24. GOD AND GODS 
"If Hinduism become monotheistic” suggested the Fat her, "Christianity and 
Hinduism can serve India in co-operation." 
"I would love to see the co-operation happen," said  Gandhiji, "but it cannot if 
the present day Christian Missions persist in holdi ng up Hinduism to ridicule and 
saying that no one can go to heaven unless he renou nces and denounces Hinduism. 
But I can conceive a good Christian, silently worki ng away, and shedding the sweet 
aroma of his life on Hindu communities, like the ro se which does not need any 
speech to spread its fragrance but spreads it becau se it must. Even so a truly 
spiritual life. Then surely there would be peace on  earth and goodwill among men. 
But not so long as there is militant or 'muscular' Christianity. This is not to be 
found in the Bible. But you find it in Germany and other countries." 
"But if Indians begin to believe in one God and giv e up idolatry, don't you think 
the whole difficulty will be solved?" 
"Will the Christians be satisfied with it? Are they  all united?" 
"Of course all the Christian sects are not united,"  said the Catholic Father. 
"Then you are asking only a theoretical question. A nd may I ask you, is there 
any amalgamation between Islam and Christianity, th ough both are said to believe 
in one God? If these two have not amalgamated, ther e is less hope of 
amalgamation of Christians and Hindus along the lin es you suggest. I have my own 
solution; but in the first instance, I dispute the description that Hindus believe in 
many gods and are idolaters. They do say there are many gods, but they also 
declare unmistakably that there is ONE GOD, the GOD  of Gods. It is, therefore, not 
proper to suggest that Hindus believe in many Gods.  They certainly believe in 
many worlds. Just as there is a world inhabited by men, and another by beasts, so 
also is there one inhabited by superior beings call ed gods whom we do not see but 
who nevertheless exist. The whole mischief is creat ed by the English rendering of Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 79  the word (Deva or Devata) for which you have not fo und a better term than 'god'. 
But God is Ishwara, Devadhideva, God of gods. So yo u see it is the word 'god' used 
to describe different divine beings that has given rise to such confusion. I believe 
that I am a thorough Hindu but I never believe in m any gods. Never even in my 
childhood did I hold that belief, and no one ever t aught me to do so. 
 
Idolatry 
"As for idol-worship, you cannot do without it in s ome form or other. Why does 
a Musalman give his life for defending a mosque whi ch he calls a house of God? 
And why does a Christian go to a church, and when h e is required to take an oath 
he swears by the Bible? Not that I see any objectio n to it. And what is it if not 
idolatry to give untold riches for building mosques  and tombs? And what do the 
Roman Catholics do when they kneel before Virgin Ma ry and before saints—quite 
imaginary figures in stone or painted on canvas or glass?"' 
"But," objected the Catholic Father, "I keep my mot her's photo and kiss it in 
veneration of her. But I do not worship it, nor do I worship saints. When I worship 
God, I acknowledge Him as Creator and greater than any human being." 
"Even so, it is not the stone we worship, but it is  God we worship in images of 
stone or metal however rude they may be." 
"But villagers worship stones as God." 
"No, I tell you they do not worship anything that i s less than God. When you 
kneel before Virgin Mary and ask for her intercessi on, what do you do? You ask to 
establish contact with God through her. Even so a H indu seeks to establish contact 
with God through a stone image. I can understand yo ur asking for the Virgin's 
intercession. Why are Mussalmans filled with awe an d exultation when they enter 
a mosque? Why, is not the whole universe a mosque? And what about the 
magnificent canopy of heaven that spreads over you?  Is it any less than a mosque? 
But I understand and sympathize with the Muslims. I t is their way of approach to Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 80  God. The Hindus have their own way of approach to t he same Eternal Being. Our 
media of approach are different, but that does not make Him different." 
"But the Catholics believe that God revealed to the m the true way." 
"But why do you say that the will of God is express ed only in one book called 
the Bible and not in others? Why i do you circumscr ibe the power of God?" 
"But Jesus proved that he had received the word of God through miracles." 
"But that is Mohammed's claim too. If you accept Ch ristian testimony you must 
accept Muslim testimony and Hindu testimony too." 
"But Mohammed said he could not do miracles." 
"No. He did not want to prove the existence of God by miracles. But he 
claimed to receive messages from God.' 
Harijan, 13-3-'37 
 
Incarnation 
God is not a person. To affirm that He descends to -earth every now and again 
in the form of a human being is a partial truth whi ch merely signifies that such a 
person lives near to God. Inasmuch as God is omnipr esent, He dwells within every 
human being and all may, therefore, be said to be i ncarnations of Him. But this 
leads us nowhere. Rama, Krishna, etc. are called in carnations of God because we 
attribute divine qualities to them. In truth they a re creations of man's 
imagination. Whether they actually lived or not doe s not affect the picture of 
them in men's minds. The Rama and Krishna of histor y often present difficulties 
which have to be overcome by all manner of argument s. 
The truth is that God is the force. He is the essen ce of life. He is pure and 
undefied consciousness. He is eternal. And yet, str angely enough, all are not able 
to derive either benefit from or shelter in the all -pervading living presence. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 81  Electricity is a powerful force. Not all can benefi t from it. It can only be 
produced by following certain laws. It is a lifeles s force. Man can utilize it if he 
labours hard enough to acquire the knowledge of its  laws. 
The living force which we call God can similarly be  found if we know and 
follow His law leading to the discovery of Him in u s. 
Harijan, 22-6-'47 
 
Hindu Dharma is like a boundless ocean teeming with  priceless gems. The 
deeper you dive, the more treasures you find. In Hi ndu religion, God is known by 
various names. Thousands of people look doubtless u pon Rama and Krishna as 
historical figures and literally believe that God c ame down in person on earth in 
the form of Rama, the son of Dasharatha, and by wor shipping him one can attain 
salvation. The same thing holds good about Krishna.  History, imagination and truth 
have got so inextricably mixed up. It is next to im possible to disentangle them. I 
have accepted all the names and forms attributed to  God as symbols connoting 
one formless omnipresent Rama. To me, therefore, Ra ma described as the lord of 
Sita, son of Dasharatha, is the all-powerful essenc e whose name inscribed in the 
heart, removes all suffering—mental, moral and phys ical. 
Harijan, 2-6-'46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 82   
25. TEMPLES AND IDOLS 
I do not regard the existence of a temple as a sin or superstition. Some form of 
common worship, and a common place of worship appea r to be a human necessity. 
Whether the temples should contain images or not is  a matter of temperament 
and taste. I do not regard a Hindu or a Roman Catho lic place of worship containing 
images as necessarily bad or superstitious, and a m osque or a Protestant place of 
worship as good or free of superstition merely beca use of their exclusion of 
images. A symbol such as a Cross or a book may easi ly become idolatrous, and 
therefore superstitious. And the worship of the ima ge of Child Krishna or Virgin 
Mary may become ennobling and free of all superstit ion. It depends upon the 
attitude of the heart of the worshipper. 
Young India , 5-11-'25 
 
We the human families are not all philosophers. We are of the earth very 
earthy, and we are not satisfied with contemplating  the Invisible God. Somehow or 
other we want something which we can touch, somethi ng which we can see, 
something before which we can kneel down. It does n ot matter whether it is a 
book, or an empty stone building, or a stone buildi ng inhabited by numerous 
figures. A book will satisfy some, an empty buildin g will satisfy some others, and 
many others will not be satisfied unless they see s omething inhabiting these empty 
buildings. Then I ask you to approach these temples  not as if they represented a 
body of superstitions. If you will approach these t emples with faith in them, you 
will know that each time you visit them you will co me away from them purified 
and with your faith more and more in the living God . 
Harijan, 23-1-'37 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 83  Temple-going is for the purification of the soul. T he worshipper draws the best 
out of himself. In greeting a living being, he may draw the best out of the person 
greeted, if the greeting is selfless. A living bein g is more or less fallible like 
oneself. But in the temple, one worships the living  God, perfect beyond 
imagination. Letters written to living persons ofte n end in heart-breaking, even 
when they are answered, and there is no guarantee o f their being always 
answered. Letters to God who, according to the devo tee's imagination, resides in 
temples, require neither pen nor ink nor paper, not  even speech. Mere mute 
worship constitutes the letter which brings its own  unfailing answer. The whole 
function is a beautiful exercise of faith. Here the re is no waste of effort, no heart-
breaking, no danger of being misunderstood. The wri ter must try to understand 
the simple philosophy lying behind the worship in t emples or mosques or churches. 
He will understand my meaning better if he will rea lize that I make no distinction 
between these different abodes of God. They are wha t faith has made them. They 
are an answer to man's craving somehow to reach the  UNSEEN. 
Harijan, 18-3-'33 
 
I am both an idolater and an iconoclast in what I c onceive to be the true 
senses of the terms. I value the spirit behind idol -worship. It plays a most 
important part in the uplift of the human race. And  I would like to possess the 
ability to defend with my life the thousands of hol y temples which sanctify this 
land of ours. 
Young India , 28-8-'24 
 
I am an iconoclast in the sense that I break down t he subtle form of idolatry in 
the shape of fanaticism that refuses to see any vir tue in any other form of 
worshipping the Deity save one's own. This form of idolatry is more deadly for Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 84  being more fine and evasive than the tangible and g ross form of worship that 
identifies the Deity with a little bit of a stone o r a golden image. 
Young India , 28-8-'24 
 
Temples, churches and mosques very often show corru ption, more often 
deterioration. Nevertheless, it would be impossible  to prove that all priests are 
bad or have been bad and that all churches, temples  and mosques are hotbeds of 
corruption and superstition. Nor does the argument take note of this fundamental 
fact that no faith has done without a habitation; a nd I go further that in the very 
nature of things it cannot exist, so long as man re mains as he is constituted. His 
very body has been rightly called the temple of the  Holy Ghost, though 
innumerable such temples belie fact and are hot-bed s of corruption used for 
dissoluteness. And I presume that it will be accept ed as a conclusive answer to a 
sweeping suggestion that all bodies should be destr oyed for the corruption of 
many, if it can be shown, as it can be, that there are some bodies which are 
proper temples of the Holy Ghost. The cause for the  corruption of many bodies 
will have to be sought elsewhere. Temples of stone and mortar are nothing else 
than a natural extension of these human temples and  though they were in their 
conception undoubtedly habitations of God like huma n temples, they have been 
subject to the same law of decay as the latter. 
Harijan, 11-3-'33 
 
I know of no religion or sect that has done or is d oing without its House of 
God, variously described as a temple, a mosque, a c hurch, a synagogue or an 
Agiari. Nor is it certain that any of the great ref ormers including Jesus destroyed 
or discarded temples altogether. All of them sought  to banish corruption from 
temples as well as from society. Some of them, if n ot all, appear to have preached Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 85  from temples. I have ceased to visit temples for ye ars, but I do not regard myself 
on that account as a better person than before. My mother never missed going to 
the temple when she was in a fit state to go there.  Probably her faith was far 
greater than mine, though I do not visit temples. T here are millions whose faith is 
sustained through these temples, churches and mosqu es. They are not all blind 
followers of a superstition, nor are they fanatics.  Superstition and fanaticism are 
not their monopoly. These vices have their root in our hearts and minds. 
Harijan, 11-3-'33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 86   
26. TREE-WORSHIP 
A correspondent writes: 
"It is a common enough sight in this country see me n and women offering 
worship to stocks and stones and trees, but I was s urprised to find, that eyen 
educated women belonging to the families of enthusi astic social workers were not 
above this practice, borne of these sisters and fri ends defend the practice by 
saying, that since it is founded on pure reverence for the divine in nature and no 
false beliefs, it cannot be classed as superstition , and they cite the names of 
Satyavan and Savitri whose memory, they say, they c ommemorate in that way. 
The argument does not convince me. May I request yo u to throw some light 0n the 
matter? 
I like this question. It raises the old, old questi on of image-worship. I am both 
a supporter and opponent of image-worship. When ima ge-worship degenerates 
into idolatry and becomes encrusted with false beli efs and doctrines, it becomes a 
necessity to combat it as a gross social evil. On t he other hand, image-worship in 
the sense of investing one's ideal with a concrete shape is inherent in man's 
nature, and even valuable as an aid to devotion. Th us we worship an image when 
we offer homage to a book which we regard as holy o r sacred. We worship an 
image when we visit a temple or a mosque with a fee ling of sanctity or reverence. 
Nor do I see any harm in all this. On the contrary,  endowed as man is with a finite, 
limited understanding, he can hardly do otherwise. Even so far from seeing 
anything inherently evil or harmful in tree- worshi p, I find in it a thing instinct 
with a deep pathos and poetic beauty. It symbolizes  true reverence for the entire 
vegetable kingdom, which with its endless panorama of beautiful shapes and 
forms, declares to us as it were with a million ton gues the greatness and glory of 
God. Without vegetation our planet would not be abl e to support life even for a Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 87  moment. In such a country especially, therefore, in  which there is a scarcity of 
trees, tree-worship assumes a profound economic sig nificance. 
I therefore see no necessity for leading a crusade against tree-worship. It is 
true, that the poor simple-minded women who offer w orship to trees have no 
reasoned understanding of the implications of their  act. Possibly they would not 
be able to give any explanation as to why they perf orm it. They act in the purity 
and utter simplicity of their faith. Such faith is not a thing to be despised; it is a 
great and powerful force that we should treasure. 
Far different, however, is the case of vows and pra yers which votaries offer 
before trees. The offering of vows and prayers for selfish ends, whether offered in 
churches, mosques, temples or before trees and shri nes, is a thing not to be 
encouraged. Making of selfish requests of offering of vows is not related to image-
worship as effect and cause. A personal selfish pra yer is bad whether made before 
an image or an unseen God. 
Let no one, however, from this understand me to mea n that I advocate tree-
worship in general. I do not defend tree-worship be cause I consider it to be a 
necessary aid to devotion, but only because I recog nize that God manifests 
Himself in innumerable forms in this universe, and every such manifestation 
commands my spontaneous reverence. 
Young India , 26-9-'29 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 88   
27. REASON AND FAITH 
Experience has humbled me enough to let me realize the specific limitations 
of reason. Just as matter misplaced becomes dirt, r eason misused becomes 
lunacy. 
Young India, 14-10-’26 
 
Rationalists are admirable beings, rationalism is a  hideous monster when it 
claims for itself omnipotence. Attribution of omnip otence to reason is as bad a 
piece of idolatry as is worship of stock and stone believing it to be God. I plead 
not for the suppression of reason, but for a due re cognition of that in us which 
sanctifies reason. 
Young India , 19-10-'26 
 
There are subjects where reason cannot take us far and we have to accept 
things on faith. Faith then does not contradict rea son but transcends it. Faith is a 
kind of sixth sense which works in cases which are without the purview of reason. 
Harijan,  6-3-'37 
 
It is faith that steers us through stormy seas, fai th that moves mountains and 
faith that jumps across the ocean. That faith is no thing but a living, wide-awake 
consciousness of God within. He who has achieved th at faith wants nothing. Bodily 
diseased, he is spiritually healthy; physically poo r, he rolls in spiritual riches. 
Young India , 24-9-'25 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 89  Without faith this world would come to naught in a moment. True faith is 
appropriation of the reasoned experience of people whom we believe to have 
lived a life purified by prayer and penance. Belief , therefore, in prophets or 
incarnations who have lived in remote ages is not a n idle superstition but a 
satisfaction of an inmost spiritual want. 
Young India , 14-4-'27 
 
Everyone has faith in God though everyone does not know it. For, everyone has 
faith in himself and that multiplied to the nth deg ree is God. The sum total of all 
that lives is God. We may not be God but we are of God—even as a little drop of 
water is of the ocean. Imagine it torn away from th e ocean and flung millions of 
miles away. It becomes helpless torn from its surro undings and cannot feel the 
might and majesty of the ocean. But if someone coul d point out to it that it is of 
the ocean, its faith would revive, it would dance w ith joy and the whole of the 
might and majesty of the ocean would be reflected i n it. 
Harijan,  3-6-'39 
 
Seeing God face to face is to feel that He is enthr oned in our hearts even as a 
child feels a mother's affection without needing an y demonstration. Does a child 
reason out the existence of a mother's love? Can he  prove it to others? He 
triumphantly declares, 'It is.' So must it be with the existence of God. He defies 
reason. But He is experienced. Let us not reject th e experience of Tulsidas, 
Ghaitanya, Ramadas and a host of other spiritual te achers even as we do not 
reject that of mundane teachers. 
Young India , 9-7-'25 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 90   
28. SCRIPTURES 
Mr Basil Mathews: Where do you find the seat of aut hority? 
Gandhiji: It lies here (pointing to his breast). I exercise my judgment about 
every scripture, including the Gita. I cannot let a  scriptural text supersede my 
reason. Whilst I believe that the principal books a re inspired, they suffer from a 
process of double distillation. Firstly they come t hrough a human prophet, and 
then through the commentaries of interpreters. Noth ing in them comes from God 
directly. Mathew may give one version of one text a nd John may give another. I 
cannot surrender my reason whilst I subscribe to di vine revelation. And above all, 
'the letter killeth, the spirit giveth life.' But y ou must not misunderstand my 
position. I believe in faith also, in things where reason has no place, e.g. the 
existence of God. No argument can move me from that  faith, and like that little 
girl who repeated against all reason 'yet we are se ven' I would like to repeat, on 
being baffled in argument by a very superior intell ect, 'Yet there is God'. 
Harijan, 5-12-'36 
 
Divine knowledge is not borrowed from books. It has  to be realized in oneself. 
Books are at best an aid, often even a hindrance. 
Young India , 17-7-'24 
 
 An error does not become truth by reason of multip lied propagation, nor does 
truth become error because nobody sees it. 
Young India , 26-2-'25 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 91   I would reject all authority if it is in conflict with sober reason or the dictates 
of the heart. Authority sustains and ennobles the w eak when it is the handiwork of 
reason, but it degrades them when it supplants reas on, sanctioned by the still 
small Voice within. 
Young India , 8-12-'20 
 
I am not a literalist. Therefore I try to understan d the spirit of the various 
scriptures of the world. I apply the test of Truth and Ahimsa laid down by these 
very scriptures for interpretation. I reject what i s inconsistent with that test, and I 
appropriate all that is consistent with it. The sto ry of a Shudra having been 
punished by Ramachandra for daring to learn the Ved as I reject as an inter-
polation. And in any event, I worship Rama, the per fect being of my conception, 
not a historical person facts about whose life may vary with the progress of new 
historical discoveries and researches. Tulsidas had  nothing to do with the Rama of 
history. Judged by historical test, his Ramayana wo uld be fit for the scrap-heap. 
As a spiritual experience, his book is almost unriv alled at least for me. And then, 
too, I do not swear by every word that is to be fou nd in so many editions published 
as the Ramayana of Tulsidas. It is the spirit runni ng through the book that holds 
me spell-bound. 
Young India,  27-8-'25 
 
I have no knowledge that the Krishna of Mahabharata  ever lived. My Krishna 
has nothing to do with any historical person. I wou ld refuse to bow my head to the 
Krishna who would kill because his pride is hurt, o r the Krishna whom the non-
Hindus portray as a dissolute youth. I believe in K rishna of my imagination as a 
perfect incarnation, spotless in every sense of the  word, the inspirer of the Gita 
and the inspirer of the lives of millions of human beings. But if it was proved to Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 92  me that the Mahabharata is history in the sense tha t modern historical books are, 
that every word of the Mahabharata is authentic and  the Krishna of the 
Mahabharata actually did some of the acts attribute d to him, even at the risk of 
being banished from the Hindu fold I should not hes itate to reject that Krishna as 
God incarnate. But to me the Mahabharata is a profo undly religious book, largely 
allegorical, in no way meant to be a historical rec ord. It is the description of the 
eternal duel going on within ourselves, given so vi vidly as to make us think for the 
time being that the deeds described therein were ac tually done by the human 
beings. Nor do I regard the Mahabharata as we have it now as a faultless copy of 
the original. On the contrary I consider that it ha s undergone many amendations. 
Young India , 1-10-'25 
 
A prayerful study and experience are essential for a correct interpretation of 
the scriptures. The injunction that a Shudra may no t study the scriptures is not 
entirely without meaning. A Shudra means a spiritua lly uncultured, ignorant man. 
He is more likely than not to misinterpret the Veda s and other scriptures. 
Everyone cannot solve an algebraical equation. Some  preliminary study is a  sine 
qua non.  How will the grand truth 'I am Brahman' lie in the  mouth of a man 
steeped in sin! To what ignoble purposes would he t urn it! What a distortion it 
would suffer at his hands! 
A man, therefore, who would interpret the scripture s must have the spiritual 
discipline. He must practise the Yamas and Niyamas— the eternal guides of 
conduct. A superficial practice thereof is useless.  The Shastras have enjoined the 
necessity of a Guru. But a Guru being rare in these  days, a study of modern books 
inculcating  bhakti has been suggested by the sages. Those who are lack ing in 
bhakti, lacking in faith, are all qualified to interpret the scriptures. The learned 
may draw an elaborately learned interpretation out of them, but that will not be Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 93  the true interpretation. Only the experienced will arrive at the true interpretation 
of the scriptures. 
But even for the inexperienced there are certain ca nons. That interpretation is 
not true which conflicts with Truth. To one who dou bts even Truth, the scriptures 
have no meaning. No one can contend with him.  
Young India , 12-11-'25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 94   
29. THE MESSAGE OF THE GITA 
1. Even in 1888-89, when I first became acquainted wit h the Gita, I felt that it 
was not a historical work, but that under the guise  of physical warfare, it 
described the duel that perpetually went on in the hearts of mankind, and 
that physical warfare was brought in merely to make  the description of the 
internal duel more alluring. This preliminary intui tion became more 
confirmed on a closer study of religion and the Git a. A study of the 
Mahabharata gave it added confirmation. I do not re gard the Mahabharata as 
a historical work in the accepted sense. The Adipar va contains powerful 
evidence in support of my opinion. By ascribing to the chief actors 
superhuman or subhuman origins, the great Vyasa mad e short work of the 
history of kings and their peoples. The persons the rein described may be 
historical, but the author of the Mahabharata has u sed them merely to drive 
home his religious theme. 
2. The author of the Mahabharata has not established t he necessity of physical 
warfare; on the contrary he has proved its futility . He has made the victors 
shed tears of sorrow and repentance, and has left t hem nothing but a legacy 
of miseries. 
3. In this great work the Gita is the crown. Its secon d chapter, instead of 
teaching the rules of physical warfare, tells us ho w a perfected man is to be 
known. In the characteristics of the perfected man of the Gita, I do not see 
any to correspond to physical warfare. Its whole de sign is inconsistent with 
the rules of conduct governing the relations betwee n warring parties. 
4. Krishna of the Gita is perfection and right knowled ge personified; but the 
picture is imaginary. That does not mean that Krish na, the adored of his 
people, never lived. But perfection is imagined. Th e idea of a perfect 
incarnation is an after growth. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 95  5. In Hinduism, incarnation is ascribed to one who has  performed some 
extraordinary service of mankind. All embodied life  is in reality an 
incarnation of God, but it is not usual to consider  every living being an 
incarnation. Future generations pay this homage to one who, in his own 
generation, has been extraordinarily religious in h is conduct. I can see 
nothing wrong in this procedure; it takes nothing f rom God's greatness, and 
there is no violence done to Truth. There is an Urd u saying which means, 
"Adam is not God but he is a spark of the Divine." And therefore he who is the 
most religiously behaved has most of the divine spa rk in him. It is in 
accordance with this train of thought that Krishna enjoys, in Hinduism, the 
status of the most perfect incarnation. 
6. This belief in incarnation is a testimony of man's lofty spiritual ambition. Man 
is not at peace with himself till he has become lik e unto God. The endeavour 
to reach this state is the supreme, the only ambiti on worth having. And this is 
self-realization. This self-realization is the subj ect of the Gita, as it is of all 
scriptures. But its author surely did not write it to establish that doctrine. 
The object of the Gita appears to me to be that of showing the most 
excellent way to attain self-realization. That whic h is to be found, more or 
less clearly, spread out here and there in Hindu re ligious books, has been 
brought out in the clearest possible language in th e Gita even at the risk of 
repetition. 
7. That matchless remedy is renunciation of the fruits  of action.  
8. This is the centre round which the Gita is woven. T his renunciation is the 
central sun, round which devotion, knowledge and th e rest revolve like 
planets. The body has been likened to a prison. The re must be action where 
there is body. Not one embodied being is exempted f rom labour. And yet all 
religions proclaim that it is possible for man, by treating the body as the 
temple of God, to attain freedom. Every action is t ainted, be it ever so 
trivial. How can the body be made the temple of God ? In other words how can 
one be free from action, i.e. from the taint of sin ? The Gita has answered the Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 96  question in decisive language: "By desireless actio n; by renouncing the fruits 
of action; by dedicating all activities to God, i.e . by surrendering oneself to 
Him body and soul." 
9. But desirelessness or renunciation does not come fo r the mere talking about 
it. It is not attained by an intellectual feat. It is attainable only by a constant 
heart-churn. Right knowledge is necessary for attai ning renunciation. Learned 
men posses a knowledge of a kind. They may recite t he Vedas from memory, 
yet they may be steeped in self-indulgence. In orde r that knowledge may not 
run riot, the author of the Gita has insisted on de votion accompanying it and 
has given it the first place. Knowledge without dev otion will be like a misfire. 
Therefore, says the Gita, “Have devotion, and knowl edge will follow.” This 
devotion is not mere lip-worship, it is a wrestling  with death. Hence the 
Gita’s assessment of the devotee’s qualities is sim ilar to that of the sage’s. 
10. Thus the devotion required by the Gita is no soft-h earted effusiveness. It 
certainly is not blind faith. The devotion of the G ita has the least to do with 
externals. A devotee may use, if he likes, rosaries , forehead marks, make 
offerings, but these things are no test of his devo tion. He is the devotee who 
is jealous of none, who is a fount of mercy, who is  without egotism, who is 
selfless, who treats alike cold and heat, happiness  misery, who is ever 
forgiving, who is always contented, whose resolutio ns are firm, who has 
dedicated mind and soul to God, who causes exultati on, sorrow and fear, who 
is pure, who is versed in action and yet remains un affected by it, who 
renounces all fruit, good or bad, who treats friend s and foe alike, who is by 
praise, who does not go under when people speak ill  of him, who loves silence 
and solitude, who has a disciplined reason. Such de votion is inconsistent with 
the existence at the same time of strong attachment s. 
11. We thus see, that to be a real devotes is to realiz e oneself. Self-realization is 
not something apart. One rupee can purchase for us poison or nectar, but 
knowledge or devotion cannot buy us either salvatio n or bondage. These are 
net media of exchange. They are themselves the thin g we want. In other Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 97  words if the means and the end are not identical, t hey are almost so. The 
extreme of means is salvation. Salvation of the Git a is perfect peace. 
12. But such knowledge and devotion, to be true, have t o stand the test of 
renunciation of fruits of action. Mere knowledge of  right and wrong will not 
make one fit for salvation. According to common not ions, a mere learned man 
will pass as a Pandit. He need not perform any serv ice. He will regard it as 
bondage even to lift a little lota. Where one test of knowledge is non-liability 
for service, there is no room for such mundane work  as the lifting of a  lota. 
13. Or take  bhakti.  The popular notion of  bhakti is soft-heartedness, telling 
beads and the like and disdaining to do even a lovi ng service, lest the telling 
of beads etc. might be interrupted. This  bhakta therefore leaves the rosary 
only for eating, drinking and the like, never for g rinding corn or nursing 
patients. 
14. But the Gita says: "No one has attained his goal wi thout action. Even men like 
Janaka attained salvation through action. If even I  were lazily to cease 
working, the world would perish. How much more nece ssary then for the 
people at large to engage in action?" 
15. While on the one hand it is beyond dispute that all  action binds, on the other 
hand it is equally true that all living beings have  to do some work whether 
they will or no. Here all activity, whether mental or physical, is to be 
included in the term action. Then how is one to be free from the bondage of 
action, even though he may be acting? The manner in  which the Gita has 
solved the problem is, to my knowledge, unique. The  Gita says: "Do your 
allotted work but renounce its fruit—be detached an d work—have no desire 
for reward and work." 
This is the unmistakable teaching of the Gita. He w ho gives up action falls. He 
who gives up only the reward rises. But renunciatio n of fruit in no way means 
indifference to the result. In regard to every acti on one must know the result that 
is expected to follow, the means thereto, and the c apacity for it. He, who, being Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 98  thus equipped, is without desire for the result, an d is yet wholly engrossed in the 
due fulfillment of the task before him, is said to have renounced the fruits of his 
action. 
16. Again, let no one consider renunciation to mean wan t of fruit for the 
renouncer. The Gita reading does not warrant such a  meaning. Renunciation 
means absence of hankering after fruit. As a matter  of fact, he who renoun-
ces reaps a thousand fold. The renunciation of the Gita is the acid test of 
faith. He who is ever brooding over result often lo ses nerve in the 
performance of his duty. He becomes impatient and t hen gives vent to anger 
and begins to do unworthy things; he jumps from act ion to action, never 
remaining faithful to any. He who broods over resul ts is like a man given to 
objects of senses; he is ever distracted, he says g oodbye to all scruples, 
everything is right in his estimation and he theref ore resorts to means fair 
and foul to attain his end. 
17. From the bitter experiences of desire for fruit the  author of the Gita 
discovered the path of renunciation of fruit, and p ut it before the world in a 
most convincing manner. The common belief is that r eligion is always 
opposed to material good. "One cannot act religious ly in mercantile and such 
other matters. There is no place for religion in su ch pursuits; religion is only 
for attainment of salvation," we hear many worldly- wise people say. In my 
opinion the author of the Gita has dispelled this d elusion. He has drawn no 
line of demarcation between salvation and wordly pu rsuits. On the contrary, 
he has shown that religion must rule even our wordl y pursuits. I have felt that 
the Gita teaches us that what cannot be followed ou t in day-to-day practice 
cannot be called religion. Thus, according to the G ita, all acts that are 
incapable of being performed without attachment are  taboo. This golden rule 
saves mankind from many a pitfall. According to thi s interpretation murder, 
lying, dissoluteness and the like must be regarded as sinful and therefore Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 99  taboo. Man's life then becomes simple, and from tha t simpleness springs 
peace. 
18. Thinking along these lines, I have felt that in try ing to enforce in one's life the 
central teaching of the Gita, one is bound to follo w truth and Ahimsa. When 
there is no desire for fruit, there is no temptatio n for untruth or Himsa. Take 
any instance of untruth or violence, and it will be  found that at its back was 
the desire to attain the cherished end. But it may be freely admitted that the 
Gita was not written to establish Ahimsa. It was an  accepted and primary 
duty even before the Gita age. The Gita had to deli ver the message of 
renunciation of fruit. This is clearly brought out so early as the second 
chapter. 
19. But if the Gita believed in Ahimsa or it was includ ed in desirelessness, why 
did the author take a warlike illustration? When th e Gita was written, 
although people believed in Ahimsa, wars were not o nly not taboo but nobody 
observed the contradiction between them and Ahimsa.  
20. In assessing the implications of renunciation of fr uit, we are not required to 
probe the mind of the author of the Gita as to his limitations of Ahimsa and 
the like. Because a poet puts a particular truth be fore the world, it does not 
necessarily follow that he has known or worked out all its great 
consequences, or that having done so, he is able al ways to express them 
fully. In this perhaps lies the greatness of the po em and the poet. A poet's 
meaning is limitless. Like man, the meaning of grea t writings suffers 
evolution. On examining the history of languages, w e notice that the meaning 
of important words has changed or expanded. This is  true of the Gita. The 
author has himself extended the meanings of some of  the current words. We 
are able to discover this even on a superficial exa mination. It is possible, that 
in the age prior to that of the Gita, offering of a nimals in sacrifice was 
permissible. But there is not a trace of it in the sacrifice in the Gita sense. In 
the Gita continuous concentration on God is the kin g of sacrifices. The third 
chapter seems to show that sacrifice chiefly means body-labour for service. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 100  The third and the fourth chapters read together wil l give us other meanings 
for sacrifice but never animal-sacrifice. Similarly  has the meaning of the word 
Sannyasa undergone, in the Gita, a transformation. The Sannyasa of the Gita 
will not tolerate complete cessation of all activit y. The Sannyasa of the Gita 
is all work and yet no work. Thus the author of the  Gita by extending 
meanings of words has taught us to imitate him. Let  it be granted, that 
according to the letter of the Gita it is possible to say that warfare is 
consistent with renunciation of fruit. But after 40  years' unremitting 
endeavour fully to enforce the teaching of the Gita  in my own life, I have, in 
all humility, felt that perfect renunciation is imp ossible without perfect 
observance of Ahimsa in every shape and form. 
21. The Gita is not an aphoristic work; it is a great r eligious poem. The deeper 
you dive into it, the richer the meanings you get. It being meant for the 
people at large, there is pleasing repetition. With  every age the important 
words will carry new and expanding meanings. But it s central teaching will 
never vary. The seeker is at liberty to extract fro m this treasure any meaning 
he likes so as to enable him to enforce in his life  the central teaching. 
22. Nor is the Gita a collection of Do's and Don'ts. Wh at is lawful for one may be 
unlawful for another. What may be permissible at on e time, or in one place, 
may not be so at another time, and in another place . Desire for fruit is the 
only universal prohibition. Desirelessness is oblig atory. 
23. The Gita has sung the praises of knowledge, but it is beyond the mere 
intellect; it is essentially addressed to the heart  and capable of being 
understood by the heart. Therefore the Gita is not for those who have no 
faith. The author makes Krishna say: 
"Do not entrust this treasure to him who is without  sacrifice, without devotion, 
without the desire for this teaching and who denies  Me. On the other hand those 
who will give this precious treasure to my devotees  will by the fact of this service 
assuredly reach Me. And those who, being free from malice will with faith absorb Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 101  this teaching, shall, having attained freedom, live  where people of true merit go 
after death." 
Young India , 6-8-'31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 102   
30. BEAUTY IN TRUTH 
There are two aspects of thing—the outward and the inward. It is purely a 
matter of emphasis with me. The outward has no mean ing except in so far as it 
helps the inward. All true art is thus the expressi on of the soul. The outward forms 
have value only in so far as they are the expressio n of the inner spirit in man. Art 
of that nature has the greatest possible appeal for  me. But I know that many call 
themselves artists, and are recognized as such, and  yet in their works there is 
absolutely no trace of the soul's upward urge and u nrest. 
All true art must help the soul to realize its inne r self. In my own case, I find 
that I can do entirely without external forms in my  soul's realization. I can claim, 
therefore, that there is truly efficient art in my life, though you might not see 
what you call works of art about me. My room may ha ve blank walls; and I may 
even dispense with the roof, so that I may gaze out  at the starry heavens overhead 
that stretch in an unending expanse of beauty. What  conscious art of man can give 
me the panoramic scenes that open out before me, wh en I look up to the sky 
above with all its shining stars? This, however, do es not mean that I refuse to 
accept the value of production of arts, generally a ccepted as such, but only that I 
personally feel how inadequate these are compared w ith the eternal symbols of 
beauty in Nature. These productions of man's art ha ve their value only in. so far as 
they help the soul onward towards self-realization.  
I see and find beauty in Truth or through Truth. Al l Truths, not merely true 
ideas, but truthful faces, truthful pictures, or so ngs are highly beautiful. People 
generally fail to see Beauty in Truth, the ordinary  man runs away from and 
becomes blind to the beauty in it. Whenever men beg in to see Beauty in Truth, 
then true art will arise. 
To a true artist only that face is beautiful which,  quite apart from its exterior, 
shines with the Truth within the soul. There is ...  no Beauty apart from Truth. On Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 103  the other hand, Truth may manifest itself in forms which may not be outwardly 
beautiful at all. Socrates, we are told, was the mo st truthful man of his time, and 
yet his features are said to have been the ugliest in Greece. To my mind he was 
beautiful because all his life was a striving after  Truth, and you may remember 
that this outward form aid not prevent Phidias from  appreciating the beauty of 
Truth in him, though as an. artist he was accustome d to see Beauty in outward 
forms also. 
Truth and untruth often co-exist; good and evil are  often found together. In an 
artist also, not seldom, the right perception of th ings and the wrong co-exist. 
Truly beautiful creations come when right perceptio n is at work. If these moments 
are rare in life they are also rare in art. 
These beauties ('a sunset or a crescent moon that s hines amid the stars at 
night') are truthful, inasmuch as they make me thin k of the Creator at the back of 
them. How else could these be beautiful, but for th e Truth that is in the centre of 
creation? When I admire the wonder of a sunset or t he beauty of the moon, my 
soul expands in worship of the Creator. I try to se e Him and His mercies in all 
these creations. But even the sunsets and sunrises would be mere hindrances if 
they did not help me to think of Him. Anything, whi ch is a hindrance to the flight 
of the soul, is a delusion and a snare; even like t he body, which often does 
actually hinder you in the path of salvation. 
Young India,  13-11-'24 
 
Truth is the first thing to be sought for, and Beau ty and Goodness will then be 
added upto you. That is what Christ really taught i n the Sermon on the Mount. 
Jesus was, to my mind, a supreme artist because he saw and expressed Truth; and 
so was Muhammad, the Koran being the most perfect c omposition in all Arabic 
literature—at any rate, that is what scholars say. It is because both of them strove 
first for Truth that the grace of expression natura lly came  in and yet neither Jesus Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 104  nor Muhammad wrote on art, That is the Truth and Be auty I crave for, live for, and 
would die for. 
Young India , 20-11-'24  
 
Here too, just as elsewhere, I must think in terms of the millions. And to the 
millions we cannot give that training to acquire a perception of Beauty in such a 
way as to see Truth in it. Show them Truth first an d they will see Beauty 
afterwards.... Whatever can be useful to . . . star ving millions is beautiful to my 
mind. Let us give today first the vital things of l ife and all the graces and 
ornaments of life will follow. 
Young India , 20-11-'24 
 
True art takes note not merely of form but also of what lies behind. There is 
an art that kills and an art that gives life. True art must be evidence of happiness, 
contentment and purity of its authors. 
Young India , 11-8-'21 
 
We have somehow accustomed ourselves to the belief that art is independent 
of the purity of private life. I can say with all t he experience at my command that 
nothing could be more untrue. As I am nearing the e nd of my earthly life I can say 
that purity of life is the highest and truest art. The art of producing good music 
from a cultivated voice can be achieved by many, bu t the art of producing that 
music from the harmony of a pure life is achieved v ery rarely. 
Harijan, 19-2-'38 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 105   
31 RAMANAMA 
Though my reason and heart long ago realized the hi ghest attribute and name 
of God as Truth, I recognize truth by the name of R ama. In the darkest hour of my 
trial, that one name has saved me and is still savi ng me. It may be the association 
of childhood, it may be the fascination that Tulsid as has wrought on me. But the 
potent fact is there, and as I write these lines, m y memory revives the scenes of 
my childhood when I used daily to visit the Ramji M andir adjacent to my ancestral 
home. My Rama then resided there. He saved me from many fears and sins. It was 
no superstition for me. The custodian of the idol m ay have been a bad man. I 
know nothing against him. Misdeeds might have gone on in the temple. Again I 
know nothing of them. Therefore, they would not aff ect me. What was and is true 
of me is true of millions of Hindus. 
Harijan,  18-3-'33 
 
I laugh within myself when someone objects that Ram a or the chanting of 
Ramanama is for the Hindus only, how can Mussulmans  therefore take part in it? Is 
there one God for the Mussulmans and another for th e Hindus, Parsis, or 
Christians? No, there is only one omnipotent and om nipresent God. He is named 
variously and we remember Him by the name which is most familiar to us. 
My Rama, the Rama of our prayers is not the histori cal Rama, the son of 
Dasharatha, the King of Ayodhya. He is the eternal,  the unborn, the one without a 
second. 
Him alone I worship. His aid alone I seek, and so s hould you. He belongs 
equally to all. I, therefore, see no reason why a M ussulman or anybody should 
object to taking His name. But he is in no way boun d to recognize God as Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 106  Ramanama. He may utter to himself Allah or Khuda so  as not to mar the harmony 
of the sound. 
Harijan, 28-4-'46 
 
I myself have been a devotee of Tulsidas from my ch ildhood and have, 
therefore, always worshipped God as Rama. But I kno w that if, beginning with 
Omkar, one goes through the entire gamut of God's n ames current in all climes, all 
countries and languages, the result is the same. He  and His Law are one. To 
observe His Law is, therefore, the best form of wor ship. A man who becomes one 
with the Law does not stand in need of vocal recita tion of the name. In other 
words, an individual with whom contemplation on God  has become as natural as 
breathing is so filled with God's spirit that knowl edge or observance of the Law 
becomes second nature, as it were, with him. Such a  one needs no other 
treatment. 
The question then arises as to why, in spite of hav ing this prince of remedies 
at hand, we know so little about it and why even th ose who know, do not 
remember Him or remember Him only by lip-service, n ot from the heart. Parrot-
like repetition of God's name signifies failure to recognize Him as the panacea for 
all ills. 
Harijan, 24-3-'46 
 
A devotee of Rama may be said to be the same as the  steadfast one 
(Sthitaprajnya) of the Gita. If one goes a little d eeper it will be seen that a true 
devotee of God faithfully obeys the five elemental forces of Nature. If he so 
obeys, he will not fall ill. If perchance he does, he will cure himself with the aid of 
the elementals. It is not for the dweller in the bo dy to get the body cured 
anyhow—he who believes that he is nothing but body will naturally wander to the Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 107  ends of the earth in order to cure the body of its ills. But he who realizes that the 
soul is something apart from, though in the body th at it is imperishable in contrast 
to the perishable body, will not be perturbed nor m ourn if the elementals fail. On 
the contrary he will welcome death as a friend. He will become his own healer 
instead of seeking for medical men. He will live in  the consciousness of the soul 
within and look to the care, first and last, of the  in- dweller. 
Such a man will take God's name with every breath. His Rama will be awake 
even whilst the body is asleep. Rama will always be  with him in whatever he does. 
The real death for such a devoted man will be the l oss of this sacred 
companionship. 
As an aid to keeping his Rama with him, he will tak e what the five elementals 
have to give him. That is to say he will employ the  simplest and easiest way of 
deriving all the benefit he can from earth, air, wa ter, sunlight and ether. This aid 
is not complementary to Ramanama. It is but a means  of its realization. 
Ramanama does not in fact require any aid. But to c laim belief in Ramanama and 
at the same time to run to doctors do not go hand i n hand. 
Just as the body cannot exist without blood, so the  soul needs the matchless 
and pure strength of faith. This strength can renov ate the weakness of all man's 
physical organs. That is why it is said that when R amanama is enshrined in the 
heart, it means the rebirth of man. This law applie s to the young, the old, man 
and woman alike. 
Harijan,  29-6-'47 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 108   
32. NATURE CURE 
Nature Cure treatment means that treatment which be fits man. By "man" is 
meant not merely man as animal, but as creature pos sessing, in addition to his 
body, both mind and soul. For such a being Ramanama  is the truest Nature Cure 
treatment. It is an unfailing remedy. The expressio n Ramabana or infallible cure is 
derived from it. Nature, too, indicates that for ma n it is the worthy remedy. No 
matter what the ailment from which a man may be suf fering, recitation of 
Ramanama from the heart is the sure cure. God has m any names. Each person can 
choose the name that appeals most to him. Ishwara, Allah, Khuda, God mean the 
same. But the recitation must not be parrotlike, it  must be born of faith of which 
endeavour will be some evidence. What should the en deavour consist of ? Man 
should seek out and be content to confine the means  of cure to the five elements 
of which the body is composed, i.e. earth, water,  akash, sun and air. Of course, 
Ramanama must be the invariable accompaniment. If i n spite of this, death 
supervenes, we may not mind. On the contrary, it sh ould be welcomed. Science 
has not so far discovered any recipe for making the  body immortal. Immortality is 
an attribute of the soul. That is certainly imperis hable, but it is man's duty to try 
to express its purity. 
Harijan,  3-3-'46 
 
If we accept the above reasoning., it will automati cally limit the means 
permissible under Nature Cure. And man is thereby s aved from all the 
paraphernalia of big hospitals and eminent doctors etc. The large majority of 
persons in the world can never afford these. Why, t hen, should the few desire 
what the many cannot have?  
Harijan, 3-3-'46 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 109   
The potency of Ramanama is, however, subject to cer tain conditions and 
limitations. Ramanama is not like black magic. If s omeone suffers from surfeit and 
wants to be cured of its after-effects so that he c an again indulge himself at the 
table, Ramanama is not for him. Ramanama can be use d only for a good, not for 
an evil end, or else thieves and robbers would be t he greatest devotees. 
Ramanama is for the pure in heart and for those who  want to attain purity and 
remain pure. It can never be a means for self-indul gence. The remedy for surfeit 
is fasting, not prayer. Prayer can come in only whe n fasting has done its work. It 
can make fasting easy and bearable. Similarly, the taking of Ramanama will be a 
meaningless force when at the same time you are dru gging your system with medi-
cines. A doctor who uses his talent to pander to th e vices of his patient degrades 
himself and his patient. What worse degradation can  there be for man than that 
instead of regarding his body as an instrument of w orshipping his Maker, he should 
make it the object of adoration and waste money lik e water to keep it going 
anyhow? Ramanama, on the other hand, purifies while  it cures, and, therefore, it 
elevates. Therein lies its use as well as its limit ation. 
Harijan, 7-4-'46 
 
 An apt question is as to why a man who recites Ram anama regularly and leads 
a pure life should ever fall ill. Man is by nature imperfect. A thoughtful man 
strives after perfection, but never attains it. He stumbles on the way, however, 
unwittingly. The whole of God's law is embodied in a pure life. The first thing is to 
realize one's limitations. It should be obvious tha t the moment one transgresses 
those limits one falls ill. Thus a balanced diet ea ten in accordance with needs 
gives one freedom from disease. How is one to know what is the proper diet for 
one? Many such enigmas can be imagined. The purport  of it all is that everyone Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 110  should be his own doctor and find out his limitatio ns. The man who does so will 
surely live up to 125. 
Harijan, 19-5-'46 
 
My love of Nature Cure and of indigenous systems do es not blind me to the 
advance that Western medicine has made in spite of the fact that I have 
stigmatized it as black magic. I have used the hars h term and I do not withdraw it, 
because of the fact, that it has countenanced vivis ection and all the awfulness it 
means and because it will stop at no practice, howe ver bad it may be, if it 
prolongs the life of the body and because it ignore s the immortal soul which 
resides in the body. I cling to Nature Cure in spit e of its great limitations and in 
spite of the lazy pretensions of Nature curists. Ab ove all, in Nature Cure, 
everybody can be his or her own doctor, not so in t he various systems of medicine. 
Harijan, 11-8-'46 
 
Spiritual force is like any other force at the serv ice of man. Apart from the 
fact that it has been used for physical ailments fo r ages, with more or less 
success, it would be intrinsically wrong not to use  it, if it can be successfully used 
for the cure of physical ailments,, For, man is bot h matter and spirit, each acting 
on and affecting the other. If you get rid of malar ia by taking quinine, without 
thinking of the millions who do not get it, why sho uld you refuse to use the 
remedy which is within you, because millions will n ot use it through their 
ignorance? May you not be clean and well because mi llions of others will not be so, 
ignorantly or, may be, even cussedly? If you will n ot be clean out of false notions 
of philanthropy, you will deny yourselves the duty of serving the very millions by 
remaining dirty and ill. Surely refusal to be spiri tually well or clean is worse than 
the refusal to be physically clean and well. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 111  Harijan, 1-9-'46 
 
Salvation is nothing more and nothing less than bei ng well in every way. Why 
should you deny it for yourselves, if thereby you s how the way to others and 
beyond showing it, actually serve them in addition by reason of your fitness? 
Harijan, l-9-'46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 112   
33. UNITY OF ALL LIFE 
My ethics not only permit me to claim but require m e to own kinship with not 
merely the ape but the horse and the sheep, the lio n and the leopard, the snake 
and the scorpion. (Not so need these kinsfolk regar d themselves.) The hard ethics 
which rule my life, and I hold ought to rule that o f every man and woman, imposes 
this unilateral obligation upon us. And it is so im posed because man alone is made 
in the image of God. That some of us do not recogni ze that status of ours, makes 
no difference, except that then we do not get the b enefit of the status, even as a 
lion brought up in the company of sheep may not kno w his own status and, 
therefore, does not receive its benefits; but it be longs to him nevertheless, and, 
the moment he realizes it, he begins to exercise hi s dominion over the sheep. But 
no sheep masquerading as a lion can ever attain the  leonine status. And, to prove 
the proposition, that man is made in the image of G od, it is surely unnecessary to 
show that all men admittedly exhibit that image in their own persons. It is enough 
to show that one man at least has done so. And, wil l it be denied that the great 
religious teachers of mankind have exhibited the im age of God in their own 
persons ? 
Young India , 8-7-'26 
 
I do not want to live at the cost of the life even of a snake. I should let him 
bite me to death rather than kill him. But it is li kely that if God puts me to that 
cruel test and permits a snake to assault me, I may  not have the courage to die, 
but that the beast in me may assert itself and I ma y seek to kill the snake in 
defending this perishable body. I admit that my bel ief has not become s6 incar-
nate in me as to warrant my stating emphatically th at I have shed all fear of 
snakes so as to befriend them as I would like to be  able to. It is my implicit belief 
that snakes, tigers, etc. are God's answer to the p oisonous, wicked, evil thoughts Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 113  we harbour. ... I believe that all life is one. Tho ughts take definite forms. Tigers 
and snakes have kinship with us. They are a warning  to us to avoid harbouring evil, 
wicked, lustful thoughts. If I want to rid the eart h of venomous beasts and 
reptiles, I must rid myself of all venomous thought s. I shall not do so if in my 
impatient ignorance and in my desire to prolong the  existence of the body I seek 
to kill the so-called venomous beasts and reptiles.  If in not seeking to defend 
myself against such noxious animals, I die, I shoul d rise again a better and fuller 
man. With that faith in me how should I seek to kil l a fellow being in a snake ? 
Young India,  14-4-'27 
 
We are living in the midst of death trying to grope  our way to Truth, Perhaps it 
is as well that we are beset with danger at every p oint in our life, for, in spite of 
our knowledge of the danger and of our precarious e xistence, our indifference to 
the source of all life is excelled only by our amaz ing arrogance. 
Young India,  7-7-'27 
 
 All life in the flesh exists by some Himsa. Hence the highest religion has been 
defined by a negative word Ahimsa. The world is bou nd in a chain of destruction. 
In other words Himsa is an inherent necessity for l ife in the body. That is why a 
votary of Ahimsa always prays for ultimate delivera nce from the bondage of the 
flesh. 
Young India,  4-10-'28 
 
 I am painfully aware of the fact that my desire to  continue life in the body 
involves me in constant Himsa. That is why I am bec oming growingly indifferent to 
this physical body of mine. For instance, I know th at in the act of respiration I Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 114  destroy innumerable invisible germs floating in the  air. But I do not stop 
breathing. The consumption of vegetables involves H imsa, but I find that I cannot 
give them up. Again, there is Himsa in the use of a ntiseptics, yet I cannot bring 
myself to discard the use of disinfectants like ker osene, etc. to rid myself of the 
mosquito pest and the like. I suffer snakes to be k illed in the Ashram when it is 
impossible to catch them and put them out of harm's  way. I even tolerate the use 
of the stick to drive the bullocks in the Ashram. T hus there is no end to Himsa 
which I directly and indirectly commit. If, as a re sult of this humble confession of 
mine, friends choose to give me up as lost, I would  be sorry, but nothing will in-
duce me to try to conceal my imperfections in the p ractice of Ahimsa. All I claim 
for myself is that I am ceaselessly trying to under stand the implications of great 
ideals like Ahimsa and to practise them in thought,  word and  deed and that not 
without a certain measure of success as I think. Bu t I know that I have a long 
distance yet to cover in this direction. 
Young India,  1-11-28 
 
I believe myself to be saturated with Ahimsa—nonvio lence. Ahimsa and Truth 
are as my two lungs. I cannot live without them. Bu t I see every moment, with 
more and more clearness, the immense power of Ahims a and the littleness of man. 
Even the forest dweller cannot be entirely free fro m violence, in spite of his 
limitless compassion. With every breath he commits a certain amount of violence. 
The body itself is a house of slaughter, and, there fore, Moksha and Eternal Bliss 
consist in perfect deliverance from the body, and t herefore, all pleasure, save the 
joy of Moksha, is evanescent, imperfect. That being  the case, we have to drink, in 
daily life, many a bitter draught of violence. 
Young India,  21-10-'26 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 115  I verily believe that man's habit of killing man on  the slightest pretext has 
darkened his reason and he gives himself liberties with - other life which he would 
shudder to take if he really believed that God was a God of Love and Mercy. 
Anyway though for fear of death I may kill tigers, snakes, fleas, mosquitoes and 
the like, I ever pray for illumination that will sh ed all fear of death and thus refu-
sing to take life know the better way, for : Taught  by the Power that pities me I 
learn to pity them. 
Harijan, 9-1-'37 
 
The Cow 
The cow is the purest type of sub-human life. She p leads before us on behalf 
of the whole of the sub-human species for justice t o it at the hands of man, the 
first among all that lives, She seems to speak to u s through her eye; You are not 
appointed over us to kill us and eat our flesh or o therwise ill-treat us, but to be 
our friend and guardian.' 
Young India , 26-6-'24 
 
It is for me a poem of pity. I worship it and I sha ll defend its worship against 
the whole world. 
Young India , 1-1-'25 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 116   
34. WHAT IS BRAHMACHARYA 
A friend asks : 'What is Brahmacharya ? Is it possi ble to practise it to 
perfection? If possible, do you do so ?' 
The full and proper meaning of Brahmacharya is sear ch of Brahman. Brahman 
pervades every being and can therefore be searched by diving into and realizing 
the inner self. This realization is impossible with out complete control of the 
senses. Brahmacharya thus means control in thought,  word and action of all the 
senses at all times and in all places. 
A man or woman completely practising Brahmacharya i s absolutely free from 
passion. Such a one therefore lives nigh unto God, is Godlike. 
I have no doubt that it is possible to practise suc h Brahmacharya in thought, 
word and action to the fullest extent. 
Young India , 5-6-'24 
 
The man, who is wedded to Truth and worships Truth alone, proves unfaithful 
to her, if he applies his talents to anything else.  How then can he minister to the 
senses? A man whose activities are wholly consecrat ed to the realization of Truth, 
which requires utter selflessness, can have no time  for the selfish purpose of 
begetting children and running a household. Realiza tion of Truth through self- 
gratification should, after what has been said befo re, appear a contradiction in 
terms. 
If we look at it from the standpoint of Ahimsa (non violence), we find that the 
fulfillment of Ahimsa is impossible without utter s elflessness. Ahimsa means 
universal love. If a man gives his love to one woma n, or a woman to one man, 
what is there left for all the world besides? It si mply means, "We two first, and the Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 117  devil take all the rest of them." As a faithful wif e must be prepared to sacrifice  
her all for the sake of her husband, and a faithful  husband for the sake of his wife, 
it is clear that such persons cannot rise to the he ight of universal love, or look 
upon all mankind as kith and kin. For they have cre ated a boundary wall round 
their love. The larger their family, the farther ar e they from universal love. Hence 
one who would obey the law of Ahimsa cannot marry, not to speak of gratification 
outside the marital bond. 
Then what about people who are already married? Wil l they never be able to 
realize Truth? Can they never offer up their all at  the altar of humanity ? There is 
a way out for them. They can behave as if they were  not married. Those who have 
enjoyed this happy condition will be able to bear m e out. Many have to my 
knowledge successfully tried the experiment. If the  married couple can think of 
each other as brother and sister, they are freed fo r universal service. The very 
thought that all women in the world are one's siste rs, mothers or daughters will at 
once ennoble a man and snap his chains. The husband  and wife do not lose 
anything here, but only add to their resources and even to their family. Their love 
becomes free from the impurity of lust and so grows  stronger. With the 
disappearance of this impurity, they can serve each  other better, and the 
occasions for quarrel become fewer. There are more occasions for quarrel, where 
the love is selfish and bounded. 
If the foregoing argument is appreciated, a conside ration of the physical 
benefits of chastity becomes a matter of secondary importance. How foolish it is 
intentionally to dissipate vital energy in sensual enjoyment! It is a grave misuse to 
fritter away for physical gratification that which is given to man and woman for 
the full development of their bodily and mental pow ers. Such misuse is the root 
cause of many a disease. 
Brahmacharya, like all other observances, must be o bserved in thought, word 
and deed. We are told in the Gita, and experience w ill corroborate the statement, Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 118  that the foolish man, who appears to control, his b ody but is nursing evil thoughts 
in his mind, makes a vain effort. It may be harmful  to suppress the body, if the 
mind is at the same time allowed to go astray. Wher e the mind wanders, the body 
must follow sooner or later. 
It is necessary here to appreciate a distinction. I t is one thing to allow the 
mind to harbour impure thoughts; it is a different thing altogether if it strays 
among them in spite of ourselves. Victory will be o urs in the end, if we non-co-
operate with the mind in its evil wanderings. 
We experience every moment of our lives that often while the body is subject 
to our control, the mind is not. This physical cont rol should never be relaxed, and 
in addition we must put forth a constant endeavour to bring the mind under 
control. We can do nothing more, nothing less. If w e give way to the  mind, the 
body and the mind will pull different ways, and we shall be false to ourselves. 
Body and mind may be said to go together, so long a s we continue to resist the 
approach of every evil thought. 
The observance of Brahmacharya has been believed to  be very difficult, almost 
impossible. In trying to find a reason for this bel ief, we see that the term 
Brahmacharya has been taken in a narrow sense. Mere  control of animal passion 
has been thought to be tantamount to observing Brah macharya. I feel that this 
conception is incomplete and wrong. Brahmacharya me ans control of all the 
organs of sense. He, who attempts to control only o ne organ and allows all the 
others free play, is bound to find his effort futil e. To hear suggestive stories with 
the ears, to see suggestive sights with the eyes, t o taste stimulating food with the 
tongue, to touch exiting things with the hands, and  then at the same time expect 
to control the only remaining organ, is like puttin g one's hands in a fire, and then 
expecting to escape being burnt. He, therefore, who  is resolved to control the one 
must be likewise determined to control the rest. I have always felt that much 
harm has been done by the narrow definition of Brah macharya. If we practise Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 119  simultaneous self-control in all directions, the at tempt will be scientific and 
possible of success. Perhaps the palate is the chie f sinner. That is why in the 
Ashram we have assigned to control of the palate a separate place among our 
observances. 
Let us remember the root meaning of Brahmacharya. C harya means course of 
conduct; Brahmacharya conduct adapted to the search  of Brahma, i.e. Truth. 
From this etymological meaning, arises the special meaning, viz., control of all the 
senses. "We must entirely forget the incomplete def inition which restricts itself to 
the sexual aspect only. 
From Yeravda Mandir , Chapter III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 120   
35. STEPS TO BRAHMACHARYA 
The first step is the realization of its necessity.  
The next is gradual control of the senses. A Brahma chari must needs control 
his palate. He must eat to live, and not for enjoym ent. He must see only clean 
things and close his eyes before anything unclean. It is thus a sign of polite 
breeding to walk with one's eyes towards the ground  and not wandering about 
from object to object. A Brahma- chari will likewis e hear nothing obscene or 
unclean, smell no strong, stimulating things. The s mell of clean earth is far 
sweeter than the fragrance of artificial scents and  essences. Let the aspirant to 
Brahmacharya also keep his hands and feet engaged i n all the waking hours in 
healthful activity. Let him also fast occasionally.  
The third step is to have clean companions—clean fr iends and clean books. 
The last and not the least is prayer. Let him repea t Ramanama with all his 
heart regularly everyday, and ask for divine grace.  
None of these things are difficult for an average m an or woman. They are 
simplicity itself. But their very simplicity is emb arrassing. Where there is a will, 
the way is simple enough. Men have not the will for  it and hence vainly grope. The 
fact that the world rests on the observance, more o r less, of Brahmacharya or 
restraint, means that it is necessary and practicab le. 
Young India, 29-4-'26 
 
Many aspirants after Brahmacharya fail, because in the use of their other 
senses they want to carry on as those who are not B rahmacharis. Their effort is 
therefore identical with the effort to experience t he bracing cold of winter in the 
scorching summer months. There should be a clear li ne between the life of a Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 121  Brahmachari and of one who is not. The resemblance that there is between the 
two is only apparent. The distinction ought to be c lear as daylight. Both use their 
eyesight, but whereas the Brahmachari uses it to se e the glories of God, the other 
uses it to see the frivolity around him. Both use t heir ears, but whereas the one 
hears nothing but praises of God, the other feasts his ears upon ribaldry. Both 
often keep late hours, but whereas the one devotes them to prayer, the other 
fritters them away in wild and wasteful mirth. Both  feed the inner man, but the 
one does so only to keep the temple of God in good repair, while the other gorges 
himself and makes the sacred vessel a stinking gutt er. Thus both live as the poles 
apart, and the distance between them will grow and not diminish with the passage 
of time. 
Brahmacharya means control of the senses in thought , word and deed. Every 
day I have been realizing more and more the necessi ty for restraints of the kind I 
have detailed above. There is no limit to the possi bilities of renunciation, even as 
there is none to those of Brahmacharya. Such Brahma charya is impossible of 
attainment by limited effort. For many, it must rem ain only as an ideal. An 
aspirant after Brahmacharya will always be consciou s of his shortcomings, will 
seek out the passions lingering in the innermost re cesses of his heart, and will 
incessantly strive to get rid of them. So long as t hought is not under complete 
control of the will, Brahmacharya in its fulness is  absent. Involuntary thought is an 
affection of the mind; and curbing of thought there fore means curbing of the mind 
which is even more difficult to curb than the wind.  Nevertheless the existence of 
God within makes even control of the mind possible.  Let no one think that it is 
impossible because it is difficult. It is the highe st goal, and it is no wonder that 
the highest effort should be necessary to attain it . 
But it was after coming to India that I realized th at such Brahmacharya was 
impossible to attain merely by human effort. Until then I had been labouring under 
the delusion that fruit diet alone would enable me to eradicate all passions, and I 
had flattered myself with the belief that I had not hing more to do. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 122  But I must not anticipate the chapter of my struggl es. Meanwhile let me make 
it clear that those who desire to observe Brahmacha rya with a view to realizing 
God need not despair, provided their faith in God i s equal to their confidence in 
their own effort: 
/glyph874वषया /glyph874व/glyph470नवत/glyph110/glyph220ते /glyph470नराहार/glyph233य दे/glyph466हनः। 
रसवज/glyph110 रसोऽ/glyph221य/glyph233य परं /glyph507/glyph232/glyph619वा /glyph470नवत/glyph110ते ॥ 
(The sense-objects turn away from an abstemious sou l, leaving the relish 
behind. The relish also disappears with the realiza tion of the Highest.) 
Therefore His name and His grace are the last resou rces of the aspirant after 
Moksha. This truth came to me only after my return to India. 
Autobiography (1948), pp. 258-60 
 
For me the observance of even bodily Brahmacharya h as been full of 
difficulties. Today I may say that I feel myself fa irly safe, but I have yet to achieve 
complete mastery over thought, which is so essentia l. Not that the will or effort is 
lacking, but it is yet a problem to me wherefrom un desirable thoughts spring their 
insidious invasions. I have no doubt that there is a key to lock out undesirable 
thoughts, but everyone has to find it out for himse lf. Saints and seers have left 
their experiences for us, but they have given us no  infallible and universal 
prescription. For perfection or freedom from error comes only from grace, and so 
seekers after God have left us Mantras, such as Ram a- nama, hallowed by their 
own austerities and charged with their purity. With out an unreserved surrender to 
His grace, complete mastery over thought is impossi ble. This is the teaching of 
every great book of religion, and I am realizing th e truth of it every moment of my 
striving after that perfect Brahmacharya.  
Autobiography (1948), p. 388 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 123   
I must confess that the observance of the law of co ntinence is impossible 
without a living faith in God which is living Truth . It is the fashion nowadays to 
dismiss God from life altogther and insist on the p ossibility of reaching the highest 
kind of life without the necessity of a living fait h in a living God. I must confess my 
inability to drive the truth of the law home to tho se who have no faith in and no 
need for a Power infinitely higher than themselves.  My own experience has led me 
to the knowledge that fullest life is impossible wi thout an immovable belief in a 
living law in obedience to which the whole universe  moves. A man without that 
faith is like a drop thrown out of the ocean bound to perish. Every drop in the 
ocean shares its majesty and has the honour of givi ng us the ozone of life. 
Harijan, 25-4-'36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 124   
36. MARRIAGE, A SACRAMENT 
Man is, undoubtedly, an artist and creator. Undoubt edly he must have -beauty 
and, therefore, colour. His artistic and creative n ature at its best taught him to 
discriminate, and to know that any conglomeration o f colours was no mark of 
beauty, nor every sense of enjoyment good in itself . His eye for art taught man to 
seek enjoyment in usefulness. Thus, he learnt at an  early stage of his evolution 
that he was to eat not for its own sake, as some of  us still do, but he should eat to 
enable him to live. At a later stage, he learnt fur ther that there was neither 
beauty nor joy in living for its own sake, but that  he must live to serve his fellow 
creatures and through them his Maker. Similarly, wh en he pondered over the 
phenomenon of the pleasurableness of sexual union, he discovered that like every 
other organ of sense this one of generation had its  use and abuse. And he saw that 
its true function, its right use, was to restrict i t to generation. Any other use he 
saw was ugly, and he saw further that it was fraugh t with very serious 
consequences, as well to the individual as to the r ace. 
Harijan, 4-4-'36 
 
Human society is a ceaseless growth, an unfoldment in terms of spirituality. If 
so, it must be based on ever increasing restraint u pon the demands of the flesh. 
Thus, marriage must be considered to be a sacrament  imposing discipline upon the 
partners, restricting them to the physical union on ly among themselves and for the 
purpose only of procreation when both the partners desire and are prepared for it. 
Young India , 16-9-'26 
 
There can be no two opinions about the necessity of  birth-control. But the only 
method handed down from ages past is self-control o r Brahmacharya. It is an Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 125  infallible sovereign remedy doing good to those who  practise it. And medical men 
will earn the gratitude of mankind, if instead of d evising artificial means of birth-
control they will find out the means of self-contro l. 
Young India , 12-3-'25 
 
Artificial methods are like putting a premium upon vice. They make man and 
woman reckless. And respectability that is being gi ven to the methods must hasten 
the dissolution of the restraints that public opini on puts upon one. Adoption of 
artificial methods must result in imbecility and ne rvous prostration. The remedy 
will be found to be worse than the disease. 
 Young India , 12-3-'25 
 
It is wrong and immortal to seek to escape the cons equences of one's acts. It is 
good for a person who overeats to have an ache and a fast. It is bad for him to 
indulge his appetite and then escape the consequenc e by taking tonics or other 
medicine. It is still worse for a person to indulge  in his animal passions and escape 
the consequences of his acts. Nature is relentless and will have full revenge for 
any such violation of her laws. Moral results can o nly be produced by moral 
restraints. All other restraints defeat the very pu rpose for which they are 
intended. 
Young India , 12-3-'25 
 
The world depends for its existence on the act of g eneration, and as the world 
is the playground of God and a reflection of His gl ory, the act of generation should 
be controlled for the ordered growth of the world. 
Autobiography  (1948), p. 251 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 126   
Sex urge is a fine and noble thing. There is nothin g to be ashamed of in it. But 
it is meant only for the act of creation. Any other  use of it is a sin against God and 
humanity. 
Harijan, 28-3-'46 
 
It is a sin to bring forth unwanted children, but I  think it is a greater sin to 
avoid the consequences of one's own action. It simp ly unmans man. 
 Harijan, 7-9-'35 
 
Man must choose either of the two courses, the upwa rd or the downward; but 
as he has the brute in him, he will more easily cho ose the downward course than 
the upward, especially when the downward course is presented to him in a 
beautiful garb. Man easily capitulates when sin is presented in the garb of virtue, 
and that is what Marie Stopes and others are doing.  
Harijan, 31-1-'35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 127   
37. GOSPEL OF NON-POSSESSION 
A seeker after Truth, a follower of the Law of Love , cannot hold anything 
against tomorrow. God never provides for the morrow . He never creates more 
than what is strictly needed from day to day. If, t herefore, we repose faith in His 
Providence, we should rest assured that he will giv e us every day our daily bread, 
meaning everything that we require. . . Our ignoran ce or negligence of the Divine 
Law, which gives to man from day to day his daily b read and no more, has given 
rise to inequalities with all the miseries attendan t upon them. The rich have a 
superfluous store of things which they do not need and which are, therefore, 
neglected and wasted; while millions starve and are  froze 1 to death for want of 
them. If each retained possession only of what he n eeded, no one would be in 
want and all would live in contentment. As it is, t he rich are discontented no less 
than the poor. The poor man would fain become a mil lionaire and the millionaire a 
multi millionaire. The poor are often not satisfied  when they get just enough to 
fill their stomaches; but they are clearly entitled  to it and society should make it a 
point to see that, they get it. The rich must take an initiative in the matter with a 
view to a universal diffusion of the spirit of cont entment. If only they keep their 
own property within moderate limits the poor will b e easily fed; and will learn the 
lesson of contentment along with the rich. Perfect fulfillment of the ideal of non-
possession requires that man should, like the birds , have no roof over his head, no 
clothing and no stock of food for the morrow. He wi ll, indeed, need his daily 
bread, but it will be God's business, and not his t o provide for it. Only a very few 
rare soul can attain, this ideal, however. We ordin ary seekers can only keep it 
constantly in view, and in the light thereof, criti cally examine our property and 
try to reduce it every day. Civilization in the rea l sense of the term consists hot in 
the multiplication but in the deliberate and volunt ary reduction of wants, which 
promotes real happiness and contentment and increas es the capacity for service. 
One can reduce one's wants by perseverance, and the  reduction of wants makes Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 128  for happiness—a healthy body and a peaceful mind. F rom the standpoint of pure 
truth, the body too is property acquired by the sou l. By means of a desire for 
enjoyment we have created and continue to maintain this encumbrance in the 
shape of the body. When this desires vanishes there  remains no further need for 
the body, and man is free from the vicious cycle of  births and deaths. The soul is 
omnipresent; why should she care to be confined wit hin the cage like body, or do 
evil and even kill for the sake of the cage? We thu s arrive at the ideal of total 
renunciation and learn to use the body for the purp oses of service so long as it 
exists, so much so that service and no bread become s with us the staff of life. We 
eat and drink, sleep and awake for service alone. T his brings us real happiness, 
and the beatific vision in the fullness of time. Le t us all examine our possession 
from this standpoint. 
We should remember that non-possession is a princip le applicable to thoughts 
as well as to things. One who fills his brain with useless knowledge violates that 
inestimable principle. Thoughts which turn us away from God or do not turn us 
towards Him constitute impediments which one must s oon get rid of. In this 
connection we may consider the definition of knowle dge contained in the 13th 
Chapter of the Gita. We are there told that humilit y etc., constitute knowledge, 
and all the rest is ignorance. If this is true and there is no doubt that it is true 
much that we hug today is knowledge is ignorance pu re and simple and, therefore, 
only does us harm instead of conferring any benefit . It makes the mind wander 
and even reduces it to a vacuity, and discontent fl ourishes in endless ramifications 
of evil. Needless to say, this is not a plea for in ertia. Every moment of our lives 
should be filled with activity, but that activity s hould be Sattvika tending to truth. 
One who has concecrated his life to service cannot be idle for a single moment. 
But one has to learn to distinguish between good ac tivity and evil activity. This 
discernment goes naturally with a single-minded dev otion to service. 
From Yeravda Mandir , Chapter VI Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 129   
Therefore, renounce all and dedicate it to God and then 1ive. The right of 
living is thus derived from renunciation. it does n ot say, 'When all do their part of 
the work I too will do it.' It says, 'Don't bother about others, do your job first, and 
leave the rest to Him.' 
Harijan, 6-3-'37 
 
Jesus, Muhammad, Buddha, Nanak, Kabir, Chaitanya, S hankara, Dayananda, 
Ramakrishna were men who exercised an immense influ ence over and moulded the 
character of* thousands of men. The world is the ri cher for their having lived in it. 
And they were all men who deliberately embraced pov erty as their lot. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahattna Gandhi , (1933), p. 353  
 
The golden rule... is resolutely to refuse to have what millions cannot. This 
ability to refuse will not descend upon us all of a  sudden. The first thing is to 
cultivate the mental attitude that will not have po ssessions or facilities denied to 
millions, and the next immediate thing is to re-arr ange our lives as fast as possible 
in accordance with that mentality. 
Young India, 24-6-'26 
 
If we will take care of today, God will take care o f tomorrow.  
Young India,  13-10-21 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 130   
38. WORK AS WORSHIP 
'Brahma created His people with the duty of sacrifi ce laid upon them, and said: 
"By this do you flourish. Let it be the fulfiller o f all your desires." 'Be who eats 
without performing this sacrifice, eats stolen brea d.'—thus says the Gita. 'Earn thy 
bread by the sweat of thy brow,' says the Bible. Sa crifices may be of many kinds. 
One of them may well be bread labour. If all labour ed for their bread and no 
more, then there would be enough food and enough le isure for all. Then there 
would be no cry of over-population, no disease, and  no such misery as we see 
around. Such labour will be the highest form of sac rifice. Men will no doubt do 
many other things, either through their bodies or t hrough their minds, but all this 
will be labour of love, for the common good. There will then be no rich and no 
poor, none high and none low, no touchable and no u ntouchable.  
Harijan,  29-6-'35 
 
This may be an unattainable ideal. But we need not,  therefore, cease to strive 
for it. Even if, without fulfilling the whole law o f sacrifice, that is, the law of our 
being, we performed physical labour enough for our daily bread, we should go a 
long way towards the ideal. 
Harijan,  29-6-'35 
 
If we did so, our wants would be minimized, our foo d would be simple. We 
should then eat to live, not live to eat. Let anyon e who doubts the accuracy of 
this proposition try to sweat for his bread, he wil l derive the greatest relish from 
the productions of his labour, improve his health, and discover that many things 
he took were superfluities. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 131  Harijan,  29-6-'35 
 
May not men earn their bread by intellectual labour ? No. The needs of the 
body must be supplied by the body. 'Render unto Cae sar that which is Caesar's' 
perhaps applies here as well. Mere mental, that is,  intellectual labour is for the 
soul and is its own satisfaction. It should never d emand payment. In the ideal 
State, doctors, lawyers and the like will work sole ly for the benefit of society, not 
for self. 
Obedience to the law of bread labour will bring abo ut a silent revolution in the 
structure of society. Men's triumph will consist in  substituting the struggle for exis-
tence by the struggle for mutual service. The law o f the brute will be replaced by 
the law of man. 
Harijan, 29-6-'35 
 
Return to the villages means a definite voluntary r ecognition of the duty of 
bread labour and all it connotes. 
Harijan, 29-6-'35 
 
God of Himself seeks for His seat the heart of him who serves his fellowmen. 
Such was Abu Ben Adhem. He served his fellowmen and  therefore his name topped 
the list of those who served God. 
Young India,  24-9-'25 
 
 But who are the suffering and the woe-begone? The suppressed and the 
poverty-stricken. He who would be a bhakta,  therefore, must serve these by Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 132  body, soul and mind. He who does not even condescen d to exert his body to the 
extent of spinning for the sake of the poor and tro ts out lame excuses does not 
know the meaning of service. He who spins before th e poor inviting them to do 
likewise serves God as no one else does. "He who gi ves me even a trifle as a fruit 
or a flower or even a leaf in the spirit of bhakti is my servant", says the Lord in the 
Bhagavadgita. And He hath His footstool where live "the humble, the lowliest and 
lost". Spinning, therefore, for such is the greates t prayer, the greatest worship, 
the greatest sacrifice. 
Young India,  24-9-'25 
 
Q: Would it not be better for a man to give the tim e he spends on the worship 
of God to the service of the poor? And should not t rue service make devotional 
worship unnecessary for such a man ? 
A: I sense mental laziness as also agnosticisrf1 question. The biggest of 
Karmayogis never give up devotional songs or worshi p. Idealistically it may be that 
true service of others is itself worship and that s uc'^ devotees do not need to 
spend any time in songs, etc. As f- matter of fact,  Bhajans, etc. are a help to true 
service and keep the remembrance of God fresh in th e heart of the devotee.  
Harijan,  13-10-'46 
 
No work that is done in His name and dedicated to H im is small. All work when 
so done assumes equal merit. A scavenger who works in His service shares equal 
distinction with a king who uses his gifts in His n ame and as a mere trustee. 
Young India , 25-11-'26 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 133  I cannot imagine anything nobler or more national t han that for, say, one hour 
in the day, we should do the labour that the poor m ust do, and thus identify 
ourselves with them and through them with all manki nd. I cannot imagine better 
worship of God than that m His name I should labour  for the poor even as they do. 
Young India , 20-10-'21 
 
There can never be too' much emphasis placed on wor k. I am simply repeating 
the gospel taught by the Gita where the Lord says, 'If I did not remain ever at work 
sleeplessly, I should set a wrong example to mankin d.' 
Harijan, 2-10-'35 
 
We should be ashamed of resting or having a square meal so long as there is 
one able-bodied man or woman without work or food.  
Young India , 6-I0-'21 
 
Service is not possible unless it is rooted in love  or Ahimsa. True love is 
boundless like the ocean and rising and swelling wi thin one spreads itself out and 
crossing all boundaries and frontiers envelops the whole world. This service is 
again impossible without bread labour, otherwise de scribed in the Gita as Yajna. It 
is only when a man or woman has done bodily labour for the sake of service that 
he or she has the right to live. 
Young India , 20-9-'28 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 134   
39. SARVODAYA 
This body. . . has been given to us only in order t hat we may serve all Creation 
with it. And, therefore, says the Gita, he who eats  without offering Yajna eats 
stolen food. Every single act of one who would lead  a life of purity should be in 
the nature of Yajna*. Yajna having come to us with our birth, we are debtors all 
our lives, and thus for ever bound to serve the uni verse. And even as bondslave 
receives food, clothing and so on from the master w hom he serves, so should we 
gratefully accept such gifts as may be assigned to us by the Lord of the universe. 
What we receive must be called a gift; for as debto rs we are entitled to no 
consideration for the discharge of our obligations.  
Therefore we may not blame the Master, if we fail t o get it. Our body is His to 
be cherished or cast away according to His will. Th is is not a matter for complaint 
or even pity; on the contrary, it is a natural and even a pleasant and desirable 
state, if only we realize our proper place in God's  scheme. We do indeed need 
strong faith, if we would experience this supreme b liss. "Do not worry in the least 
about yourself, leave all worry to God,"... this ap pears to be the commandment in 
all religions. 
This need not frighten any one. He who devotes hims elf to service with a clear 
conscience will day by day grasp the necessity for it in greater measure, and will 
continually grow richer in faith. The path of servi ce can hardly be trodden by one, 
who is not prepared to renounce self- interest, and  to recognize the conditions of 
his birth. Consciously or unconsciously every one o f us does render some service or 
other. If we cultivate this habit of doing this ser vice deliberately, our desire for 
service will steadily grow stronger, and will make not only for our own happiness 
but that of the world at large. 
From Yervada Mandir,  Chapter XIV Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 135   
A votary of Ahimsa cannot subscribe to the utilitar ian formula (of the greatest 
good of the greatest number). He will strive for th e greatest good of all and die in 
the attempt to realize the ideal. He will, therefor e, be willing to die, so that the 
others may live. He will serve himself with the res t, by himself dying. The greatest 
good of all inevitably includes the good of the gre atest number, and therefore, he 
and the utilitarian will converge in many points in  their career but there does 
come a time when they must part company, and even w ork in opposite directions. 
The utilitarian to be logical will never sacrifice himself. 
Young India , 9-12-'26 
 
I do not believe .., that an individual may gain spiritu ally and those who 
surround him suffer. I believe in Advaita. I believ e in the essential unity of man 
and, for that matter, of all that lives. Therefore,  I believe that if one man gains 
spiritually, the whole world gains with him and, if  one man falls, the whole world 
falls to that extent. 
Young India , 4-12-'24 
 
There is not a single virtue which aims at, or is c ontent with, the welfare of 
the individual alone. Conversely, there is not a si ngle offence which does not, 
directly or indirectly, affect many others besides the actual offender. Hence, 
whether an individual is good or bad is not merely his own concern, but really the 
concern of the whole community, nay, of the whole w orld. 
Ethical Religion  (1927), p. 55 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 136  A life of service must be one of humility. He, who would sacrifice his life for 
others, has hardly time to reserve for himself a pl ace in the sun. Inertia must not 
be mistaken for humility, as it has been in Hinduis m. True humility means most 
strenuous and constant endeavour entirely directed to the service of humanity. 
God is continuously in action without resting for a  single moment. If we would 
serve Him or become one with Him, our activity must  be as unwearied as His. 
From Yeravda Mandir , Chapter XII 
 
There may be momentary rest in store for the drop w hich is separated from 
the ocean, but not for the drop in the ocean, which  knows no rest. The same is 
the case with ourselves. As soon as we become one w ith the ocean in the shape of 
God, there is no more rest for us, nor indeed do we  need rest any longer. Our very 
sleep is action. For we sleep with the thought of G od in our hearts. This 
restlessness constitutes true rest. This never-ceas ing agitation Therefore we may 
not blame the Master, if we fail to get it. Our bod y is His to be cherished or cast 
away according to His will. This is not a matter fo r complaint or even pity; on the 
contrary, it is a natural and even a pleasant and d esirable state, if only we realize 
our proper place in God's scheme. We do indeed need  strong faith, if we would 
experience this supreme bliss. "Do not worry in the  least about yourself, leave all 
worry to God," ... this appears to be the commandme nt in all religions. 
This need not frighten any one. He who devotes hims elf to service with a clear 
conscience will day by day grasp the necessity for it in greater measure, and will 
continually grow richer in faith. The path of servi ce can hardly be trodden by one, 
who is not prepared to renounce self- interest, and  to recognize the conditions of 
his birth. Consciously or unconsciously every one o f us does render some service or 
other. If we cultivate this habit of doing this ser vice deliberately, our desire for 
service will steadily grow stronger, and will make not only for our own happiness 
but that of the world at large. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 137  From Yeravda Mandir , Chapter XIV 
 
A votary of Ahimsa cannot subscribe to the utilitar ian formula (of the greatest 
good of the greatest number). He will strive for th e greatest good of all and die in 
the attempt to realize the ideal. He will, therefor e, be willing to die, so that the 
others may live. He will serve himself with the res t, by himself dying. The greatest 
good of all inevitably includes the good of the gre atest number, and therefore, he 
and the utilitarian will converge in many points in  their career but there does 
come a time when they must part company, and even w ork in opposite directions. 
The utilitarian to be logical will never sacrifice himself. 
Young India , 9-12-'26 
 
I do not believe that an individual may gain spirit ually and those whose 
surround him suffer. I believe in Advaita. I believ e in the essential unity of man 
and, for that matter, of all that lives. Therefore,  I believe that if one man gains 
spiritually, the whole world falls to that extent. 
Young India, 4-12-24 
 
There is not a single virtue which aims at, or is c ontent with, the welfare of 
the individual alone. Conversely there is not a sin gle offence which does not, 
directly or indirectly, affect many others besides the actual offender. Hence, 
whether an individual is good or bad is not merely his own concern, but really the 
concern of the whole community, nay, of the whole w orld. 
Ethical Religion  (1927), p. 55 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 138  A life of service must be one of humility. He, who would sacrifice his life for 
others, has hardly time to reserve for himself a pl ace in the sun. Intertia must not 
be mistaken for humility, as it has been in Hinduis m. True humility means most 
strenuous and constant endeavour entirely directed to the service of humanity. 
God is continuously in action without resting for a  single moment. If we would 
serve Him or become one with Him, our activity must  be as unwearied as His. 
From Yeravda Mandir , Chapter XII 
 
There may momentary rest in store for the drop whic h is separated from the 
ocean, but not for the drop in the ocean, which kno ws no rest. The same is the 
case with ourselves. As soon As we become one with the ocean in the shape of 
God, there is no more rest for us, nor indeed do we  need rest any longer. Our very 
sleep is action. For we sleep with the thought of g od in our hearts. This 
restlessness constitutes true rest. This never ceas ing agitation holds the key to 
peace ineffable. This supreme state of total surren der is difficult to describe, but 
not beyond the bounds of human experience. It has b een attained by many 
dedicated souls, and may be attained by ourselves a s well. 
From Yeravda Mandir , Ch. XII 
 
What Yajna means has been explained by Gandhiji in an earlier paragraph. He 
says: "Yajna means an act directed to the welfare o f others, done without desiring 
any return for it, whether of a temporal or spiritu al nature. 'Act' here must be 
taken in its widest sense, and includes thought and  word, as well as deed. 'Others' 
embraces not only humanity, but all life. Therefore , and from the standpoint of 
Ahimsa it is not a Yajna to sacrifice lower animals  even with a view to the service 
of humanity." 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 139   
40. ETHICS OF THE ATOM BOMB 
It has been suggested by American friends that the atom bomb will bring in 
Ahimsa as nothing else can. It will, if it is meant  that its destructive power will so 
disgust the world that it will turn it away from vi olence for the time being. This is 
very like a man glutting himself with dainties to t he point of nausea and turning 
away from them only to return with redoubled zeal a fter the effect of nausea is 
well over. Precisely in the same manner will the wo rld return to violence with 
renewed zeal after the effect of disgust is worn ou t. 
Often does good come out of evil. But that is God's , not man's plan. Man 
knows that only evil can come out of evil, as good out of good. 
That atomic energy, though harnessed by American sc ientists and army men 
for destructive purposes, may be utilized by other scientists for humanitarian 
purposes is undoubtedly within the realm of possibi lity. But that is not what was 
meant by my American friends. They were not so simp le as to put a question 
which connoted an obvious truth. An incendiary uses  fire for his destructive and 
nefarious purpose, a housewife makes daily use of i t in preparing nourishing food 
for mankind. 
So far as I can see, the atomic bomb has deadened t he finest feeling that has 
sustained mankind for ages. There used to be the so -called laws of war which 
made it tolerable. Now we know the naked truth. War  knows no law except that 
of might. The atom bomb brought an empty victory to  the Allied arms but it 
resulted for the time being in destroying the soul of Japan. What has happened to 
the soul of the destroying nation is yet too early to see. Forces of Nature act in a 
mysterious manner. We can but solve the mystery by deducing the unknown result 
from the known results of similar events. A slaveho lder cannot hold a slave 
without putting himself or his deputy in the cage h olding the slave. Let no one run 
away with the idea that I wish to put in a defence of Japanese misdeeds in Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 140  pursuance of Japan's unworthy ambition. The differe nce was only one of degree. I 
assume that Japan's greed was more unworthy. But th e greater unworthiness 
conferred no right on the less unworthy of destroyi ng without mercy men, women 
and children of Japan in a particular area. 
The moral to be legitimately drawn from the supreme  tragedy of the bomb is 
that it will not be destroyed by counter-bombs even  as violence cannot be by 
counter- violence. Mankind has to get out of violen ce only through non-violence. 
Hatred can be overcome only by love. Counter-hatred  only increases the surface 
as well as the depth of hatred. I am aware that I a m repeating what I have many 
times stated before and practised to the best of my  ability and capacity. What I 
first stated was itself nothing new. It was as old as the hills. Only I recited no 
copy-book maxim but definitely announced what I bel ieved in every fiber of my 
being. Sixty years of practice in various walks of life has only enriched the belief 
which experience of friends has fortified. It is, h owever, the central truth by 
which one can stand alone without flinching. I beli eve in what Max Muller said 
years ago, namely, that truth needed to be repeated  as long as there were men 
who disbelieved it. 
Harijan, 7-7-'46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 141   
41. PEACE ON EARTH 
It is my firm opinion that Europe today represents not the spirit of God or 
Christianity but the spirit of Satan. And Satan's s uccesses are the greatest when 
he appears with the name of God on his lips. Europe  is today only nominally 
Christian. It is really worshipping Mammon. It is e asier for a camel to pass through 
the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter th e Kingdom.' Thus really spoke 
Jesus Christ. His so-called followers measure their  moral progress by their 
material possessions. 
Young India,  8-9-'20 
 
By all means drink deep of the fountains that are g iven to you in the Sermon 
on the Mount, but then you will have to take sackcl oth and ashes. The teaching of 
the Sermon was meant for each and every one of us. You cannot serve both God 
and Mammon. God the Compassionate and the Merciful,  Tolerance incarnate, 
allows Mammon to have his nine days' wonder. But I say to you ... fly from that 
self-destroying but destructive show of Mammon. 
Young India,  8-12-'27 
 
A time is coming when those, who are in the mad rus h today of multiplying 
their wants, vainly thinking that they add to the r eal substance, real knowledge of 
the world, will retrace their steps and say: 'What have we done?' Civilizations have 
come and gone, and in spite of all our vaunted prog ress I am tempted to ask again 
and again 'To what purpose ?' Wallace, a contempora ry of Darwin, has said the 
same thing. Fifty years of brilliant inventions and  discoveries, he has said, have 
not added one inch to the moral height of mankind. So said a dreamer and Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 142  visionary if you will—Tolstoy. So said Jesus, and B uddha, and Muhammad, whose 
religion is being denied and falsified in my own co untry today. 
Young India , 8-12-'27 
 
Not to believe in the possibility of permanent peac e is to disbelieve in the 
Godliness of human nature. Methods hitherto adopted  have failed because rock-
bottom sincerity on the part of those who have stri ven has been lacking. Not that 
they have realized this lack. Peace is unattained b y part performance of 
conditions, even as a chemical combination is impos sible without complete 
fulfillment of the conditions of attainment thereof . If the recognized leaders of 
mankind who have control over the engines of destru ction were wholly to 
renounce their use, with full knowledge of its impl ications, permanent peace can 
be obtained. This is clearly impossible without the  great powers of the earth 
renouncing their imperialistic design. This again s eems impossible without great 
nations ceasing to believe in soul- destroying comp etition and to desire to 
multiply wants and, therefore, increase their mater ial possessions. It is my con-
viction that the root of the evil is want of a livi ng faith in a living God. It is a first-
class human tragedy that peoples of the earth who c laim to believe in the 
message of Jesus whom they describe as the Prince o f Peace show little of that 
belief in actual practice. It is painful to see sin cere Christian divines limiting the 
scope of Jesus' message, to select individuals. I h ave been taught from my 
childhood and tested the truth by experience that t he primary virtues of mankind 
are possible of cultivation by the me&iest of the h uman species. It is this 
undoubted universal possibility that distinguishes the humans from the rest of 
God's creation. If even one nation were uncondition ally to perform the supreme 
act of renunciation, many of us would see in our li fetime visible peace established 
on earth. 
Harijan, 18-6-'38 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 143   
If the best minds of the world have not imbibed the  spirit of non-violence, 
they would have to meet gangsterism in the orthodox  way. But that would only 
show that we have not gone far beyond the law of th e jungle, that we have not 
yet learnt to appreciate the heritage that God has given us, that, in spite of the 
teaching of Christianity which is 1,900 years old a nd of Hinduism and Buddhism 
which are older, and even of Islam, we have not mad e much headway as human 
beings. But whilst I would understand the use of fo rce by those who have not the 
spirit of nonviolence in them I would have those wh o know non-violence to throw 
their whole weight in demonstrating that even gangs terism has to be met with 
non-violence. 
Harijan, 10-12-'38 
 
Brute force has been the ruling factor in the world  for thousands of years, and 
mankind has been reaping its bitter harvest all alo ng, as he who runs may read. 
There is little hope of anything good coming out of  it in the future. If light came 
out of darkness, then alone can love emerge from ha tred. 
Satyagraha in South Africa , p. 289 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 144   
42 OBITER DICTA 
Death 
Why should we be upset when children or young men o r old men die? Not a 
moment passes when someone is not born or is not de ad in this world. We should 
feel the stupidity of rejoicing in a birth and lame nting a death. Those who believe 
in the soul—and what Hindu, Mussalman or Parsee is there who does not?—know 
that the soul never dies. The souls of the living a s well as of the dead are all one. 
The eternal processes of creation and destruction a re going on ceaselessly. There 
is nothing in it for which we might give ourselves up to joy or sorrow. Even if we 
extend the idea of relationship only to our country men and take all the births in 
the country as taking place in our family, how many  births shall we celebrate? If 
we weep for all the deaths in our country, the tear s in our eyes would never dry. 
This train of thought should help us to get rid of all fear of death.  
Young India , 13-10-'21 
 
Birth and death are not two different states, but t hey are different aspects of 
the same state. There is as little reason to deplor e the one as there is to be 
pleased over the other. 
Young India , 20-11-'24 
 
Immortality 
I believe in the immortality of the soul. I would l ike to give you the analogy of 
the ocean. The ocean is composed of drops of water,  each drop is an entity and 
yet it is part of the whole, 'the one and the many' . In this ocean of life we are all 
little drops. My doctrine means that I must identif y myself with life, with Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 145  everything that lives, that I must share the majest y of life in the presence of God. 
The sum total of this life is God. 
India's Case for Swaraj  (1932), p. 245 
 
Insurance 
I had thought that life insurance implied fear and want of faith in God. .. In 
getting my life insured I had robbed my wife and ch ildren of their self-reliance. 
Why should they be not expected to take care of the mselves? What happened to 
the families of the numberless poor in the world? W hy should I not count myself as 
one of them? What reason had I to assume that death  would claim me earlier than 
the others? After all the real protector was neithe r I nor my brother but God 
Almighty. 
Autobiography  (1948), pp. 320-21 
 
Means and Ends 
They say, 'means are after all means.' I would say,  'means are after all 
everything.' As the means so the end. There is no w all of separation between the 
means and the end. Indeed the Creator has given us control (and that too very 
limited) over means, none over the end. Realization  of the goal is in exact 
proportion to that of the means. This is a proposit ion that admits of no exception. 
Young India , 17-7-'24 
 
Politics 
To see the universal and all-pervading spirit of Tr uth face to face one must be 
able to love the meanest of creation as oneself. An d a man who aspires after that 
cannot afford to keep out of any field of life. Tha t is why my devotion to Truth Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 146  has drawn me into the field of politics; and I can say without the slightest 
hesitation, and yet in all humility, that those who  say that religion has nothing to 
do with politics do not know what religion means. 
Autobiography  (1948), p. 615 
 
For me, politics bereft of religion are absolute di rt, ever to be shunned. 
Politics concern nations and that which concerns th e welfare of nations must be 
one of the concerns of a man who is religiously inc lined, in other words a seeker 
after God and Truth. For me God and Truth are conve rtible terms, and if anyone 
told me that God was a God of untruth or a God of t orture I would decline to 
worship Him. Therefore, in politics also we have to  establish the Kingdom of 
Heaven. 
Young India, 18-6-'25 
 
I could not be leading a religious life unless I id entified myself with the whole 
of mankind, and that I could not do unless I took p art in politics. The whole gamut 
of man's activities today constitutes an indivisibl e whole. You cannot divide 
social, economic, political and purely religious wo rk into watertight 
compartments. I do not know any religion apart from  human activity. It provides a 
moral basis to all other activities which they woul d otherwise lack, reducing life 
to a maze of 'sound and fury signifying nothing'. 
Harijan, 24-12-'38 
 
Predestination  
Q : Are the time, place and manner of death predest ined by the Almighty for 
each individual? If so, why worry even if we are il l? Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 147  A: I do not know whether time, place and the manner o f death are 
predestined. All I do know is that 'not a blade of grass moves but by His will'. This 
too I know hazily. What is hazy today will be clear  tomorrow or the day after by 
prayerful waiting. Let this however be quite clear.  The Almighty is not a person 
like us. He or It is the greatest living Force or L aw in the world. Accordingly He 
does not act by caprice, nor does that Law admit of  any amendment or 
improvement. His will is fixed and changeless, ever ything else changes every 
second. Surely, it does not follow from the doctrin e of predestination that we 
may not 'worry' in the care of ourselves even if we  are ill. Indifference to illness is 
a crime greater than that of falling ill. There is no end to the effort to do better 
today than yesterday. We have to 'worry' and find o ut why we are or have become 
ill. Health, not 'illth', is the law of nature. Let  us investigate the law of nature and 
obey it, if we will not be ill or, if having fallen  ill, will be restored. 
Harijan, 28-7-'46 
 
Progress 
Evolution is always experimental. All progress is g ained through mistakes and 
their rectification. No good comes fully fashioned,  out of God's hand, but has to 
be carved out through repeated experiments and repe ated failures by ourselves. 
This is the law of individual growth. The same law controls social and political 
evolution also. The right to err, which means the f reedom to try experiments, is 
the universal condition of all progress. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi  (1933), p. 245  
 
The nations have progressed both by evolution and r evolution. The one is as 
necessary as the other. Death, which is an eternal verity, is revolution as birth 
and after is slow and steady evolution. Death is as  necessary for man's growth as 
life itself. God is the greatest revolutionary the world has ever known or will Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 148  know. He sends storms where a moment ago there was calm. He levels down 
mountains which He builds with exquisite care and i nfinite patience. I do watch 
the sky and it fills me with awe and wonder. In the  serene blue sky, both of India 
and England, I have seen clouds gathering and burst ing with a fury which has 
struck me dumb. History is more a record of wonderf ul revolutions than the so-
called ordered progress. . . . 
Young India , 2-2-'22 
 
Rebirth 
I am a believer in previous births and rebirths. Al l our relationships are the 
result of the Sanskaras we carry from previous birt hs. God's laws are inscrutable 
and are the subject of endless search. No one will fathom them. 
Harijan, 18-8-'40 
 
Religious Education 
I do not believe that the State can concern itself or cope with religious 
instruction. I believe that religious education mus t be the sole concern of 
religious associations. Do not mix up religion and ethics. I believe that 
fundamental ethics is common to all religions. Teac hing of fundamental ethics is 
undoubtedly a function of the State. By religion I have not in mind fundamental 
ethics but what goes by the name of denominationali sm. We have suffered enough 
from State-aided religion and a State- church. A so ciety or group, which depends 
partly or wholly on State aid for the existence of its religion, does not deserve or, 
better still, does not have any religion worth the name. I do not need to give any 
illustrations in support of this obvious truth as i t is to me. 
Harijan,  31-8-'47 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 149  Religious Ideal 
...The very virtue of a religious ideal lies in the  fact that it cannot be 
completely realized in the flesh. For a religious i deal must be proved by faith, and 
how can faith have play if perfection could be atta ined by the spirit while it was 
still surrounded by its 'earthly vesture of decay'?  Where would there be scope for 
its infinite expansion which is its essential chara cteristic? Where would be room 
for that constant striving, that ceaseless quest af ter the ideal that is the basis of 
all spiritual progress, if mortals could reach the perfect state while still in the 
body ? If such easy perfection in the body was poss ible, all we would have to do 
would be simply to follow a cut and dry model. Simi larly if a perfect code of 
conduct were possible for all there would be no roo m for a diversity of faiths and 
religions because there would be only one standard religion which everybody 
would have to follow. 
Young India , 22-11-'28 
 
The virtue of an ideal consists in its boundlessnes s. But although religious 
ideals must thus, from their nature, remain unattai nable by imperfect human 
beings, although by virtue of their boundlessness t hey may seem ever to recede 
further away from us, the nearer we go to them, sti ll they are closer to us than 
our very hands and feet because we are more certain  of their reality and truth 
than even of our own physical being. This faith in one's ideals alone constitutes 
true life, in fact, it is man's all in all. 
Young India , 22-11-'28 
 
Rights 
The true source of rights is duty. If we all discha rge our duties, rights will not 
be far to seek. If leaving duties unperformed we ru n after rights, they will escape Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 150  us like a will-o'-the-wisp. The more we pursue them , the farther will they fly. The 
same teaching has been embodied by Krishna in the i mmortal words: 'Action alone 
is thine. Leave thou the fruit severely alone.' Act ion is duty; fruit is the right. 
Young India , 8-1-'25 
 
Secrecy 
I have come to regard secrecy as a sin.... If we re alized the presence of God 
as witness to all we say and do, we would not have anything to conceal from 
anybody on earth. For we would not think unclean th oughts before our Maker, 
much less speak them. It is uncleanness that seeks secrecy and darkness. The 
tendency of human nature is to hide dirt; we do not  want to see or touch dirty 
things; we want to put them out of sight. And so mu st it be with our speech. I 
would suggest that we should avoid even thinking th oughts we would hide from 
the world. 
Young India , 22-12-'20 
 
Sin 
I do not seek redemption from the consequences of m y sin; I seek to be 
redeemed from sin itself or rather from the very th ought of sin. Until I have 
attained that end I shall be content to be restless . 
Mahatma Gandhi's Ideas  (1930), p. 70 
 
A sinner is equal to the saint in the eye of God. B oth will have equal justice, 
and both an equal opportunity either to go forward or to go backward. Both are 
His children, His creation. A saint who considers h imself superior to a sinner 
forfeits his sainthood and becomes worse than the s inner, who, unlike the proud 
saint, knows not what he is doing.  Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 151  Harijan,  14-10-'33 
 
I have made the frankest admission of my many sins.  But I do not carry their 
burden on my shoulders. If I am journeying Godward,  as I feel I am, it is safe with 
me. For I feel the warmth of the sunshine of His pr esence. My austerities, fastings 
and prayers are, I know, of no value, if I rely upo n them for reforming me. But 
they have an inestimable value, if they represent, as I hope they do, the 
yearnings of a soul striving to lay his weary head in the lap of his Maker. 
Harijan,  18-4-'36 
 
Spiritualism 
I never receive communications from the spirits of the dead. I have no 
evidence warranting a disbelief in the possibility of such communications. But I do 
strongly disapprove of the practice of holding or a ttempting to hold such 
communications. They are often deceptive and are pr oducts of the imagination. 
The practice is harmful both to the medium and the spirits, assuming the 
possibility of such communications. It attracts and  ties to the earth the spirit so 
invoked whereas its effort should be to detach itse lf from the earth, and rise 
higher. A spirit is not necessarily purer because i t is disembodied. It takes with it 
most of the frailties to which it was liable when o n earth. Information or advice, 
therefore, given by it need not be true or sound. T hat the spirit likes 
communications with those on earth is no matter for  pleasure. On the contrary it 
should be weaned from such unlawful attachment. So much for the harm done to 
the spirits. 
Young India , 12-9-'29 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 152  As for the medium, it is a matter of positive knowl edge with me that all those 
within my experience have been deranged or weak-bra ined and disabled for 
practical work whilst they were holding, or thought  they were holding, such 
communications. I can recall no friend of mine who having held such 
communications had benefited in any way. 
Young India , 12-9-'29 
 
Superstition 
Superstitions and undesirable things go as soon as we begin to live the correct 
life. I concern myself not with belief but with ask ing to do the right thing. As soon 
as they do it, their belief rights itself.  
Young India . 11-8-'27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 153   
NON-ENGLISH WORDS WITH THEIR MEANINGS 
Abhyasa - repetition; practice; study 
Abu Ben Adhem - a saintly Muslim character, the creation of Leigh H unt's poetic  
imagination, who is represented as one who, though he was 
content to be known merely as a lover of his fellow men, found 
his name in the recording angel's book leading the list of those 
who loved the Lord 
Adi Parva - first book of the Hindu epic, Mahabharata 
Advaita - Hindu philosophy of Non-dualism 
Advaitist - a believer in non-dualism 
Agiari - Zoroastrian fire-temple 
Ahimsa -  non-violence 
Ahriman - Spirit of Evil, in Zoroastrian religion 
Ahurmazd - Zoroastrian name of God 
Akash - ether; sky 
Allah - Muslim name of God 
Amanifvam - humility 
Ananda - joy 
Anekantavada - belief in many doctrines; skepticism 
Anekaniavadi - a believer in many doctrines; a sceptic  
Arya Samaj - a Hindu reformist organization founded by Swami Day ananda 
Saraswati in the last century  
Ashram - abode of a spiritual teacher; hermitage; one of the  four 
stages of life according to Hinduism  Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 154  Avatara - incarnation of God 
Ayodhya - capital of the kingdom of Rama, the epic hero  
 
Bansi - flute 
Bhagavadgita - The Song Celestial , a highly philosophical poem of 700 verses 
which occurs in the Mahabharata and in which Krishn a, 
incarnate God, discourses on eternal verities 
Bhajan - hymn; singing of hymns  
Bhakta - a devotee  
Bhakti - devotion 
Brahma  - Hindu name of God, the Creator  
Brahmachari - a celibate; one who lives a life of self-restraint  
Brahmacharya - celibacy; continence; life of self-restraint  
Brahman - God 
Brahmana - member of the first (priestly) caste among Hindus 
Brahmaputra - a river of north-eastern India 
 
Chaitanya - Bengali religious reformer of the 15th century A. D . who 
preached Bhakti or devotion to God  
Chapati - thin, flat cake made of floor  
Charya - conduct; practice  
Chit - knowledge 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 155   
Dada Hormazda - Zoroastrian name of God  
Daridranarayana - God in the form of the poor  
Dasharatha - King of Ayodhya and father of Rama, the epic hero 
Dayananda - Swami Dayananda Saraswati, founder of the Arya Sama j  
Devadhideva - God of Gods  
Dava, Devata - god 
Dharma - religion; law of one's being; duty  
Dvaita - Hindu philosophy of Dualism  
Dvaitism - doctrine of Dualism  
 
Ganga - well-known sacred river of northern India  
Gayatri - sacred Vedic Mantra (or formula) which is recited b y orthodox 
Hindus in their daily worship  
Gita - same as Bhagavadgita 
Guru - teacher; religious preceptor 
 
Hanuman - monkey-chief of the epic Ramayana, whom Hindus vene rate 
as a divinity  
Harishchandra - an ancient Hindu king who sacrificed his all for th e sake of 
truth  
Hirrtsa - violence 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 156  Imam Hasan and Imam Husain  - saintly sons of Hazrat Ali, son-in-law of Prophet 
Muhammad  
Ishwara - Hindu name for God  
Islam - religion founded by Prophet Muhammad  
 
Jainism - an ancient religion of India propagated by 24 Tirth ankars or 
Saviours, the first of whom was Rishabha and the la st Mahavira, 
who was a contemporary of Buddha in the 6th century  B. C. 
One of the cardinal doctrines of Jainism is Ahimsa or Non-
violence 
Janaka - an ancient Hindu king who was a great philosopher  
Janmashtami - birthday of Shri Krishna, Hindu incarnation of God,  to whom 
the Bhagavadgita or  The Song Celestial is ascribed  
Japa - silent repetition  
Jehova - Hebrew name of God  
Judaism - the religion of the Jews 
Kabir - poet-saint of northern India who lived in the 15th century A. 
D. and who preached the essential unity of the Godh ead and 
harmony of all religions  
Kalma - a Muslim formula of prayer  
Karmayogi - a follower of the path of selfless action  
Khuda - Muslim name for God  
Koran - Book of Revelation of Islam 
Krishna - central figure of the epic, Mahabharata, who is ven erated by 
Hindus as God incarnate  Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 157   
Lila - play 
 
Mahabharata - Hindu epic of about 1,00,000 verses, the central th eme of 
which is the great war between the Pandavas and the ir cousins 
the Kauravas, who were rival claimants to the thron e of 
Hastinapur (ancient Delhi)  
Mandir - Hindu temple  
Mantra - a sacred text or formula  
Manu - ancient Hindu law-giver  
Maya - illusion; divine power  
Moksha - liberation; freedom from birth and death  
 
Namaz - daily prayer of Muslims  
Nanak - founder of Sikhism (1469-1538 or 1539 A. D.)  
Narasinha Mehta - poet-saint of Gujarat who lived in the 15th century  
Nirvana - final emancipation from sway of passions; Buddhist goal of 
life  
Niyamas - rules of conduct  
 
Omkar - the sacred and mystic syllable   
Om Paramatma - the Supreme Self or God  
 
Pariahs - 'untouchables' among Hindus Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 158  Prahlad - son of a mythological demon-king and devotee of God  Vishnu, 
who faced dreadful ordeals in defence of his faith,  remaining 
steadfast to the end  
Puranas - Hindu mythological books  
 
Rahaman - Muslim name of God  
Rahim - Muslim name of God 
Rama, Ramachandra - hero of the epic, Ramayana, who is regarded as an 
incarnation of God by Hindus 
Ramakrishna - Bengali saint (1836-86 A.D.) who taught the oneness  of the 
Godhead and the basic harmony of all religions. The  
Ramakrishna Mission is named after him  
Ratnanama - name of Rama (i.e. God) 
Ramayana - Hindu epic which relates the story of the abduction  of Sita, 
wife of Rama, prince of Ayodhya, by Ravana, demon-k ing of 
Lanka, and her rescue by Rama after the destruction  of the 
demon 
Ramanuja - Hindu philosopher-saint of the 11th century A. D. w ho was an 
exponent of Vishishtadvaita or qualified Monism  
 
Sanatani - a follower of orthodox Hinduism  
Sannyasa - renunciation of worldly ties  
Sanskaras - innate tendencies inherited from past lives  
Sarvodaya - welfare of all  
Sat - truth; that which exists  Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 159  Sat-Chit-Ananda - Truth-Knowledge-Bliss  
Sattvika - endowed with goodness; virtuous  
Satya - truth 
Satyagraha - recourse to truth-force or soul-force  
Satyavan - husband of Savitri, heroine of well-known mythologi cal 
episode. She wins back his life from Yama, the god of death  
Savitri - heroine of the Satyavan-Savitri episode  
Shankara - Hindu philosopher of the 8th century A. D. who was an 
exponent of Advaita or Absolute Non-Dualism; a name  of the 
Deity  
Shankaracharya - same as Shankara; also a member of the order of mon ks 
founded by Shankara  
Shastra - Hindu scripture  
Shastri - one versed in scriptures 
Shuddhi— lit. - "purification"; conversion to Hindu faith 
Shudra - member of the fourth of menial caste among Hindus 
Sthitaprajna - one who is firmly established in transcendental kno wledge 
Surdas - blind Hindi poet-saint of northern India who lived in the 16th 
century A. D. 
Syadvada - philosophy of "probability" in matters of perceptio n by the 
senses; a form of scepticism. Which is professed by  a section of 
Jain thinkers  
Syadvadi - a believer in Syadvada  
 
Tabligh - propaganda and conversion to Islam  Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 160  Tapas - penance; religious austerity 
Trappist - an order of Christian monks who observe the vow of silence 
Tulsidas - Hindi poet of northern India who lived in the 16th century 
A.D. and whose work   
 
Ramacharitamanasa - recounting the story of the epic hero, Rama, has 
become universally popular with Hindus  
 
Upanishads - ancient philosophical treatises which are believed by Hindus 
to contain revealed truth  
Vairagya - aversion to worldly life 
Vaishnava - a devotee of God Vishnu, the "Preserver" among the Hindu 
Trinity 
Varnashrama - four-fold division of Hindu society  
Vedas - most ancient scriptures of Hindus which are believe d to 
embody revealed truth  
Vedic - belonging to Vedas  
Vishnu - the "Preserver" among Hindu Trinity  
Vyasa - compiler of the Vedas and author of the Mahabharata   
Yajna - sacrifice 
Yamuna - a river of northern India, hallowed by its associat ions with 
Krishna, the Hindu incarnation  
 
Zend Avesta - Zoroastrian scripture Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 161  Zoroaster - founder of Zoroastrian religion which is professed by the 
Parsees of India. He is also known as Zarathustra o r Zerdusht 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 162   
SOURCES 
An Autobiography or the Story of My Experiments wit h Truth  
by M. K. Gandhi. Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmeda bad-14, Edi. 1948. 
 
The Bombay Chronicle , daily newspaper published at Bombay  
 
Ethical Religion  by Mahatma Gandhi. S. Ganesan, Madras, 1927 
 
From Yeravda Mandir  by M. K. Gandhi. Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmed abad-
14, Edi. 1945.  
 
Harijan,  weekly journal, formerly edited by Mahatma Gandhi and others. Now 
defunct. Published at the Navajivan Publishing Hous e, Ahmedabad-14  
 
Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule  by M. K. Gandhi. Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad-14. Edi. 1946.  
 
Mahatma Gandhi,  Ganesh & Co., Madras, 1918  
 
Mahatma Gandhi's Ideas  by C. F. Andrews, Allen and Unwin, London, 1930 
 
The Modern Review , monthly journal published at Calcutta  
 
The Nation's Voice,  Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad-14. Edi. 194 7.  
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 163  Satyagraha in South Africa  by M. K. Gandhi. Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad-14.  
 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi,  G. A. Natesan, Madras (4th Edi.), 
1933  
 
Young India , weekly journal, was edited by Mahatma Gandhi (191 9-1932) and 
published at Ahmedabad 
 
 
  
Truth is God 
[Gleanings from the writings of Mahatma Gandhi bear ing on 
God, God-Realization and the Godly way] 
 
 
Written by : M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Compiled by : R. K. Prabhu 
 
 
Rs. 20/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Tel. 91-79-2754 0635 
Email: jitnavjivan10@gmail.com   
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
FOREWORD 
The Navajivan Managing Trustee has fallen a victim to  the prevailing fashion 
and illusion. He wants a 'Foreword' from me to a book  of selections from Gandhiji's 
writings dealing with religion and God. The subject as well as the author ought to 
have saved Shri Jivanji from this foreword-hunger. But so strong is fashion that in 
spite of everything he has done like others and wants me to do what is wholly 
unnecessary. 
God and therefore religion are fundamental necessiti es for normal healthy 
life—to the individual as well as to nations. Here i n this book the reader will find 
Gandhiji speaking from his heart on various occasions in the course of thirty years 
of the maturest period of his life. What a modern man  who did very great things 
thought on the subject of God and religion cannot fa il to be instructive to 
educated men and women in these difficult days. 
"We the human families are not all philosophers. Some how or other we want 
something which we can touch, something which we can  see, something before 
which we can kneel down. It does not matter whether it is a book or an empty 
stone-building or a stone-building inhabited by numer ous figures": so wrote 
Gandhiji, defending temple-worship on the background  of other prevailing 
religions. 
"Hindu Dharma is like a boundless ocean teeming with priceless gems. The 
deeper you dive, the more treasures you find," said G andhiji. 
Anyone who desires to understand what sort of a man th e Father of the Nation 
was, must read this book. 
One may not want to learn anything about religion t hat is not in our Shastras 
or in other religious books. But here is a facet of th e mind of a great man we love 
and to whom the nation is grateful. It has a value ov er and above a book of 
religious instruction. 
Madras, 11-4-'55        C. Rajagopalachari Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3   
TO THE READER 
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wri tings and to others who are 
interested in them that I am not at all concerned w ith appearing to be consistent. 
In my search after Truth I have discarded many ideas a nd learnt many new things. 
Old as I am in age, I have no feeling that I have c eased to grow inwardly or that 
my growth will stop at the dissolution of the flesh. W hat I am concerned with is 
my readiness to obey the call of Truth, my God, from  moment to moment, and 
therefore, when anybody finds any inconsistency betwee n any two writings of 
mine, if he has still faith in my sanity, he would do well to choose the later of the 
two on the same subject. 
Harijan,  29-4-'33, p. 2      M.  K.  GANDHI  
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4   
1. MY QUEST 
I am but a seeker after Truth. I claim to have found  a way to it. I claim to be 
making a ceaseless effort to find it. But I admit that  I have not yet found it. To 
find Truth completely is to realize oneself and one' s destiny, i.e. to become 
perfect. I am painfully conscious of my imperfection s, and therein lies all the 
strength I possess, because it is a rare thing for a man to know his own limitations. 
Young India , 17-11-'21 
 
If I was a perfect man, I own I should not feel the m iseries of neighbours as I 
do. As a perfect man I should take note of them, pres cribe a remedy, and compel 
adoption by the force of unchallengeable Truth in m e. But as yet I only see as 
through a glass darkly and therefore have to carry c onviction by slow and laborious 
processes, and then, too, not always with success. That b eing so, I would be less 
than human if, with all my knowledge of avoidable m isery pervading the land and 
of the sight of mere skeletons under the very shadow of the Lord of the Universe, I 
did not feel with and for all the suffering but dumb  millions of India. 
Young India,  17-11-'21 
 
I am but a poor struggling soul yearning to be wholl y good—wholly truthful and 
wholly non-violent in thought, word and deed, but e ver failing to reach the ideal 
which I know to be true. It is a painful climb, but the pain of it is a positive 
pleasure to me. Each step upward makes me feel stronger  and fit for the next. 
Young India , 9-4-'25 
 
I know the path. It is straight and narrow. It is lik e the edge of a sword. I 
rejoice to walk on it. I weep when I slip. God's word  is: 'He who strives never Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5  perishes.' I have implicit faith in that promise. Thou gh, therefore, from my 
weakness I fail a thousand times, I will not lose fa ith but hope that I shall see the 
Light when the flesh has been brought under perfect su bjection as some day it 
must. 
Young India , 17-6-'26 
 
I have not seen Him, neither have I known Him. I hav e made the world's faith 
in God my own and as my faith is ineffaceable, I reg ard that faith as amounting to 
experience. However, as it may be said that to descr ibe faith as experience is to 
tamper with truth, it may perhaps be more correct t o say that I have no word for 
characterizing my belief in God. 
Autobiography , 1948, p. 341 
 
I claim to be a votary of truth from my childhood. It was the most natural 
thing to me. My prayerful search gave me the reveali ng maxim  Truth is God , 
instead of the usual one  God is Truth.  That maxim enables me to see God face to 
face as it were. I feel Him pervade every fibre of m y being. 
Harijan , 9-8-'42 
 
Ahimsa is my God, and Truth is my God. When I look for  Ahimsa, Truth says, 
'Find it through me.' When I look for Truth, Ahimsa says, 'Find it out through me.' 
Young India , 4-6-'25 
 
To see the universal and all-pervading spirit of Truth  face to face one must be 
able to love the meanest of creation as oneself. And a  man who aspires after that 
cannot afford to keep out of any field of life. Tha t is why my devotion of Truth has 
drawn me into the field of politics; and I can say wi thout the slightest hesitation, Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6  and yet in all humility, that those who say that rel igion has nothing to do with 
politics do not know what religion means. 
Autobiography , 1948, p. 615 
 
I am endeavoring to see God through service of human ity, for I know that God 
is neither in heaven, nor down below, but in every o ne. 
Autobiography , 1948, p. 615 
 
I have no desire for the perishable kingdom of earth.  I am striving for the 
Kingdom of Heaven which is Moksha. To attain my end i t is not necessary for me to 
seek the shelter of a cave. I carry one about me, if I would but know it. A cave-
dweller can build castles in the air whereas a dwell er in a palace like Janak has no 
castles to build. The cave- dweller who hovers round the world on the wings of 
thought has no peace. A Janak though living in the m idst of 'pomp and 
circumstance’ may have peace that passeth understandi ng. For me the road to 
salvation lies through incessant toil in the service of my country and there through 
of humanity. I want to identify myself with everythi ng that lives. 
Young India , 3-4-'24 
 
I want to realize brotherhood or identity not merel y with the beings called 
human, but I want to realize identity with all life , even with such things as crawl 
upon earth. I want, if I don't give you a shock, to  realize identity with even the 
crawling things upon earth, because we claim descent from the same God, and 
that being so, all life in whatever form it appears  must be essentially one. 
Young India , 4-4-'29 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  There is no such thing as 'Gandhism', and I do not want  to leave any sect after 
me. I do not claim to have originated any new princ iple of doctrine. I have simply 
tried in my own way to apply the eternal truths to o ur daily life and problems. 
Truth and non-violence are as old as the hills. All I have done is to try experiments 
in both on as vast a scale as I could do. In doing so I have sometimes erred and 
learnt by my errors. Life and its problems have thus be come to me so many 
experiments in the practice of truth and non-violenc e. 
Harijan , 28-3-'36 
 
My faith in truth and non-violence is ever-growing, and as I am ever trying to 
follow them in my life, I too am growing every mome nt. I see new implications 
about them. I see them in a newer light every day a nd read in them a newer 
meaning.  
Harijan , 2-3-'40 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8   
2. GOD IS 
There is an indefinable mysterious Power that pervades  everything. I feel it, 
though I do not see it. It is this unseen Power which makes itself felt and yet 
defies all proof, because it is so unlike all that I pe rceive through my senses. It 
transcends the senses. 
But it is possible to reason out the existence of God t o a limited extent. Even 
in ordinary affairs we know that people do not know who rules or why, and how he 
rules. And yet they know that there is a power that c ertainly rules. In my tour last 
year in Mysore I met many poor villagers and I foun d upon inquiry that they did not 
know who ruled Mysore. They simply said some god ruled it. If the knowledge of 
these poor people was so limited about their ruler I, who am infinitely lesser than 
God, than they than their ruler, need not be surprise d if I do not realize the 
presence of God, the King of kings. Nevertheless I do f eel as the poor villagers felt 
about Mysore that there is orderliness in the universe , there is an unalterable Law 
governing everything and every being that exists or l ives. It is not a blind law; for 
no blind law can govern the conduct of living being s, and thanks to the marvelous 
researches of Sir. J. C. Bose, it can now be proved th at even matter is life. That 
Law then which governs all life is God. Law and the Lawgiver are one. I may not 
deny the Law or the Lawgiver, because I know so litt le about It or Him. Even as my 
denial or ignorance of the existence of an earthly p ower will avail me nothing, so 
will not my denial of God and His Law liberate me fr om its operation; whereas 
humble and mute acceptance of divine authority make s life's journey easier even 
as the acceptance of earthly rule makes life under i t easier. 
I do dimly perceive that whilst everything around me  is ever changing, ever 
dying, there is underlying all that change a living  power that is changeless, that 
holds all together, that creates, dissolves and re-crea tes. That informing power or Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  spirit is God. And since nothing else I see merely throu gh the senses can or will 
persist, He alone is. 
And is this power benevolent or malevolent? I see it i s purely benevolent. For I 
can see that in the midst of death life persists, in the  midst of untruth truth 
persists, in the midst of darkness light persists. Hence I  gather that God is Life, 
Truth, Light. He is Love. He is the Supreme Good. 
But He is no God who merely satisfies the intellect, if He ever does. God to be 
God must rule the heart and transform it. He must expr ess Himself in every 
smallest act of His votary. This can only be done throu gh a definite realization 
more real than the five senses can ever produce. Sense perceptions can be, often 
are, false and deceptive, however real they may appe ar to us. Where there is 
realization outside the senses it is infallible. It is p roved not by extraneous 
evidence but in the transformed conduct and characte r of those who have felt the 
real presence of God within. 
Such testimony is to be found in the experiences of an  unbroken line of 
prophets and sages in all countries and climes. To reje ct this evidence is to deny 
oneself. 
This realization is preceded by an immovable faith. H e who would in his own 
person test the fact of God's presence can do so by a l iving faith. And since faith 
itself cannot be proved by extraneous evidence, the safest course is to believe in 
the moral government of the world and therefore in the supremacy of the moral 
law, the law of Truth and Love. Exercise of faith wi ll be the safest where there is 
a clear determination summarily to reject all that i s contrary to Truth and Love. 
I cannot account for the existence of evil by any ra tional method. To want to 
do so is to be coequal with God. I am therefore humbl e enough to recognize evil as 
such. And I call God long suffering and patient preci sely because He permits evil in 
the world. I know that He has no evil. He is the auth or of it and yet untouched by 
it. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  I know too that I shall never know God if I do not w restle with and against evil 
even at the cost of life itself. I am fortified in th e belief by my own humble and 
limited experience. The purer I try to become, the nearer I feel to be to God. How 
much more should I be, when my faith is not a mere ap ology as it is today but has 
become as immovable as the Himalayas and as white and b right as the snows on 
their peaks? Meanwhile I invite the correspondent t o pray with Newman who sang 
from experience: 
Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom, Lead  Thou me on.  
The night is dark and I am far from home, Lead Thou me on. 
Keep Thou my feet, I do not ask to see 
The distant scene; one step enough for me. 
Young India,  11-10-'28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11   
3. GOD ALONE IS 
To me God is Truth and Love; God is ethics and morali ty; God is fearlessness. 
God is the source of Light and Life and yet He is abov e and beyond all these. God 
is conscience. He is even the atheism of the atheist. Fo r in His boundless love God 
permits the atheist to live. He is the searcher of hear ts. He transcends speech and 
reason. He knows us and our hearts better than we do ourselves. He does not take 
us at our word for He knows that we often do not mea n it, some knowingly and 
others unknowingly. He is a personal God to those who need His personal pre-
sence. He is embodied to those who need His touch. He i s the purest essence. He 
simply Is to those who have faith. He is all things to all men. He is in us and yet 
above and beyond us. One may banish the word 'God' f rom the Congress but one 
has no power to banish the thing itself. What is a sole mn affirmation, if it is not 
the same thing as in the name of God? And surely consc ience is but a poor and 
laborious paraphrase of the simple combination of thre e letters called God. He 
cannot cease to be because hideous immoralities or inhu man brutalities are 
committed in His name. He is long suffering. He is pat ient but He is also terrible. 
He is the most exacting personage in the world and the  world to come. He metes 
out the same measure to us as we mete out to our neigh bours—men and brutes. 
With Him ignorance is no excuse. And withal He is ever  forgiving for He always 
gives us the chance to repent. He is the greatest dem ocrat the world knows, for 
He leaves us 'unfettered' to make our own choice bet ween evil and good. He is the 
greatest tyrant ever known, for He often dashes the cu p from our lips and under 
cover of free will leaves us a margin so wholly inade quate as to provide only mirth 
for Himself at our expense. Therefore it is that Hind uism calls it all His sport—Lila, 
or calls it all an illusion—Maya. We are  not.  He alone Is. And if we will be, we must 
eternally sing His praise and do His will. Let us dance  to the tune of His Bansi—
flute, and all would be well. 
Young India , 5-3-'25 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12   
Advaitism and God  
[In answer to a friend's questions, Gandhiji wrote: ] 
I am Advaitist and yet I can support Dvaitism (dualism) . The world is changing 
every moment, and is therefore unreal, it has no per manent existence. But though 
it is constantly changing, it has a something about it which persists and it is 
therefore to that extent real. I have therefore no objection to calling it real and 
unreal, and thus being called an Anekantavadi or a S yadvadi. But my Syadvada is 
not the Syadvada of the learned, it is peculiarly m y own. I cannot engage in a 
debate with them. It has been my experience that I a m always true from my point 
of view, and am often wrong from the point of view of my honest critics. I know 
that we are both right from our respective points of view. And this knowledge 
saves me from attributing motives to my opponents or c ritics. The seven blind men 
who gave seven different descriptions of the elephant were all right from their 
respective points of view, and wrong from the point of view of one another, and 
right and wrong from the point of view of the man w ho knew the elephant. I very 
much like this doctrine of the manyness of reality. It is this doctrine that has 
taught me to judge a Mussalman from his own standpoint and a Christian from his. 
Formerly I used to resent the ignorance of my opponen ts. Today I can love them 
because I am gifted with the eye to see myself as othe rs see me and vice versa. I 
want to take the whole world in the embrace of my l ove. My Anekantavada is the 
result of the twin doctrine of Satyagraha and Ahimsa.  
I talk of God exactly as I believe Him to be. I bel ieve Him to be creative as 
well as non-creative. This too is the result of my acc eptance to the doctrine of the 
manyness of realty. From the platform of the Jains I p rove the non creative aspect 
of God, and from that of Ramanuja the creative aspec t. As a matter of fact we are 
all thinking of the Unthinkable, describing the Ind escribable, seeking to know the 
Unknown, and that is why our speech falters, is inade quate and even often 
contradictory. That is why the Vedas describe Brahman  as 'not this', 'not this'. But Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13  if He or It is not this, He or It  is.  If we exist, if our parents and their parents have 
existed, then it is proper to believe in the Parent o f the whole creation. If He is 
not, we are nowhere. And that is why all of us with one voice call one God 
differently as Paramatma, Ishwara, Shiva, Vishnu, Ram a, Allah, Khuda, Dada 
Hormuzda, Jehova, God, and an infinite variety of n ames. He is one and yet many; 
He is smaller than an atom, and bigger than the Himal ayas. He is contained even 
in a drop of the ocean, and yet not even the seven se as can compass Him. Reason 
is powerless to know Him. He is beyond the reach or gra sp of reason. But I need 
not labour the point. Faith is essential in this matter . My logic can make and 
unmake innumerable hypotheses. An atheist might floor me in a debate. But my 
faith runs so very much faster than my reason that I can challenge the whole world 
and say, 'God is, was and ever shall be.' 
But those who want to deny His existence are at liber ty to do so. He is 
merciful and compassionate. He is not an earthly king  needing an army to make us 
accept His sway. He allows us freedom, and yet His compa ssion commands 
obedience to His will. But if any one of us disdain t o bow to His will, He says: 'So 
be it. My sun will shine no less for thee, my clouds wil l rain no less for thee. I need 
not force thee to accept my sway.' Of such a God let  the ignorant dispute the 
existence. I am one of the millions of wise men who be lieve in Him and am never 
tired of bowing to Him and singing His glory. 
Young India , 21-1-'26 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14   
4. TRUTH IS GOD 
[Replying to a question asked of him at a meeting i n Switzerland on his way back from the 
Round Table Conference in London, Gandhiji said :] 
You have asked me why I consider that God is Truth. I n my early youth I was 
taught to repeat what in Hindu scriptures are known a s one thousand names of 
God. But these one thousand names of God were by no me ans exhaustive. We 
believe—and I think it is the truth—that God has as m any names as there are 
creatures and, therefore we also say that God is name less and since God has many 
forms we also consider Him formless, and since He speaks  to us through many 
tongues we consider Him to be speechless and so on. An d so when I came to study 
Islam I found that Islam too had many names for God. I  would say with those who 
say God is Love, God is Love. But deep down in me I use d to say that though God 
may be Love, God is Truth, above all. If it is possib le for the human tongue to give 
the fullest description of God, I have come to the co nclusion that for myself, God 
is Truth. But two years ago I went a step further and  said that Truth is God. You 
will see the fine distinction between the two statem ents, viz. that God is Truth 
and Truth is God. And I came to that conclusion after  a continuous and relentless 
search after Truth which began nearly fifty years ago . I then found that the 
nearest approach to Truth was through love. But I als o found that love has many 
meanings in the English language at least and that hu man love in the sense of 
passion could become a degrading thing also. I found t oo that love in the sense of 
Ahimsa had only a limited number of votaries in the w orld. But I never found a 
double meaning in connection with truth and even at heists had not demurred to 
the necessity or power of truth. But in their passion  for discovering truth, the 
atheists have not hesitated to deny the very existence of God—from their own 
point of view rightly. And it was because of this rea soning that I saw that rather 
than say that God is Truth, I should say that Truth is G od. I recall the name of 
Charles Bradlaugh who delighted to call himself an atheist, but knowing as I do Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  something of him, I would never regard him as an athe ist. I would call him a God-
fearing man, though I know that he would reject the  claim. His face would redden 
if I would say "Mr. Bradlaugh, you are a truth-feari ng man, and so a God-fearing 
man." I would automatically disarm his criticism by sa ying that Truth is God, as I 
have disarmed criticisms of many a young man. Add to t his the great difficulty 
that millions have taken the name of God and in His n ame committed nameless 
atrocities. Not that scientists very often do not comm it cruelties in the name of 
truth. I know how in the name of truth and science i nhuman cruelties are 
perpetrated on animals when men perform vivisection. There are thus a number of 
difficulties in the way, no matter how you describe G od. But the human mind is a 
limited thing, and you have to labour under limitat ions when you think of a being 
or entity who is beyond the power of man to grasp. 
And then we have another thing in Hindu philosophy, viz. God alone is and 
nothing else exists, and the same truth you find emph asized and exemplified in 
the Kalma of Islam. There you find it clearly stated— that God alone is and nothing 
else exists. In fact the Sanskrit word for Truth is a wo rd which literally means that 
which exists—Sat. For this and several other reasons t hat I can give you, I have 
come to the conclusion that the definition, 'Truth i s God', gives me the greatest 
satisfaction. And when you want to find Truth as God t he only inevitable means is 
Love, i.e. non-violence, and since I believe that ul timately the means and end are 
convertible terms, I should not hesitate to say that Go d is Love. 
'What then is Truth?’ 
A difficult question, but I have solved it for myself  by saying that it is what the 
voice within tells you. How, then, you ask, differe nt people think of different and 
contrary truths? Well, seeing that the human mind wo rks through innumerable 
media and that the evolution of the human mind is no t the same for all, it follows 
that what may be truth for one may be untruth for a nother, and hence those who 
have made these experiments have come to the conclusi on that there are certain 
conditions to be observed in making those experiments . Just as for conducting Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16  scientific experiments there is an indispensable scient ific course of instruction, in 
the same way strict preliminary discipline is necessary to qualify a person to make 
experiments in the spiritual realm. Everyone should, t herefore, realize his 
limitations before he speaks of his Inner Voice. Theref ore we have the belief 
based upon experience, that those who would make ind ividual search after Truth 
as God, must go through several vows, as for instance, the vow of truth, the vow 
of Brahmacharya (purity)—for you cannot possibly divi de your love for Truth and 
God with anything else—, the vow of non-violence, of  poverty and non-possession. 
Unless you impose on yourselves the five vows you may not  embark on the 
experiment at all. There are several other condition s prescribed, but I must not 
take you through all of them. Suffice it to say tha t those who have made these 
experiments know that it is not proper for everyone t o claim to hear the voice of 
conscience, and it is because we have at the present m oment everybody claiming 
the right of conscience without going through any d iscipline whatsoever and there 
is so much untruth being delivered to a bewildered wo rld, all that I can, in true 
humility, present to you is that truth is not to be f ound by anybody who has not 
got an abundant sense of humility. If you would swim on the bosom of the ocean 
of Truth you must reduce yourself to a zero. Furthe r than this I cannot go along 
this fascinating path. 
Young India,  31-12-'31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17   
5. GOD IS LOVE 
Scientists tell us that without the presence of the c ohesive force amongst the 
atoms that comprise this globe of ours, it would crumb le to pieces and we cease 
to exist; and even as there is cohesive force in blin d matter, so must there be in 
all things animate and the name for that cohesive fo rce among animate beings is 
Love. We notice it between father and son, between brother and sister, friend and 
friend. But we have to learn to use that force among  all that lives, and in the use 
of it consists our knowledge of God. Where there is lov e there is life; hatred leads 
to destruction. 
Young India , 5-5-'20 
 
Though there is enough repulsion in Nature, she  lives by attraction. Mutual 
love enables Nature to persist. Man does not live by destruction. Self-love compels 
regard for others. Nations cohere because there is mutu al regard among 
individuals composing them. Some day we must extend th e national law to the 
universe, even as we have extended the family law to  form nations—a larger 
family. 
Young India , 2-3-'22 
 
I have found that life persists in the midst of destr uction and, therefore, there 
must be a higher law than that of destruction. Only under that law would a well-
ordered society be intelligible and life worth-livi ng. And if that is the law of life, 
we have to work it out in daily life. Where- ever t here are jars, wherever you are 
confronted with an opponent, conquer him with love.  In this crude manner, I have 
worked it out in my life. That does not mean that a ll my difficulties are solved. 
Only I have found that this law of love has answered as the law of destruction has 
never done. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  Young India , 1-10-'31 
 
I believe that the sum total of the energy of mankin d is not to bring us down 
but to lift us up, and that is the result of the defin ite, if unconscious, working of 
the law of love. The fact that mankind persists shows t hat the cohesive force is 
greater than the disruptive force, centripetal force  greater than centrifugal.  
Young India , 12-11-'31 
 
If love or non-violence be not the law of our being  . . . there is no escape from 
a periodical recrudescence of war, each succeeding one outdoing the preceding 
one in ferocity. 
Harijan,  26-9-'36 
 
All the teachers that ever lived have preached that law with more or less vigour. If 
love was not the law of life, life would not have pe rsisted in the midst of death. 
Life is a perpetual triumph over the grave. If there  is a fundamental distinction 
between man and beast, it is the former's progressive r ecognition of the law and 
its application in practice to his own personal life. All the saints of the world, 
ancient and modern, were each according to his ligh t and capacity a living 
illustration of that supreme law of our being. That t he brute in us seems so often 
to gain an easy triumph is true enough. That, howeve r, does not disprove the law. 
It shows the difficulty of practice. How should it be otherwise with a law which is 
as high as truth itself? When the practice of the la w becomes universal, God will 
reign on earth as He does in Heaven. I need not be re minded that earth and 
Heaven are in us. We know the earth, we are strangers to the Heaven within us. If 
it is allowed that for some the practice of love is p ossible, it is arrogance not to 
allow even the possibility of its practice in all the  others. Not very remote 
ancestors of ours indulged in cannibalism and many o ther practices which we Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19  would today call loathsome. No doubt in those days too  there were Dick Sheppards 
who must have been laughed at and possibly pilloried for preaching the (to them) 
strange doctrine of refusing to eat fellow men. 
Harijan,  26-9-'36 
 
God is not a Power residing in the clouds. God is an un seen Power residing 
within us and nearer to us than finger-nails to the f lesh. There are many powers 
lying hidden within us and we discover them by constan t struggle. Even so may we 
find this Supreme Power if we make diligent search wi th the fixed determination 
to find Him. One such way is the way of Ahimsa. It is s o very necessary because 
God is in every one of us and, therefore, we have to identify ourselves with every 
human being without exception* This is called cohesion  or attraction in scientific 
language. In the popular language it is called love.  It binds us to one another and 
to God. Ahimsa and love are one and the same thing.  
From a private letter dated,  1-6-'42 
Harijan,  28-3-'53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20   
6. GOD IS TRUTH—KNOWLEDGE—BLISS 
The word Satya (Truth) is derived from  Sat,  which means 'being'. Nothing is or 
exists in reality except Truth. That is why  Sat  or Truth is perhaps the most 
important name of God. In fact it is more correct to  say that Truth is God, than to 
say that God is Truth. But as we cannot do without a r uler or a general, such 
names of God as 'King of kings' or 'The Almighty' a re and will remain generally 
current. On deeper thinking, however, it will be re alized, that  Sat  or Satya is the 
only correct and fully significant name for God. 
And where there is Truth, there also is knowledge whic h is true. Where there 
is no Truth, there can be no true Knowledge. That is why the word  Chit  or 
Knowledge is associated with the name of God. And whe re there is true 
Knowedge, there is always Bliss ( Ananda ). Their sorrow has no place. And even as 
Truth is eternal, so is the Bliss derived from it. Henc e we know God as  Sat-Chit-
Ananda, One who combines in Himself Truth, Knowledge and Bliss.  
Devotion to this Truth is the sole justification for ou r existence. All our 
activities should be centred in Truth. Truth should b e the very breath of our life. 
When once this stage in the pilgrim's progress is reached , all other rules of correct 
living will come without effort, and obedience to t hem will be instinctive. But 
without Truth it is impossible to observe any principle s or rules in life. 
Generally speaking, observation of the law of Truth i s understood merely to 
mean that we must speak the truth. But we in the Ashra m should understand the 
word Satya or Truth in a much wider sense. There shoul d be Truth in thought, 
Truth in speech, and Truth in action. To the man who  has realized this Truth in its 
fullness, nothing else remains to be known, because all  knowledge is necessarily 
included in it. What is not included in it is not Tr uth, and so not true knowledge; 
and there can be no inward peace without true knowl edge. If we once learn how 
to apply this never-failing test of Truth, we will a t once be able to find out what is 
worth doing, what is worth seeing, what is worth re ading. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21  But how is one to realize this Truth, which may be l ikened to the philosopher's 
stone or the cow of plenty? By single-minded devotion  ( abhyasa ) and indifference 
to all other interests in life ( vairagya) —replies the Bhagavad-gita. In spite, 
however, of such devotion, what may appear as truth t o one person will often 
appear as untruth to another person. But that need n ot worry the seeker. Where 
there is honest effort, it will be realized that what  appear to be different truths 
are like the countless and apparently different leav es of the same tree. Does not 
God Himself appear to different individuals in differ ent aspects? Still we know that 
He is one. But Truth is the right designation of God.  Hence there is nothing wrong 
in every man following Truth according to his lights.  Indeed it is his duty to do so. 
Then if there is a mistake on the part of anyone so f ollowing Truth, it will be 
automatically set right. For the quest of Truth invol ves  tapas —self-suffering, 
sometimes even unto death. There can be no place in i t for even a trace of self- 
interest. In such selfless search for Truth nobody can lose his bearings for long. 
Directly he takes to the wrong path he stumbles, and  is thus redirected to the 
right path. Therefore the pursuit of Truth is true  bkakti  (devotion). It is the path 
that leads to God. There is no place in ii for coward ice, no place for defeat. It is 
the talisman by which death itself becomes the portal  to life eternal. 
In this connection it would be well to ponder over t he lives and examples of 
Harishchandra, Prahlad, Ramachandra, Imam Hasan and Imam Hussain, the 
Christian saints, etc. How beautiful it would be, if all of us, men and women, 
devoted ourselves wholly to Truth in all that we mig ht do in our waking hours, 
whether working, eating, drinking, or playing, till  dissolution of the body makes us 
one with Truth? God as Truth has been for me a treasur e beyond price: may He be 
so to every one of us. 
From Yeravda Mandir,  Chapter I. 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22   
7. GOD AND NATURE 
We do not know all the laws of God nor their working . Knowledge of the tallest 
scientist or the greatest spiritualist is like a partic le of dust. If God is not a 
personal being for me like my earthly father, He is i nfinitely more. He rules me in 
the tiniest detail of my life. I believe literally t hat not a leaf moves but by His 
will. Every breath I take depends upon His sufferance . 
Harijan,  16-2-'34 
 
He and His Law are one. The Law is God. Anything attr ibuted to Him is not a 
mere attribute. He is the attribute. He is Truth, Lo ve and Law and a million other 
things that human ingenuity can name. 
Harijan , 16-2-'34 
 
The laws of Nature are changeless, unchangeable, and there are no miracles in the 
sense of infringement or interruption of Nature's law s. But we limited beings fancy 
all kinds of things and impute our limitations to God . We may copy God, but not 
He us. We may not divide Time for Him. Time for Him is eternity. For us there is 
past, present and future. And what is human life of a  hundred years but less than 
a mere speck in the eternity of Time?  
Harijan,  17-4-'37 
 
God Himself has reserved no right of revision of His o wn laws nor is there any 
need for Him for any such revision. He is all-powerful , all-knowing. He knows at 
the same time and without any effort the past, the pr esent and the future. He has 
therefore nothing to reconsider, nothing to revise, n othing to alter and nothing to 
amend. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23  Young India,  25-11-'26 
 
This earthly existence of ours is more brittle than th e glass bangles that ladies 
wear. You can keep glass bangles or thousands of years i f you treasure them in a 
chest and kept them remain untouched. But this earthl y existence is so fickle that 
it may be wiped out in the twinkling of an eye. The refore, while we get breathing 
time, let us get rid of the distinctions of high and l ow, purify our hearts and be 
ready to face our Maker when an earthquake or some natural calamity or death in 
the ordinary course overtakes us. 
Harijan,  2-2-'34 
 
I share the belief with the whole world—civilized an d uncivilized—that calamities 
(such as the Bihar earthquake of 1934) come to mankin d as chastisement for their 
sins. When that conviction comes from the heart, peop le pray, repent and purify 
themselves... I have but a limited knowledge of His p urpose. Such calamities are 
not a mere caprice of the Deity or Nature. They obe y fixed laws as surely as the 
planets move in obedience to laws governing their mov ement. Only we do not 
know the laws governing these events and, therefore, c all them calamities or 
disturbances. 
Harijan,  2-2-'34 
 
There is a divine purpose behind every physical calami ty. That perfected 
science will one day be able to tell us beforehand w hen earthquakes will occur, as 
it tells us today of eclipses, is quite possible. It wil l be another triumph of the 
human mind. But such triumph even indefinitely multi plied can bring about no 
purification of self without which nothing is of any  value. 
Harijan,  8-6-35 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24   
I ask those who appreciate the necessity of inward pur ification to join in the 
prayer that we may read the purpose of God behind suc h visitations, that they 
may humble us and prepare us to face our Maker whene ver the call comes, and 
that we may be ever ready to share the sufferings of our fellows whosoever they 
may be. 
Harijan , 8-6-'35 
 
To say that God permits evil in this world may not be pleasing to the ear. But 
if He is held responsible for the good, it follows that  He has to be responsible for 
the evil too. Did not God permit Ravana to exhibit unparalleled strength? Perhaps 
the root cause of the perplexity arises from a lack of  the real understanding of 
what God is. God is not a person. He transcends descr iption. He is the Lawmaker, 
the Law and the Executor. No human being can well a rrogate these powers to 
himself. If he did, he would be looked upon as an una dulterated dictator. They 
become only Him whom we worship as God. 
Harijan , 24-2-'46 
 
In a strictly scientific sense God is at the bottom of both good and evil. He directs 
the assassin's dagger no less than the surgeon's knife. B ut for all that good and evil 
are, for human purposes, from each other distinct and incompatible, being 
symbolical of light and darkness, God and Satan.  
Harijan , 20-2-'37 
 
I do not regard God as a person. Truth for me is God , and God's Law and God 
are not different things or facts, in the sense that an  earthly king and his law are 
different. Because God is an idea, Law Himself. Theref ore, it is impossible to 
conceive God as breaking the Law. He, therefore, do es not rule our actions and Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25  withdraw Himself. When we say He rules our actions, we are simply using human 
language and we try to limit Him. Otherwise He and His Law abide everywhere and 
govern everything. Therefore, I do not think that H e answers in every detail every 
request of ours, but there is no doubt that He rules ou r action, and I literally 
believe that not a blade of grass grows or moves withou t His will. The free will we 
enjoy is less than that of a passenger on a crowded deck . 
"Do you feel a sense of freedom in your communion wit h God?" 
I do. I do not feel cramped as I would on a boat fu ll of passengers. Although I 
know that my freedom is less than that of a passenger, I  appreciate that freedom 
as I have imbibed through and through the central t eaching of the Gita that man is 
the maker of his own destiny in the sense that he has fr eedom of choice as to the 
manner in which he uses that freedom. But he is no con troller of results. The 
moment he thinks he is, he comes to grief. 
Harijan  23-3-'40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26   
8. GOD AS DARIDRANARAYAN 
Daridranarayan is one of the millions of names by whic h humanity knows God 
who is unnameable and unfathomable by human understan ding and it means God 
of the poor, God appearing in the hearts of the poor . 
Young India , 4-4-'29 
 
For the poor the economic is the spiritual. You canno t make any other appeal 
to those starving millions. It will fall flat on them.  But you take food to them and 
they will regard you as their God. They are incapabl e of any other thought. 
Young India , 5-5-'27 
 
With this very hand I have collected soiled pies from  them tied tightly in their 
rags. Talk to them of modern progress. Insult them by t aking the name of God 
before them in vain. They will call you and me fien ds if we talk about God to 
them. They know, if they know God at all, a God of terror, vengeance, a pitiless 
tyrant. 
Young India , 15-9-'27 
 
I dare not take before them the message of God. I may  as well place before 
the dog over there the message of God as before those h ungry millions who have 
no lustre in their eyes and whose only God is their bre ad. I can take before them a 
message of God only by taking the message of sacred wo rk before them. It is good 
enough to talk of God whilst we are sitting here aft er a nice breakfast and looking 
forward to a nicer luncheon, but how am I to talk o f God to the millions who have 
to go without two meals a day? To them God can only  appear as bread and butter. 
Well, the peasants of India were getting their bread from their soil. I offered them Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27  the spinning wheel in order that they may get butter  and if I appear today ... in 
my loin-cloth it is because I come as the sole repre sentative of those half-starved, 
half-naked dumb millions. 
Young India , 15-10-'31 
 
I claim to know my millions. All the hours of the day  I am with them. They are 
my first care and last because I recognize no God ex cept that God that is to be 
found in the hearts of the dumb millions. They do no t recognize His presence; I 
do. And I worship the God that is Truth or Truth whic h is God through the service 
of these millions. 
Harijan,  11-3-'39 
I suggest that we are thieves in a way. If I take anyt hing that I do not need for 
my own immediate use and keep it, I thieve it from somebody else. It is the funda-
mental law of Nature, without exception, that Natur e produces enough for our 
wants from day to day; and if only everybody took en ough for himself and nothing 
more, there would be no pauperism in this world, the re would be no man dying of 
starvation. 
Mahatma Gandhi  (1918), p. 189 
 
In India we have got many millions of people who hav e to be satisfied with one 
meal a day and that meal consisting of a Chapati cont aining no fat in it and a 
pinch of salt. You and I have no right to anything t hat we really have until these 
millions are clothed and fed. You and I ought to kno w better, must adjust our 
wants, and even undergo voluntary privation in order  that they may be nursed, fed 
and clothed. 
Mahatma Gandhi  (1918), p. 189 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28   
9. THE VOICE OF GOD 
My claim to hear the voice of God is no new claim. Unfortunately there is no 
way that I know of proving the claim except through  results. God will not be God if 
He allowed Himself to be an object of proof by His cr eatures. But He does give His 
willing slave the power to pass through the fieriest of  ordeals. I have been a 
willing slave to this most exacting Master for more t han half a century. His voice 
has been increasingly audible as years have rolled fey . He has never forsaken me 
even in my darkest hour. He has saved me often against  myself and left me not a 
vestige of independence. The greater the surrender to  Him, the greater has been 
my joy. 
Harijan , 6-5-'33 
 
Nobody has to my knowledge questioned the possibility o f the Inner Voice 
speaking to some, and it is a gain to the world even if one person's claim to speak 
under the authority of the Inner Voice can be reall y sustained. Many men make the 
claim, but not all will be able to substantiate it. B ut, it cannot and ought not to 
be suppressed for the sake of preventing false claimants.  There is no danger what-
soever if many people could truthfully represent the Inner Voice. But, 
unfortunately, there is no remedy against hypocrisy. V irtue must not be 
suppressed because many will feign it. Men have always  been found throughout 
the world claiming to speak for the Inner Voice. Bu t no harm has yet overtaken the 
world through their short lived activities. Before o ne is able to listen to that 
Voice, one has to go through a long and fairly severe  course of training, and when 
it is the Inner Voice that speaks, it is unmistakable, The world cannot be 
successfully fooled for all time. There is, therefore,  no danger of anarchy setting 
in because a humble man like me will not be suppressed  and will dare to claim the 
authority of the Inner Voice, when he believes that he has heard it. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29  Harijan , 18-3-'33 
 
For me the Voice of God, of Conscience, of Truth or the Inner Voice or 'the 
still small Voice' mean one and the same thing. I saw n o form. I have never tried, 
for I have always believed God to be without form. B ut what I did hear was like a 
Voice from afar and yet quite near. It was as unmistak able as some human voice 
definitely speaking to me, and irresistible. I was not dreaming at the time I heard 
the Voice. The hearing of the Voice was preceded by a terrific struggle within me. 
Suddenly the Voice came upon me. I listened, made ce rtain that it was the Voice, 
and the struggle ceased. I was calm. The determination  was made accordingly; the 
date and the hour of the fast were fixed. Joy came o ver me. This was between 11 
and 12 midnight. I felt refreshed and began to write  the note about it which the 
reader must have seen.  
Harijan , 8-7-'33 
 
Could I give any further evidence that it was truly  the Voice that I heard and 
that it was not an echo of my own heated imagination ? I have no further evidence 
to convince the sceptic. He is free to say that it wa s all self- delusion or 
hallucination. It may well have been so. I can offe r no proof to the contrary. But I 
can say this—that not the unanimous verdict of the whole world against me could 
shake me from the belief that what I heard was the tr ue Voice of God. 
Harijan , 8-7-'33 
 
But some think that God Himself is a creation of our own imagination. If that 
view holds good, then nothing is real, everything is o f our own imagination. Even 
so, whilst my imagination dominates me, I can only act  under its spell. Realest Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  things are only relatively so. For me the Voice was m ore real than my own 
existence. It has never failed me, and for that matt er, anyone else. 
Harijan , 8-7-'33 
 
And every one who wills can hear the Voice. It is wi thin every one. But like 
everything else, it requires previous and definite pre paration. 
Harijan , 8-7-'33 
 
There is no question of hallucination. I have stated a  simple scientific truth, 
thus to be tested by all who have the will and the pa tience to acquire the 
necessary qualifications, which are again incredibly si mple to understand and easy 
enough to acquire where there is determination. I c an only say : "You have to 
believe no one but yourselves. You must try to listen t o the Inner Voice, but if you 
won't have the expression 'Inner Voice', you may use the expression 'dictates of 
reason', which you should obey, and if you will not  parade God, I have no doubt 
you will parade something else which in the end will  prove to be God, for 
fortunately, there is no one and nothing else but God  in this universe." I would also 
submit that it is not every one claiming to act on th e urge of the Inner Voice (who) 
has that urge. After all, like every other faculty, this faculty for listening to the 
still small Voice within requires previous effort, and  training, perhaps much 
greater than what is required for the acquisition of any other faculty, and even if 
out of thousands of claimants only a few succeed in e stablishing their claim, it is 
well worth running the risk of having and tolerating  doubtful claimants. A person 
falsely claiming to act under divine inspiration or t he promptings of the Inner 
Voice without having any such, will fare worse than t he one falsely claiming to act 
under the authority of an earthly sovereign. Wherea s the latter on being exposed 
will escape with injury to his body the former may pe rish body and soul together. 
Charitable critics impute no fraud to me, but sugge st that I am highly likely to be Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31  acting under some hallucination. The result for me, e ven then, will not be far 
different from what it would be if I was laying a fa lse claim. A humble seeker that 
I claim to be has need to be most cautious and, to p reserve the balance of mind, 
he has to reduce himself to zero before God will gui de him. Let me not labour this 
point. 
The Bombay Chronicle , 18-11-'33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32   
10. GOD-REALIZATION 
For me Truth is the sovereign principle, which includ es numerous other 
principles. This Truth is not only truthfulness in word,  but truthfulness in thought 
also, and not only the relative truth of our concep tion, but the Absolute Truth, the 
Eternal Principle that is God. There are innumerable  definitions of God, because 
His manifestations are innumerable. They overwhelm me with wonder and awe 
and for a moment stun me. But I worship God as Truth o nly. I have not yet found 
Him, but I am seeking after Him. I am prepared to sa crifice the things dearest to 
me in pursuit of this quest. Even if the sacrifice dem anded be my  very life I hope I 
may be prepared to give it. But as long as I have no t realized this Absolute Truth, 
so long must I hold by the relative truth as I have co nceived it. That relative truth 
must, meanwhile, be my beacon, my shield and buckler . Though this path is 
straight and narrow and sharp as the razor's edge, for me it has been the quickest 
and easiest. Even my Himalayan blunders have seemed tri fling to me because I 
have kept strictly to this path. For the path has saved  me from coming to grief, 
and I have gone forward according to my light. Ofte n in my progress I have had 
faint glimpses of the Absolute Truth, God, and daily t he conviction is growing upon 
me that He alone is real and all else is unreal. 
Autobiography , (1948) pp. 6-7 
 
The further conviction has been growing upon me that  whatever is possible for 
me is possible even for a child, and I have found soun d reasons for saying so. The 
instruments for the quest of Truth are as simple as they are difficult. They may 
appear quite impossible to an arrogant person, and qu ite possible to an innocent 
child. The seeker after Truth should be humbler than the dust. The world crushes 
the dust under its feet, but the seeker after Truth sho uld so humble himself that Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  even the dust could crush him. Only then, and not ti ll then, will he have a glimpse 
of Truth. 
Autobiography , (1948,) pp. 6-7 
 
This belief in God has to be based on faith which tran scends reason. Indeed; 
even the so-called realization has at bottom an elem ent of faith without which it 
cannot be sustained. In the very nature of things it must be so. Who can transgress 
the limitations of his being? I hold that complete realization is impossible in this 
embodied life. Nor is it necessary. A living immovabl e faith is all that is required 
for reaching the full spiritual height attainable by  human beings. God is not 
outside this earthly case of ours. Therefore, exterior  proof is not of much avail, if 
any at all. We must ever fail to perceive Him throu gh the senses, because He is 
beyond them. We can feel Him, if we will but withdr aw ourselves from the senses. 
The divine music is incessantly going on within ourselv es, but the loud senses 
drown the delicate music, which is unlike an infinit ely superior to anything we can 
perceive or hear with our senses. 
Harijan , 13-6-'36 
 
I have seen and believe that God never appears to yo u in person, but in action 
which can only account for your deliverance in your  darkest hour. 
Harijan , 13-6-'36 
 
My uniform experience has convinced me that there i s no other God than 
Truth. . . . The little fleeting glimpses . . . that  I have been able to have of Truth 
can hardly convey an idea of the indescribable lustr e of Truth, a million times 
more intense than that of the sun we daily see with ou r eyes. In fact, what I have 
caught is only the faintest glimmer of that mighty ef fulgence. But this much I can Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  say with assurance as a result of all my experiments, th at a perfect vision of Truth 
can only follow a complete realization of Ahimsa. 
Young India,  7-2-'29 
 
I have no special revelation of God's will. My firm b elief is that He reveals 
Himself daily to every human being but we shut our ea rs to the still small Voice. 
We shut our eyes to the Pillar of Fire in front of us . I realize His omnipresence. 
Young India,  25-5-'21 
 
Man's ultimate aim is the realization of God and al l his activities, social, 
political, religious, have to be guided by the ultim ate aim of the vision of God. 
The immediate service of all human beings becomes a n ecessary part of the 
endeavour, simply because the only way to find God i s to see Him in his creation 
and be one with it. This can only be done by service  of all. I am a part and parcel 
of the whole and I cannot find Him apart from the r est of humanity. My 
countrymen are my nearest neighbours. They have beco me so helpless, so 
resourceless, so inert that I must concentrate myself on  serving them. If I could 
persuade myself that I could find Him in a Himalayan cave I would proceed there 
immediately. But I know that I cannot find Him apar t from humanity. 
Harijan , 29-8-'36 
 
The impenetrable darkness that surrounds us is not a cur se but a blessing. He 
has given us power to see only the step in front of us, and it should be enough if 
Heavenly light reveals that step to us. We can then sin g with Newman, 'One step 
enough for me'. And we may be sure from our past exp erience that the next step 
will always be in view. In other words, the impenetra ble darkness is nothing so 
impenetrable as we imagine. But it seems impenetrabl e when, in our impatience, 
we want to look beyond that one step.  Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35  Harijan , 20-4-'34 
 
I am surer of His existence than of the fact that you  and I are sitting in this 
room. Then I can also testify that I may live without  air and water but not without 
Him. You may pluck out my eyes, but that cannot kil l me. You may chop off my 
nose, but that will not kill me. But blast my belief in God, and I am dead. You may 
call this a superstition, but I confess it is a superstit ion that I hug, even as I used 
to do the name of Rama in my childhood when there w as any cause of danger or 
alarm. That was what an old nurse had taught me. 
Harijan , 14-5-'38 
 
God is the hardest taskmaster I have known on earth, a nd he tries you through 
and through. And when you find that your faith is fa iling or your body is failing 
you, and you are sinking, He comes to your assistance s omehow or other and 
proves to you that you must not lose faith and that He  is always at your beck and 
call, but on His terms, not on your terms. So I have f ound. I cannot recall a single 
instance when, at the eleventh hour, He has forsaken m e. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi  (1933), p. 1069 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36   
11. THE PATH OF AHIMSA 
The path of Truth is as narrow as it is straight. Even so  is that of Ahimsa. It is 
like balancing oneself on the edge of a sword. By co ncentration an acrobat can 
walk on a rope. But the concentration required to t read the path of Truth and 
Ahimsa is far greater. The slightest inattention brings one tumbling to the ground. 
One can realize Truth and Ahimsa only by ceaseless striv ing. . . . 
Ahimsa is not the crude thing it has been made to appe ar. Not to hurt any 
living things is no doubt a part of Ahimsa. But it is its least expression. The 
principle of Ahimsa is hurt by every evil thought, by  undue haste, by lying, by 
hatred, by wishing ill to anybody. It is also violate d by our holding on to what the 
world needs. But the world needs even what we eat da y by day. In the place 
where we stand there are millions of a micro-organism s to whom the place 
belongs, and who are hurt by our presence there. What  should we do then? Should 
we commit suicide? Even that is no solution, if we be lieve, as we do, that so long 
as the spirit is attached to the flesh, on every destru ction of body it weaves for 
itself another. The body will cease to be only when w e give up all attachment to 
it. This freedom from all attachment is the realizati on of God as Truth. Such 
realization cannot be attained in a hurry. The body  does not belong to us. While it 
lasts we must use it as a trust handed over to our char ge. Treating in this way the 
things of the flesh, we may one day expect to become free from the burden of the 
body. Realizing the limitations of the flesh, we must strive day by day towards the 
ideal with what strength we have in us. 
It is perhaps clear from the foregoing, that without  Ahimsa it is not possible to 
seek and find Truth. 
Ahimsa and Truth are so interwined that it is practic ally impossible to 
disentangle and separate them. They are like the two sides of a coin, or rather of 
a smooth unstamped metallic disc. Who can say, which i s the obverse, and which Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37  is the reverse? Nevertheless, Ahimsa is the means; Truth i s the end. Means to be 
means must always be within our reach, and so Ahimsa is  our supreme duty. If we 
take care of the means, we are bound to reach the en d sooner or later. When once 
we have grasped this point, final victory is beyond q uestion. Whatever difficulties 
we encounter, whatever apparent reverses we sustain, w e may not give up the 
quest for Truth which alone is, being God Himself. 
From Yeravda Mandir, Chapter II 
 
Non-violence is an active force of the highest order.  It is soul-force or the power 
of Godhead within us. Imperfect man cannot grasp the  whole of that essence—he 
would not be able to bear its full blaze, but even a n infinitesimal fraction of it, 
when it becomes active within us, can work wonders. T he sun in the heavens fills 
the whole universe with its life-giving warmth. But i f one went too near it, it 
would consume him to ashes. Even so, it is with Godhead.  We become Godlike to 
the extent we realize non-violence, but we can neve r become wholly God. Non-
violence is like radium in its action. An infinitesima l quantity of it embedded in a 
malignant growth, acts continuously, silently and cease lessly till it has 
transformed the whole mass of the diseased tissue into a healthy one. Similarly, 
even a little of true non-violence acts in a silent, subtle, unseen way and leavens 
the whole society. 
Harijan , 12-ll-'38 
 
Truth without humility would be an arrogant caricat ure. He who wants to 
practise truth knows how hard it is. The world may a pplaud his so-called triumphs. 
Little does the world know his falls. A truthful man i s a chastened being. He has 
need to be humble. A man who wants to love the whole  world including one who 
calls himself his enemy knows how impossible it is to do so in his own strength. He 
must be as mere dust before he can understand the elem ents of Ahimsa. He is Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  nothing if he does not daily grow in humility as he g rows in love.... And no one can 
see God face to face who has aught of the I in him. H e must become a cypher if he 
would see God. Who shall dare say in this storm-tossed u niverse, 'I have won’? God 
triumphs in us, never we. . . .What is true of the phy sical world is true of the 
spiritual. If in order to gain a worldly battle, Eur ope sacrificed several million lives 
during the late war, itself a transitory event, what  wonder that in the spiritual 
battle millions have to perish in the attempt so that  one complete example may 
be left to the world ? 
Young India , 25-6-'25 
 
Non-violence is the greatest force at the disposal of  mankind. It is mightier than 
the mightiest weapon of destruction devised by the in genuity of man. Destruction 
is not the law of the humans. Man lives freely by his  readiness to die, if need be, 
at the hands of his brother, never by killing him. Every murder or injury, no 
matter for what cause, committed or inflicted on an other is a crime against 
humanity. 
Harijan , 20-7-'35 
 
The virtues of mercy, non-violence, love and truth in any man can be truly 
tested only when they are pitted against ruthlessness, v iolence, hate and untruth. 
If this is true, then it is incorrect to say that Ahim sa is of no avail before a 
murderer. It can certainly be said that to experime nt with Ahimsa in face of a 
murderer is to seek self-destruction. But this is the rea l test of Ahimsa. He who 
gets himself killed out of sheer helplessness, however, c an in no wise be said to 
have passed the test. He who when being killed bears no anger against this 
murderer and even asks God to forgive him is truly no n-violent. History relates this 
of Jesus Christ. With his dying breath on his cross, he is reported to have said: 
"Father, forgive them for they know not what they d o." We can get similar Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39  instances from other religions but the quotation is g iven because it is world 
famous. 
It is another matter that our non-violence has not r eached such heights. It 
would be wholly wrong for us to lower the standard of  Ahimsa by reason of our 
own fault or lack of experience. Without true under standing of the ideal, we can 
never hope to reach it. It is necessary for us, there fore, to apply our reason to 
understand the power of non-violence. 
Harijan , 28-4-'46 
 
Ahimsa is a comprehensive principle. We are helpless mo rtals caught in the 
conflagration of Himsa. The saying that life lives on  life has a deep meaning in it. 
Man cannot for a moment live without consciously or u nconsciously committing 
outward Himsa. The very fact of his living— eating, drinking and moving about—
necessarily involves some Himsa, destruction of life, b e it ever so minute. A votary 
of Ahimsa therefore remains true to his faith if the sp ring of all his actions is 
compassion, if he shuns to the best of his ability the de struction of the tiniest 
creature, tries to save it, and thus incessantly striv es to be free from the deadly 
coil of Himsa. He will be constantly growing in self-r estraint and compassion, but 
he can never become entirely free from outward Hims a. 
Autobiography  (1948), pp. 427-28 
 
Then again, because underlying Ahimsa is the unity of all life, the error of one 
cannot but affect all, and hence man cannot be whol ly free from Himsa. So long as 
he continues to be a social being, he cannot but part icipate in the Himsa that the 
very existence, of society involves. When two nation s are fighting, the duty of a 
votary of Ahimsa is to stop the war. He who is not equ al to that duty, he who has 
no power of resisting war, he who is not qualified t o resist war, may take part in Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40  war, and yet whole-heartedly try to free himself, hi s nation and the world from 
war. 
Autobiography  (1948), p. 428 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41   
12. PRAYER—THE ESSENCE OF RELIGION 
I believe that prayer is the very soul and essence  of  religion, and therefore 
prayer must be the very core of the life of man, for  no man can live without 
religion. There are some who in the egotism of thei r reason declare that they have 
nothing to do with religion. But it is like a man sa ying that he breathes but that he 
has no nose. Whether by reason, or by instinct, or by  superstition, man acknow-
ledges some sort of relationship with the divine. The rankest agnostic or atheist 
does acknowledge the need of a moral principle, and associates something good 
with its observance and something bad with its non-obse rvance. Bradlaugh, whose 
atheism is well known, always insisted on proclaiming h is innermost conviction. He 
had to suffer a lot for thus speaking the truth, but h e delighted in it and said that 
truth is its own reward. Not that he was quite insensib le to the joy resulting from 
the observance of truth. This joy however is not all worldly, but springs out of 
communion with the divine. That is why I have said t hat even a man who disowns 
religion cannot and does not live without religion.  
Now I come to the next thing, viz. that prayer is th e very core of man's life, as 
it is the most vital part of religion. Prayer is eith er petitional or in its wider sense 
is inward communion. In either case the ultimate resul t is the same. Even when it 
is petitional, the petition should be for the cleansi ng and purification of the soul, 
for freeing it from the layers of ignorance and dark ness that envelop it. He 
therefore who hungers for the awakening of the divin e in him must fall back on 
prayer. But prayer is no mere exercise of words or of the ears, it is no mere re-
petition of empty formula. Any amount of repetition  of Ramanama is futile if it 
fails to stir the soul. It is better in prayer to ha ve a heart without words than 
words without a heart. It must be in clear response to the spirit which hungers for 
it. And even as a hungry man relishes a hearty meal, a  hungry soul will relish a 
heartfelt prayer. And I am  giving you a bit of my experience and that of my 
companions when I say that he who has experienced the  magic of prayer may do Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42  without food for days together but not a single mome nt without prayer. For 
without prayer there is no inward peace. 
If that is the case, someone will say, we should be off ering our prayers every 
minute of our lives. There is no doubt about it, but  we erring mortals, who find it 
difficult to retire within ourselves for inward commu nion even for a single 
moment, will find it impossible to remain perpetually  in communion with the 
divine. We therefore fix some hours when we make a se rious effort to throw off 
the attachments of the world for a while, we make a  serious endeavour to remain, 
so to say, out of the flesh. You have heard Surdas's hym n. It is the passionate cry 
of a soul hungering for union with the divine. Accor ding to our standards he was a 
saint, but according to his own he was a proclaimed sin ner. Spiritually he was 
miles ahead of us, but he felt the separation from th e divine so keenly that he has 
uttered that anguished cry* in lothing and despair. 
I have talked of the necessity for prayer, and there through I have dealt with 
the essence of prayer. We are born to serve our - fell owmen, and we cannot 
properly do so unless we are wide awake. There is an e ternal struggle raging in 
man's breast between the powers of darkness and of ligh t, and he who has not the 
sheet-anchor of prayer to rely upon will be a victim  to the powers of darkness. 
The man of prayer will be at peace with himself and with the whole world; the 
man who goes about the affairs of the world without a  prayerful heart will be 
miserable and will make the world also miserable. Apa rt therefore from its 
bearing on man's condition after death, prayer has in calculable value for man in 
this world of the living. Prayer is the only means of  bringing about orderliness and 
peace and repose in our daily acts. Take care of the  vital thing and other things 
will take care of themselves. Rectify one angle of a square, and the other angles 
will be automatically right. 
Begin therefore your day with prayer, and make it so  soulful that it may 
remain with you until the evening. Close the day wit h prayer so that you may have 
a peaceful night free from dreams and nightmares. Do  not worry about the form of Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43  prayer. Let it be any form, it should be such as can p ut us into communion with 
the divine. Only, whatever be the form, let not the  spirit wander while the words 
of prayer run on out of your mouth. 
All things in the universe, including the sun and t he moon and the stars, obey 
certain laws. Without the restraining influence of t hese laws the world would not 
go on for a single moment. You, whose mission in life i s service of your fellowmen, 
will go to pieces if you do not impose on yourselves som e sort of discipline, and 
prayer is a necessary spiritual discipline. It is discipli ne and restraint that 
separates us from the brute. If we will be men walking  with our heads erect and 
not walking on all fours, let us understand and put o urselves under voluntary 
discipline and restraint. 
Young India , 23-l-'30 
 
* मो सम कौन क ु/glyph466टल खल कामी । 
'Who is so corrupt, wicked and lustful as I !’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44   
13. WHY PRAY? 
Why pray at all? Does not God, if there be One, kno w what has happened? 
Does He stand in need of prayer to enable Him to do H is duty? 
No, God needs no reminder. He is within every one. No thing happens without 
His permission. Our prayer is a heart search. It is a re minder to ourselves that we 
are helpless without His support. No effort is complete without prayer,—without a 
definite recognition that the best human endeavour i s of no effect if it has not 
God's blessing behind it. Prayer is a call to humility.  It is a call to self- 
purification, to inward search. 
Harijan,  8-6-'35 
 
In my opinion, Rama, Rahaman, Ahurmazda, God or Kri shna are all attempts 
on the part of man to name that invisible force whi ch is the greatest of all forces. 
It is inherent in man, imperfect though he be, ceasel essly to strive after 
perfection. In the attempt he falls into reverie. An d, just as a child tries to stand, 
falls down again and again and ultimately learns how to walk, even so man, with 
all his intelligence, is a mere infant as compared to  the infinite and ageless God. 
This may appear to be an exaggeration but is not. Man  can only describe God in his 
own poor language. The power we call God defies descr iption. Nor does that 
power stand in need of any human effort to describe Him. It is man who requires 
the means whereby he can describe that power which i s vaster than the ocean. If 
this premise is accepted, there is no need to ask wh y we pray. Man can only 
conceive God within the limitations of his own mind.  If God is vast and boundless 
as the ocean, how can a tiny drop like man imagine what He is? He can only 
experience what the ocean is like, if he falls into a nd is merged in it. This 
realization is beyond description. In Madame Blavatsk y's language man, in praying, 
worships his own glorified self. He can truly pray, who  has the conviction that God Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45  is within him. He who has not, need not pray. God wi ll not be offended, but I can 
say from experience that he who does not pray is certa inly a loser. What matters 
then whether one man worships God as a Person and anot her as Force? Both do 
right according to their lights. None knows and perha ps never will know what the 
absolutely proper way to pray is. The ideal must alw ays remain the ideal. One 
need only remember that God is the Force among all the forces. All other forces 
are material. But God is the vital force or spirit wh ich is all-pervading, all-
embracing and therefore beyond human ken. 
Harijan,  18-8-'46 
 
A Dialogue with a Buddhist  
Dr. Fabri, a follower of Buddha, called on Gandhiji  at Abbottabad, and 
enquired : 
"Could the Divine Mind be changed by prayer? Could one find it out by prayer?” 
"It is a difficult thing to explain fully what I do when I pray,'' said Gandhiji.”But 
I must try to answer your question. The Divine Mind i s unchangeable, but that 
Divinity is in everyone arid everything—animate and  inanimate. The meaning of 
prayer is that I want to evoke that Divinity within  me. Now I may have that 
intellectual conviction, but not a living touch. An d so when I pray for Swaraj or 
Independence for India I pray or wish for adequate p ower to gain that Swaraj or to 
make the largest contribution I can towards winning i t, and I maintain that I can 
get that power in answer to prayer." 
"Then you are not justified in calling it prayer; to  pray means to beg or 
demand," said Dr. Fabri. 
"Yes, indeed. You may say I beg it of myself, of my H igher self, the Real self 
with which I have not yet achieved complete identif ication. You may, therefore, 
describe it as a continual longing to lose oneself in t he Divinity which comprises 
all." Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46  "What about the people who cannot pray?" asked Dr. F abri. 
"Be humble," said Gandhiji, "I would say to them, and  do not limit even the 
real Buddha by your own conception of Buddha. He co uld not have ruled the lives 
of millions of men that he did and does today if he was not humble enough to 
pray. There is something infinitely higher than int ellect that rules us and even the 
sceptics. Their scepticism and philosophy does not hel p them in critical periods of 
their lives. They need something better, something o utside them that can sustain 
them. And so if someone puts a conundrum before me, I  say to him, 'You are not 
going to know the meaning of God or prayer unless you  reduce yourself to a 
cipher. You must be humble enough to see that in spi te of your greatness and 
gigantic intellect you are but a speck in the unive rse. A merely intellectual 
conception of the things of life is not enough. It i s the spiritual conception which 
eludes the intellect, and which alone can give one s atisfaction. Even moneyed 
men have critical periods in their lives. Though they  are surrounded by everything 
that money can buy and affection can give, they fin d themselves at  certain 
moments in their lives utterly distracted. It is in t hese moments that we have a 
glimpse of God, a vision of Him who is guiding every one of our steps in life. It is 
prayer.' " 
"You mean what we might call a true religious experi ence which is stronger 
than intellectual conception," said Dr. Fabri. "Twic e in life I had that experience, 
but I have since lost it. But I now find great comfo rt in one or two sayings of 
Buddha : 'Selfishness is the cause of sorrow', and 'Reme mber, monks, everything is 
fleeting'. To think of these takes almost the place of belief." 
"That is prayer," repeated Gandhiji with an insistence  that could not but have 
gone home. 
Harijan , 19-8-'39 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47   
14. HOW, TO WHOM AND WHEN TO PRAY 
'Often, Sir, do you ask us to worship God, to pray bu t never tell us how to and 
to whom to do so. Will you kindly enlighten me?' as ks a reader of the  Navajivan . 
Worshipping God is singing the praise of God. Prayer is a confession of one's 
unworthiness and weakness. God has a thousand names, or rather, He is Nameless. 
We may worship or pray to Him by whichever name tha t pleases us. Some call Him 
Rama, some Krishna, others call Him Rahim, and yet ot hers call Him God. All 
worship the same spirit, but as all foods do not agree  with all, all names do not 
appeal to all. Each chooses the name according to his associations, and He being 
the In-Dweller, All-Powerful and Omniscient knows our  innermost feelings and 
responds to us according to our deserts. 
Worship or prayer, therefore, is not to be performed  with the lips, but with 
the heart. And that is why it can be performed equal ly by the dumb and the sta- 
mmerer, by the ignorant and the stupid. And the pray ers of those whose tongues 
are nectared but whose hearts are full of poison are n ever heard. He, therefore, 
who would pray to God, must cleanse his heart. Rama wa s not only on the lips of 
Hunuman, He was enthroned in his heart. He gave Hanu man exhaustless strength. 
In His strength he lifted the mountain and crossed the ocean. It is faith that steers 
us through stormy seas, faith that moves mountains and  faith that jumps across 
the ocean. That faith is nothing but  a living, wideawake consciousness of God 
within. He who has achieved that faith wants nothing.  Bodily diseased he is spiri-
tually healthy, physically pure, he rolls in spiritu al riches. 
'But how is the heart to be cleansed to this extent?' one might well ask. The 
language of the lips is easily taught; but who can t each the language of the heart? 
Only the  bhakta —the true devotee—knows it and can teach it. The Git a has 
defined the  bhakta  in three places and talked of him generally everywh ere. But a 
.knowledge of the definition of a  bhakta  is hardly a sufficient guide. They are rare Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48  on this earth. I have therefore suggested the Religio n of Service as the means. God 
of Himself seeks for His scat the heart of him who serves his fellowmen. That is 
why Narasinha Mehta who 'saw and knew' sang 'He is a tr ue Vaishnava  who knows 
to melt at other's woe.' Such was Abu Ben Adhem. He s erved his fellowmen, and 
therefore his name topped the list of those who served  God. 
But who are the suffering and the woebegone? The supp ressed and the 
poverty-stricken. He who would be a bhakta , therefore, must serve these by body, 
soul and mind. How can he who regards the 'suppressed' c lasses as untouchables 
serve them by the body? He who does not even condesce nd to exert his body to 
the extent of spinning for the sake of the poor, and  trots out lame excuses, docs 
not know the meaning of service. An able-bodied wret ch deserves no alms, but an 
appeal to work for his bread. Alms debase him. He who spins before the poor 
inviting them to do likewise serves God as no one else does. 'He who gives Me even 
a trifle such as a fruit or a flower or even a leaf in the spirit of  bhakti  is My 
servant,' says the Lord in the Bhagawadgita. And He ha th his footstool where live 
the humble, the lowliest and the lost.' Spinning, th erefore, for such is the greatest 
prayer, the greatest worship, the greatest sacrifice. 
"Prayer, therefore, may be done by any name. A pray erful heart is the vehicle 
and service makes the heart prayerful. Those Hindus w ho in this age serve the un-
touchables from a full heart truly pray; the Hindus a nd those others who spin 
prayerfully for the poor and the indigent truly pra y. 
Young India , 24-9-'25 
 
There can be no fixed rule laid down as to the time these devotional acts 
should take. It depends upon individual temperament. These are precious 
moments in one's daily life. The exercises are intended  to sober and humble us 
and enable us to realize that nothing happens witho ut His will and that we are but 
'clay in the hands of the Potter'. These are moments  when one reviews one's Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49  immediate past, confesses one's weaknesses, asks for forgiv eness and strength to 
be and do better. One minute may be enough for some,  twenty-four hours may be 
too little for others. For those who are filled with the presence of God in them, to 
labour is to pray. Their life is one continuous prayer  or act of worship. For those 
others who act only to sin, to indulge themselves, and  live for self, no time is too 
much. If they had patience and faith and the will t o be pure, they would pray till 
they feel the definite purifying presence of God wit hin them. For us ordinary 
mortals there must be a middle path between these two  extremes. We are not so 
exalted as to be able to say that all our acts are a d edication, nor perhaps are we 
so far gone as to be living purely for self. Hence ha ve all religions set apart times 
for general devotion. Unfortunately these have nowad ays become merely 
mechanical and formal, where they are not hypocriti cal. What is necessary is the 
correct attitude to accompany these devotions. 
For definite personal prayer in the sense of asking Go d for something, it should 
certainly be in one's own tongue. Nothing can be gra nder than to ask God to make 
us act justly towards everything that lives. 
Young India , 10-6-'26 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50   
15. FASTS 
A genuine fast cleanses body, mind and soul. It cru cifies the flesh and to that 
extent sets the soul free. A sincere prayer can work wonders. It is an intense 
longing of the soul for its even greater purity. Puri ty thus gained when it is utilized 
for a noble purpose becomes a prayer. The mundane use of the Gayatri, its 
repetition for healing the sick, illustrates the mean ing we have given to prayer. 
When the same Gayatri  japa  is performed with a humble and concentrated mind in  
an intelligent manner in times of national difficult ies and calamities, it becomes a 
most potent instrument for warding off danger. There can be no greater mistake 
than to suppose that the recitation of the Gayatri, t he Namaz or the Christian 
prayer are superstitions fit to be practised by the ig norant and the credulous. 
Fasting and prayer therefore are a most powerful pro cess of purification and that 
which purifies necessarily enables us the better to do our duty and to attain our 
goal. If therefore fasting and prayer seem at times n ot to answer, it is not because 
there is nothing in them but because the right spirit  is not behind them. 
A man who fasts and gambles away the whole of the day  as do so many on 
Janmashtami day, naturally, not only obtains no result  from the fast in the shape 
of greater purity but such a dissolute fast leaves hi m on the contrary degraded. A 
fast to be true must be accompanied by readiness to re ceive pure thoughts and 
determination to resist all Satan's temptations. Simil arly a prayer to be true has to 
be intelligible and definite. One has to identify on eself with it. Counting beads 
with the name of Allah on one's lips whilst the mind w anders in all directions is 
worse than useless. 
Young India , 24-3-'20 
 
Of course, it is not to be denied that fasts can be rea lly coercive. Such are fasts 
to attain a selfish object. A fast undertaken to wring  money from a person or for Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51  fulfilling some such personal end would amount to the exercise of coercion or 
undue influence. I would unhesitatingly advocate resi stance of such undue 
influence. I have myself successfully resisted it in the fasts that have been 
undertaken or threatened against me. And if it is arg ued that the dividing line 
between a selfish and an unselfish end is often very thi n, I would urge that a 
person who regards the end of a fast to be selfish or o therwise base should 
resolutely refuse to yield to it, even though the re fusal may result in the death of 
the fasting person. If people will cultivate the hab it of disregarding fasts which in 
their opinion are taken for unworthy ends, such fasts w ill be robbed of the taint of 
coercion and undue influence. Like all human institu tions, fasting can be both 
legitimately and illegitimately used. But as a great weapon in the armoury of 
Satyagraha, it cannot be given up because of its possib le abuse. Satyagraha has 
been designed as an effective substitute for violence . This use is in its infancy 
and, therefore, not yet perfected. But as the author  of modern Satyagraha I 
cannot give up any of its manifold uses without forfei ting my claim to handle it in 
the spirit of a humble seeker. 
Harijan , 9-9-'33 
 
Christian Objections  
[With reference to a letter from C. F. Andrews expr essing moral repulsion amongst 
Christians in England against 'fasting unto death',  Gandhiji wrote:] 
Hindu religious literature is replete with instances of fasting, and thousands of 
Hindus fast even today on the slightest pretext. It i s the one thing that does the 
least harm. There is no doubt that, like everything t hat is good, fasts are abused. 
That is inevitable. One cannot forbear to do good, because sometimes evil is done 
under its cover. 
My real difficulty is with my Christian Protestant fr iends, of whom I have so 
many and whose friendship I value beyond measure. Let me confess to them that, Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52  though from my very first contact with them I have k nown their dislike for fasts, I 
have never been able to understand it. 
Mortification of the flesh has been held all the worl d over as a condition of 
spiritual progress. There is no prayer without fasting, taking fasting in its widest 
sense. A complete fast is a complete and literal denial  of self. It is the truest 
prayer. "Take my life and let it be always, only, al l for Thee" is not, should not be, 
a mere lip or figurative expression. It has to be a r eckless and joyous giving 
without the least reservation. Abstention from food and even water is but the 
mere beginning, the least part of the surrender. 
Whilst I was putting together my thoughts for this arti cle, a pamphlet written 
by Christians came into my hands wherein was a chapte r on the necessity of 
example rather than precept. In this occurs a quotati on from the 3rd Chapter of 
Jonah. The prophet had foretold that Nineveh, the g reat city, was to be destroyed 
on the fortieth day of his entering it: 
"So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclai med a fast, and put on 
sack-cloth, from the greatest of them even to the lea st of them. For word came 
unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his thron e, and he laid his robe from 
him, and covered him with sack-cloth, and sat in ashe s. And he caused it to be 
proclaimed and published through Nineveh by the decr ee of the king and the 
nobles saying, 'Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste anything; let them 
not feed, nor drink water. But let man and beast be covered with sack-cloth, and 
cry mightily unto God: yea, let them turn everyone from his evil way, and from 
the violence that is in their hands. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and 
turn away from his fierce anger that we perish not?'  And God saw their works that 
they turned from their evil way; and God repented o f the evil that he had said 
that he would do unto them; and he did it not." 
Thus this was a 'fast unto death'. But every fast unto  death is not suicide. This 
fast of the king and the people of Nineveh was a grea t and humble prayer to God 
for deliverance. It was to be either deliverance or death. Even so was my fast, if I Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53  may compare it to the Biblical fast. This chapter fro m the book of Jonah reads like 
an incident in the Ramayana. 
Harijan , 15-4-'33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54   
16. THE ETERNAL DUEL 
Man's destined purpose is to conquer old habits, to over come the evil in him 
and to restore good to its rightful place. If religi on does not teach us how to 
achieve this conquest, it teaches us nothing. But there  is no royal road to success 
in this the truest enterprise in life. Cowardice is per haps the greatest vice from 
which we suffer and is also possibly the greatest viol ence, certainly far greater 
than bloodshed and the like that generally go under the name of violence. For it 
comes from want of faith in God and ignorance of His attributes . . . But I can give 
my own testimony and say that a heartfelt prayer is u ndoubtedly the most potent 
instrument that man possesses for overcoming cowardice an d all other bad old 
habits. Prayer is impossibility without a living faith in the presence of God within. 
Christianity and Islam describe the same process as a duel  between God and 
Satan, not outside but within; Zoroastrianism as a due l between Ahurmazd and 
Ahriman; Hinduism as a duel between forces of good and  forces of evil. We have 
to make our choice whether we should ally ourselves w ith the forces of evil or 
with the forces of good. And to pray to God is nothin g but that sacred alliance bet-
ween God and man whereby he attains his deliverance f rom the clutches of the 
prince of darkness. But a heartfelt prayer is not a r ecitation with the lips. It is a 
yearning from within which expresses itself in every wo rd, every act, nay, every 
thought of man. When an evil thought successfully assa ils him, he may know that 
he has offered but a lip prayer and similarly with re gard to an evil word escaping 
his lips or an evil act done by him. Real prayer is a n absolute shield and protection 
against this trinity of evils. Success does not always att end the very first effort at 
such real living prayer. We have to strive against ou rselves, we have to believe in 
spite of ourselves, because months are as our years. We have therefore to 
cultivate illimitable patience if we will realize t he efficacy of prayer. There will 
be darkness, disappointment and even worse; but we must  have courage enough Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55  to battle against all these and not succumb to cowar dice. There is no such thing as 
retreat for a man of prayer. 
What I am relating is not a fairy tale. I have not d rawn an imaginary picture. I 
have summed up the testimony of men who have by praye r conquered every diffi-
culty in their upward progress, and I have added my own humble testimony that 
the more I live the more I realize how much I owe t o faith and prayer which is one 
and the same thing for me. And I am quoting an expe rience not limited to a few 
hours, or days or weeks, but extending over an unbrok en period of nearly 40 years. 
I have had my share of disappointments, uttermost da rkness, counsels of despair, 
counsels of caution, subtlest assaults of pride, but I a m able to say that my faith,—
and I know that it is still little enough, by no mean s as great as I want it to be,—
has ultimately conquered every one of these difficult ies up to now. If we have 
faith in us, if we have a prayerful heart, we may n ot tempt God, may not make 
terms with Him. . . . Not until we have reduced ourse lves to nothingness can we 
conquer the evil in us. God demands nothing less than  complete self-surrender as 
the price for the only real freedom that is worth ha ving. And when a man thus 
loses himself, he immediately finds himself m the servic e of all that lives. It 
becomes his delight and his recreation. He is a new man  never weary of spending 
himself in the service of God's creation.  
Young India , 20-12-'28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56   
17. SELF-PURIFICATION 
Love and Ahimsa are matchless in their effect. But, in  their play there is no 
fuss, show, noise or placards. They presuppose self-confide nce which in its turn 
presupposes self-purification. Men of stainless character  and self-purification will 
easily inspire confidence and automatically purify th e atmosphere around them. 
Young India , 6-9-'28 
 
Identification with everything that lives is impossible  without self-purification; 
without self-purification the observance of the law o f Ahimsa must remain an 
empty dream; God can never be realized by one who i s not pure of heart. Self-
purification, therefore, must mean purification in a ll the walks of life. And 
purification being highly infectious, purification o f oneself necessarily leads to the 
purification of one's surroundings. 
Autobiography , 1948; p. 615 
 
But the path of purification is hard and steep. To a ttain to perfect purity one 
has to become absolutely passion-free in thought, speec h, and action; to rise 
above the opposing currents of love and hatred, atta chment and repulsion. I know 
that I have not in me as yet that triple purity, in spite of constant, ceaseless 
striving for it. That is why the world's praise fails t o move me, indeed it very often 
stings me. To conquer the subtle passions seems to me to be harder far than the 
physical conquest of the world by the force of arms. 
Autobiography , (1948); p. 616 
 
Never own defeat in a sacred cause and make up your m inds henceforth that you 
will be pure and that you will find a response from God. But God never answers Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57  the prayers of the arrogant, nor the prayers of those who bargain with Him. ... If 
you would ask Him to help you, you would go to Him i n all your nakedness, 
approach Him without reservation, also without fear o r doubts as to how He can 
help a fallen being like you. He who helped million s who have approached Him, is 
He going to desert you? He makes no exceptions whatsoe ver and you will find that 
every one of your prayers will be answered. The praye r of even the most impure 
will be answered. I am telling you this out of my pe rsonal experience, I have gone 
through the purgatory. Seek first the Kingdom of Hea ven and everything will be 
added unto you. 
Young India , 4-4-'29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58   
18. VALUE OF SILENCE 
It has often occurred to me that a seeker after trut h has to be silent. I know the 
wonderful efficacy of silence. I visited a Trappist mo nastery in South Africa. A 
beautiful place it was. Most of the inmates of that pl ace were under a vow of 
silence. I inquired of the Father the motive of it a nd he said the motive is 
apparent: 'We are frail human beings. We do not kno w very often what we say. If 
we want to listen to the still small Voice that is alwa ys speaking within us, it will 
not be heard if we continually speak.' I understood t hat precious lesson. I know 
the secret of silence. 
Young India , 6-8-'25 
 
Experience has taught me that silence is a part of the  spiritual discipline of a 
votary of truth. Proneness to exaggerate, to suppress o r modify the truth, 
wittingly or unwittingly, is a natural weakness of ma n, and silence is necessary in 
order to surmount it. A man of few words will rarely be thoughtless in his speech; 
he will measure every word. We find so many people impatient to talk. There is no 
chairman of a meeting who is not pestered with notes f or permission to speak. And 
whenever the permission is given the speaker generally  exceeds the time limit, 
asks for more time, and keeps on talking without perm ission. All this talking can 
hardly be said to be of any benefit to the world. It  is so much waste of time. 
Autobiography  (1948), p. 84 
 
When one comes to think of it one cannot help feelin g that nearly half the 
misery of the world would disappear if we, fretting m ortals, knew the virtue of 
silence. Before modern civilization came upon us, at least six to eight hours of 
silence out of twenty-four were vouchsafed to us. Mode rn civilization has taught 
us to convert night into day and golden silence into  brazen din and noise. What a Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59  great thing it would be if we in our busy lives could  retire into ourselves each day 
for at least a couple of hours and prepare our minds t o listen in to the Voice of the 
Great Silence. The Divine Radio is always singing if we could only make ourselves 
ready to listen to it, but it is impossible to listen wi thout silence. St. Theresa has 
used a charming image to sum up the sweet result of si lence: 
"You will at once feel your senses gather themselves tog ether; they seem like 
bees which return to the hive and there shut themselve s up to work without effort 
or care on your part. God thus rewards the violence w hich your soul has been 
doing to itself; and gives to it such a domination ove r the senses that a sign is 
enough when it desires to recollect itself, for them  to obey and so gather 
themselves together. At the first call of the will t hey come back more and more 
quickly. At last after many and many exercises of this kind God disposes them to a 
state of absolute repose and of perfect contemplation ." 
Harijan,  24-9-'38 
 
It (silence) has now become both a physical and spiritu al necessity for me. 
Originally it was taken to relieve the sense of pressur e. Then I wanted time for 
writing. After, however, I had practised it for some  time, I saw the spiritual value 
of it. It suddenly flashed across my mind that that w as the time when I could best 
hold communion with God. And now I feel as though I was naturally built for 
silence. 
Harijan , 10-12-'38 
 
Silence is a great help to a seeker after truth like myself. In the attitude of 
silence the soul finds the path in a clearer light, a nd what is elusive and deceptive 
resolves itself into crystal clearness. Our life is a long  and arduous quest after 
Truth, and the soul requires inward restfulness to att ain its full height. 
Harijan,  10-12-'38 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60   
19. EQUALITY OF RELIGIONS 
Religions are different roads converging to the same point. What does it 
matter that we take different roads, so long as we re ach the same goal? In reality, 
there are as many religions as there are individuals. 
Hind Swaraj  (1946), p. 36 
 
I believe that all the great religions of the world are true more or less. I say 
'more or less' because I believe that everything that  the human hand touches, by 
reason of the very fact that human beings are imperf ect, becomes imperfect. 
Perfection is the exclusive attribute of God and it i s indescribable, untranslatable. 
I do believe that it is possible for every human being  to become perfect even as 
God is perfect. It is necessary for us all to aspire afte r perfection, but when that 
blessed state is attained, it becomes indescribable; inde finable. And, I, therefore, 
admit, in all humility, that even the Vedas, the Ko ran and the Bible are imperfect 
word of God and, imperfect beings that we are, swayed  to and fro by a multitude 
of passions, it is impossible for us even to understand th is word of God in its 
fullness. 
Young India , 22-9-'27 
 
Belief in one God is the corner-stone of all religio ns. But I do not foresee a time 
when there would be only one religion on earth in p ractice. In theory, since there 
is one God, there can be only one religion. But in p ractice, no two persons I have 
known have had the same identical conception of God . Therefore, there will, 
perhaps, always be different religions answering to d ifferent temperaments and 
climatic conditions. 
Harijan,  2-2-'34 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61   
The need of the moment is not one religion, but mutu al respect and tolerance 
of the devotees of the different religions. We want to reach not the dead level, 
but unity in diversity. Any attempt to root out trad itions, effects of heredity, 
climate and other surroundings is not only bound to f ail but is a sacrilege. The soul 
of religions is one, but it is encased in a multitude o f forms. The latter will persist 
to the end of time. Wise men will ignore the outward  crust and see the «same soul 
living under a variety of crusts. 
Young India,  25-9-'25 
 
There is in Hinduism room enough for Jesus, as there is f or Mohammed, 
Zoroaster and Moses. For me the different religions are  beautiful flowers from the 
same garden, or they are branches of the same majestic  tree. Therefore they are 
equally true, though being received and interpreted  through human instruments 
equally imperfect. It is impossible for me to reconci le myself to the idea of 
conversion after the style that goes on in India and elsewhere today. It is an error 
which is perhaps the greatest impediment to the world 's progress towards peace. 
"Warring creeds" is a blasphemous expression. And it fit ly describes the state of 
things in India, the mother, as I believe her to be, of Religion or religions. If she is 
truly the mother, the motherhood is on trial. Why sho uld a Christian want to 
convert a Hindu to Christianity and vice versa? Why sh ould he not be satisfied if 
the Hindu is a good or godly man? If the morals of a man are a matter of no 
concern, the form of worship in a particular manner in a church, a mosque or a 
temple is an empty formula; it may even be a hindran ce to individual or social 
growth, and insistence on a particular form or repeti tion of a credo may be a 
potent cause of violent quarrels leading to bloodshe d and ending in utter disbelief 
in Religion, i.e. God Himself. 
Harijan , 30-1-'37 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62   
But it is no business of mine to criticize the scriptur es of other faiths, or to point 
out their defects. It is and should be, however, my privilege to proclaim and 
practise the truths that there may be in them. I may not, therefore, criticize or 
condemn things in the Koran or the life of the Proph et that I cannot understand. 
But I welcome every opportunity to express my admirat ion for such aspects of his 
life as I have been able to appreciate and understand . As for things that present 
difficulties, I am content to see them through the ey es of devout Mussalman 
friends, while I try to understand them with the he lp of the writings of eminent 
Muslim expounders of Islam. It is only through such a reverential approach to 
faiths other than mine that I can realize the princi ple of equality of all religions. 
But it is both my right and duty to point out the de fects in Hinduism in order to 
purify it and to keep it pure. But when non-Hindu c ritics set about criticizing 
Hinduism and cataloguing its faults they only blazon t heir own ignorance of 
Hinduism and their incapacity to regard it from the Hindu view-point. It destorts 
their vision and vitiates their judgment. Thus my own experience of the non-Hindu 
critics of Hinduism brings home to me my limitations and teaches me to be wary of 
launching on a criticism of Islam or Christianity and their founders. 
Harijan,  13-3-'37 
 
The Allah of Islam is the same as the God of Christi ans and the Ishwara of 
Hindus. Even as there are numerous names of God in Hi nduism, there are as many 
names of God in Islam. The names do not indicate indiv iduality but attributes, and 
little man has tried in his humble way to describe mig hty God by giving Him 
attributes, though He is above all attributes, Indescri bable, Inconceivable, 
Immeasurable. Living faith in this God means acceptanc e of the brotherhood of 
the mankind. It also means equal respect for all reli gions. 
Harijan,  14-5-'38 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63   
20. TOLERANCE 
I do not like the word tolerance, but could not thi nk of a better one. 
Tolerance implies a gratuitous assumption of the infe riority of other faiths to one's 
own, whereas Ahimsa teaches us to entertain the same re spect for the religious 
faiths of others as we accord to our own, thus admittin g the imperfection of the 
latter. This admission will readily be made by a seeke r of Truth who follows the 
law of love. If we had attained the full vision of T ruth, we would no longer be 
seekers, but become one with God, for Truth is God. Bu t being only seekers, we 
prosecute our quest and are conscious of our imperfect ion. And if we are 
imperfect ourselves, religion as conceived by us must al so be imperfect. We have 
not realized religion in its perfection, even as we h ave not realized God. Religion 
of our conception, thus imperfect, is always subject t o a process of evolution and 
re-interpretation. Progress towards Truth, towards God,  is possible only because 
of such evolution. And if all faiths outlined by men  are imperfect, the question of 
comparative merit does not arise. All faiths constitut e a revelation of Truth, but 
all are imperfect and liable to error. Reverence to  other faiths need not blind us 
to their faults. We must be keenly alive to the defec ts of our own faith, and must 
not leave it on that account but try to overcome th ose defects. Looking at all 
religions with an equal eye, we would not only not h esitate but would think it our 
duty to adopt into our faith every acceptable featu re of other faiths. 
The question then arises — Why should there be so many f aiths? We know that 
there are a large variety of them. The soul is one, but the bodies which she 
animates are many. We cannot reduce the number of bo dies; yet we recognize the 
unity of the soul. Even as a tree has a single trunk,  but many branches and leaves, 
there is one Religion, but any number of faiths. All faiths are a gift of God, but 
partake of human imperfection, as they pass through t he medium of humanity. 
God-given religion is beyond all speech. Imperfect m en put it into such language Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64  as they can command, and their words are interprete d by other men equally 
imperfect. Whose interpretation must be held to be t he right one ? Everyone is 
right from his own standpoint, but it is not impossibl e that everyone is wrong. 
Hence the necessity for tolerance, which does not mean  indifference towards 
one's own faith, but a more intelligent and purer l ove for it. Tolerance gives us 
spiritual insight, which is as far from fanaticism as th e North Pole is from the 
south. True knowledge of religion breaks down the ba rriers between faith and 
faith and gives rise to tolerance. Cultivation of tol erance for other faiths will 
impart to us a truer understanding of our own. 
Tolerance obviously does not disturb the distinction be tween right and wrong, 
or good and evil. The reference here throughout has  been to the principal faiths of 
the world, which are all based on identical fundamen tal principles, and which can 
all point to saintly men and women who held them in  the past and hold them now. 
In the case of good and evil, we have to cultivate charity for the wicked no less 
than for the good, the sinner no less than the saint, all the while we cherish 
inveterate hatred towards wickedness and sin. 
Young India , (Bulletin), 2-10-'30 
 
 The golden rule of conduct, therefore, is mutual to leration, seeing that we 
will never all think alike and we shall see Truth i n fragment and from different 
angles of vision. Conscience is not the same thing for all. Whilst, therefore, it is a 
good guide for individual conduct, imposition of tha t conduct upon all will be an 
insufferable interference with everybody's freedom o f conscience. 
Young India , 23-9-'26 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65   
21. Conversion 
[From an address to foreign missionaries:] 
You, the missionaries, come to India thinking that you  come to a land of 
heathens, of idolaters, of men who do not know God. One of the greatest of 
Chrsitian Divines, Bishop Hebber, wrote the two lines w hich have always left the 
sting with me: 'Where every prospect pleases, and Man alone is vile'. I wish he had 
not written them. My own experience in my travels th roughout India has been to 
the contrary. I have gone from one end of the count ry to the other, without any 
prejudice in a relentless search after truth, and I am  not able to say that here in 
this fair land, watered by the great Ganga, the Bra hmaputra and the Yamuna, man 
is vile. He is not vile. He is as much a seeker after t ruth as you and I are, possibly 
more so. This reminds me of a French book translated fo r me by a French friend. It 
is an account of an imaginary expedition in search of  knowledge. One party landed 
in India and found Truth and God personified, in a little Pariah's hut. I tell you 
there are many such huts belonging to the untouchabl es where you will certainly 
find God. They do not reason but they persist in the belief that God is. They 
depend upon God for His assistance and find it too. The re are many stories told 
throughout the length and breadth of India about th ese noble untouchables. Vile 
as some of them may be there are noblest specimens of humanity in their midst. 
But does my experience exhaust itself merely with th e untouchables? No. I am 
here to tell you that there are non-Brahmanas, there  are Brahmanas who are as 
fine specimens of humanity as you will find in any pla ce on the earth. There are 
Brahmanas today in India who are embodiments of self-s acrifice, godliness and 
humility. There are Brahmanas who are devoting themse lves body and soul to the 
service of untouchables, with no expectation of rewar d from the untouchables, 
but with execration from orthodoxy. They do not min d it because in serving 
Pariahs they are serving God. I can quote chapter and  verse from my experience. I 
place these facts before you in all humility for the simple reason that you may Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66  know this land better, the land to which you have co me to serve. You are here to 
find out the distress of the people of India and remov e it. But I hope you are here 
also in a receptive mood and if there is anything t hat India has to give, you will 
not stop your ears, you will not close your eyes and s teel your hearts but open up 
your ears, eyes and most of all your hearts to receive  all that may be good in this 
land. I give you my assurance that there is a great d eal of good in India. Do not 
flatter yourselves with the belief that a mere recita l of that celebrated verse in 
St. John makes a man a Christian. If I have read the Bible correctly, I know many 
men who have never heard the name of Jesus Christ or have even rejected the 
official interpretation of Christianity, who will, p robably, if Jesus came in our 
midst today in the flesh, be owned by him more than m any of us. I therefore ask 
you to approach the problem before you with open-he artedness and humility. 
I cannot help recalling to you the conversation I re lated in Darjeeling at the 
Missionary Language School. Lord Salisbury was waited u pon by a deputation of 
missionaries in connection with China and this deputati on wanted protection. I 
cannot recall the exact words but give you the purp ort of the answer Lord 
Salisbury gave. He said, 'Gentlemen, if you want to go to China to preach the 
message of Christianity, then do not ask for assistance of  temporal power. Go with 
your lives in your hands and if the people of China w ant to kill you, imagine that 
you have been killed in the service of God.' Lord Sa lisbury was right. Christian 
missionaries come to India under the shadows or, if you  like, under the protection 
of a temporal power, and it creates an impassable bar . 
If you give me statistics that so many orphans have bee n reclaimed and 
brought to the Christian faith, I would accept them  but I do not feel convinced 
thereby that it is your mission. In my opinion your mi ssion is infinitely superior to 
that. You want to find men in India and if you want  to do that, you have to go to 
the lowly cottages not to give them something, might  be to take something from 
them. A true friend as I claim to be of the missionar ies of India and of the 
Europeans, I speak to you what I feel from the bottom  of my heart. I miss Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67  receptiveness, humility, willingness on your part to id entify yourselves with the 
masses of India. I have talked straight from my heart . May it find a response from 
your hearts. 
Young India , 6-8-25 
 
I hold that proselytizing under the clock of humanit arian work is, to say the 
least, unhealthy. It is most certainly resented by th e people here. Religion after 
all is a deeply personal matter, it touches the heart.  Why should I change my 
religion because a doctor who professes Christianity as  his religion has cured me of 
some disease or why should the doctor expect or suggest such a change whilst I am 
under his influence? Is not medical relief its own rew ard and satisfaction? Or why 
should I whilst I am in a missionary educational institu tion have Christian teaching 
thrust upon me? In my opinion these are not uplifting  and give rise to suspicion if 
not even secret hostility. The methods of conversion mu st be like Caesar's wife 
above suspicion. Faith is not imparted like secular sub jects. It is given through the 
language of the heart. If a man has a living faith i n him, it spreads its aroma like 
the rose its scent. Because of its invisibility, the ext ent of its influence is far wider 
than that of the visible beauty of the colour of the  petals. 
I am, then, not against conversion. But I am against t he modern methods of it. 
Conversion nowadays has become a matter of business, lik e any other. I remember 
having read a missionary report saying how much it c ost per head to convert and 
then presenting a budget for 'the next harvest'. 
Yes, I do maintain that India's great faiths are all  sufficing for her. Apart from 
Christianity and Judaism, Hinduism and its offshoots, Isl am and Zoroastrianism are 
living faiths. No one faith is perfect. All faiths are  equally dear to their respective 
votaries. What is wanted therefore is living friendly contact among the followers 
of the great religions of the world and not a clash among them in the fruitless 
attempt on the part of each community to show the s uperiority of its faith over Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68  the rest. Through such friendly contact it will be po ssible for us all to rid our res-
pective faiths of shortcomings and excrescences. 
It follows from what I have said above that India is in no need of conversion of 
the kind I have in mind. Conversion in the sense of self-purification, self-
realization is the crying need of the times. That, h owever, is not what is ever 
meant by proselytizing. To those who would convert In dia, might it not be said, 
'Physician, heal thyself'?  
Young India , 23-4-'31 
 
When I was a youth I remember a Hindu having become a convert to 
Christianity. The whole town understood that the init iation took the shape of this 
well-bread Hindu partaking of beef and brandy in th e name of Jesus Christ and 
discarding his national costume. I learnt in later yea rs, that such a convert, as so 
many of my missionary friends put it, came to a life of freedom out of a life of 
bondage, to a life of plenty out of one of penury. As I wander about throughout 
the length and breadth of India I see many Christian Indians almost ashamed of 
their birth, certainly of their ancestral religion,  and of their ancestral dress. The 
aping of Europeans on the part of Anglo-Indians is bad  enough, but the aping of 
them by Indian converts is a violence done to their  country and, shall I say, even 
to their new religion. There is a verse in the New Te stament to bid Christians 
avoid meat if it would offend their neighbours. Meat  here, I presume, includes 
drink and dress. I can appreciate uncompromising avoid ance of all that is evil in 
the old, but where there is not only no question of a nything evil but where an 
ancient practice may be even desirable, it would be a crime to part with it when 
one knows for certain that the giving up would deepl y hurt relatives and friends. 
Conversion must not mean denationalization. Conversion  should mean a definite 
giving up of the evil of the old, adoption of all t he good of the new and a 
scrupulous avoidance of everything evil in the new. C onversion, therefore, should Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69  mean a life of greater dedication to one's own count ry, greater surrender to God, 
greater self-purification. . . .Is it not truly deplo rable that many Christian Indians 
discard their own mother-tongue, bring up their chil dren only to speak in English? 
Do they not thereby completely cut themselves adrift from the nation in whose 
midst they have to live? 
Young India , 20-8-'25 
 
To live the gospel is the most effective way... most e ffective in the beginning, 
in the middle and in the end. 
Preaching jars on me and makes no appeal to me, and I get suspicious of 
missionaries who preach. But I love those who never pre ach but live the life 
according to their lights. Their lives are silent, y et most effective, testimonies. 
Therefore I cannot say what to preach, but I can sa y that a life of service and 
uttermost simplicity is the best preaching. A rose does not need to preach. It 
simply spreads its fragrance. The fragrance is its own ser mon. If it had human 
understanding and if it could engage a number of pre achers, the preachers would 
not be able to sell more roses than the fragrance itsel f could do. The fragrance of 
religious and spiritual life is much finer and subtler than that of the rose.  
Harijan , 29-3-'35 
 
I could no more think of asking a Christian or Mussalm an or a Parsi or a Jew to 
change his faith than I would think of changing my o wn. This makes me no more 
oblivious of the limitations of the professors of those faiths, than it makes me of 
the grave limitations of the professors of mine. And seeing that it takes all my 
resources in trying to bring my practice to the level  of my faith and in preaching 
the same to my co-religionists, I do not dream of prea ching to the followers of 
other faiths. 'Judge not lest ye be judged' is a soun d maxim for one's conduct. It is Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70  a conviction daily growing upon me that the great a nd rich Christian missions will 
render true service to India, if they can persuade th emselves to confine their 
activities to humanitarian service without the ulteri or motive of converting India 
or at least her unsophisticated villagers to Christiani ty, or destroying their social 
superstructure, which notwithstanding its many defects has stood now from time 
immemorial the onslaughts upon it from within and fro m without. Whether they—
the missionaries—and we wish it or not, what is true in  the Hindu faith will abide, 
what is untrue will fall to pieces. Every living fait h must have within itself the 
power of rejuvenation if it is to live. 
Harijan , 28-9-'35 
 
Shuddhi and Tabligh 
In my opinion there is no such thing as proselytism in H induism as it is 
understood in Christianity or to a lesser extent in Isl am. The Arya Samaj has, I 
think, copied the Christians in planning its propagand a. The modern method does 
not appeal to me. It has done more harm than good. T hough regarded as a matter 
of the heart purely and one between the Maker and o neself, it has degenerated 
into an appeal to the selfish instinct. . . My Hindu i nstinct tells me that all 
religions are more or less true. All proceed from the same God but all are 
imperfect because they have come down to us through i mperfect human 
instrumentality. The real Shuddhi movement should con sist in each one trying to 
arrive at perfection in his or her own faith. In such  a plan character would be the 
only test. What is the use of crossing from one compartm ent to another, if it does 
not mean a moral rise? What is the meaning of my try ing to convert to the service 
of God (for that must be the implication of Shuddhi  or Tabligh.) when those who 
are in my fold are everyday denying God by their ac tions? "Physician, heal thyself" 
is more true in matters religious than mundane. 
Young India , 29-5-'24 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71   
22. WHY I AM A HINDU 
Believing as I do in the influence of heredity, bein g born in a Hindu family, I 
have remained a Hindu. I should reject it, if I foun d it inconsistent with my moral 
sense or my spiritual growth. On examination I have f ound it to be the most 
tolerant of all religions known to me. Its freedom fr om dogma makes a forcible 
appeal to me inasmuch as it gives the votary the lar gest scope for self- expression. 
Not being an exclusive religion, it enables the foll owers of that faith not merely to 
respect all the other religions, but it also enables th em to admire and assimilate 
whatever may be good in the other faiths. Non-viole nce is common to all religions, 
but it has found the highest expression and applicatio n in Hinduism. (I do not 
regard Jainism or Buddhism as separate from Hinduism.) Hinduism believes in the 
oneness not of merely all human life but in the onene ss of all that lives. Its 
worship of the cow is, in my opinion, its unique contr ibution to the evolution of 
humanitarianism. It is a practical application of the  belief in the oneness and, 
therefore, sacredness, of all life. The great belie f in transmigration is a direct 
consequence of that belief. Finally the discovery of the law of Varnashrama is a 
magnificent result of the ceaseless search for truth. 
Young India , 20-10-'27 
 
I call myself a Sanatani Hindu, because, 
1.  I believe in the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Puranas an d all that goes by the 
name of Hindu scriptures, and therefore in Avataras a nd rebirth; 
2.  I believe in the Varanshrama Dharma in a sense, in my opinion, strictly 
Vedic but not in its present popular and crude sense; 
3.  I believe in the protection of the cow in its much l arger sense than the 
popular; Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72  4.  I do not disbelieve in idol-worship. 
The reader will note that I have purposely refraine d from using the word divine 
origin in reference to the Vedas or any other scriptu res. For I do not believe in the 
exclusive divinity of the Vedas. I believe the Bible,  the Koran, and the Zend Avesta 
to be as much divinely inspired as the Vedas. My belie f in the Hindu scriptures 
does not require me to accept every word and every v erse as divinely inspired. Nor 
do I claim to have any first-hand knowledge of thes e wonderful books. But I do 
claim to know and feel the truths of the essential! te aching of the scriptures. I de-
cline to be bound by any interpretation, however le arned it may be, if it is 
repugnant to reason or moral sense. I do not emphatic ally repudiate the claim (if 
they advance any such) of the present Shankaracharya s and Shastris to give a 
correct interpretation of the Hindu scriptures. On th e contrary I believe that our 
present knowledge of these books is in a most chaotic s tate. I believe implicitly in 
the Hindu aphorism, that no one truly knows the Shast ras who has not attained 
perfection in Innocence (Ahimsa), Truth (Satya) and Self-control (Brahmacharya) 
and who has not renounced all acquisition or possession  of wealth. I believe in the 
institution of Gurus, but in this age millions must go w ithout a Guru, because it is 
a rare thing to find a combination of perfect purit y and perfect learning. But one 
need not despair of ever knowing the truth of one's  religion, because the 
fundamentals of Hinduism, as of every great religion,  are unchangeable and easily 
understood. Every Hindu believes in God and His oneness,  in rebirth and 
salvation.... I am a reformer through and through. B ut my zeal never takes me to 
the rejection of any of the essential things of Hindu ism. I have said I do not 
disbelieve in idol- worship. An idol does not excite a ny feeling of veneration in 
me. But I think that idol-worship is part of human n ature. We hanker after 
symbolism. Why should one be more composed in a church  than elsewhere? Images 
are an aid to worship. No Hindu considers an image to  be God. I do not consider 
idol-worship a sin. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73  It is clear from the foregoing that Hinduism is not an exclusive religion. In it 
there is room for the worship of all the prophets of t he world. It is not a 
missionary religion in the ordinary sense of the term. It has no doubt absorbed 
many tribes in its fold, but this absorption has been of an evolutionary, 
imperceptible character. Hinduism tells everyone to worship God according to his 
own faith or Dharma, and so it lives at peace with all the religions.  
Young India , 6-10-'21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74   
23. BUDDHISM, CHRISTIANITY AND ISLAM 
I have heard it contended times without number and I  have read in books also 
claiming to express the spirit of Buddhism that Buddha did not believe in God. In 
my humble opinion such a belief contradicts the very central fact of Buddha's 
teaching. . . .The confusion has arisen over his reje ction and just rejection of all 
the base things that passed in his generation under the name of God. He 
undoubtedly rejected the notion that a being called  God was actuated by malice, 
could repent of his actions, and like the kings of the  earth could possibly be open 
to temptations and bribes and could possibly have favo urites. His whole soul rose 
in mighty indignation against the belief that a bein g called God required for his 
satisfaction the living blood of animals in order that  he might be pleased—animals 
who were his own creation. He, therefore, reinstated God in the right place and 
dethroned the usurper who for the time being seemed t o occupy that White 
Throne. He emphasized and re-declared the eternal an d unalterable existence of 
the moral government of this universe. He unhesitating ly said that the law was 
God Himself. 
Young India , 24-11-'27 
 
God's laws are eternal and unalterable and not separa ble from God Himself. It 
is an indispensable condition of His very perfection. A nd hence the great confusion 
that Buddha disbelieved in God and simply believed i n the moral law, and because 
of this confusion about God Himself, arose the confusion  about the proper 
understanding of the great word Nirvana. Nirvana is u ndoubtedly not utter extinc-
tion. So far as I have been able to understand the ce ntral fact of Buddha's life, 
Nirvana is utter extinction of all that is base in us,  all that is vicious in us, all that 
is corrupt and corruptible in us. Nirvana is not like  the black, dead peace of the Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75  grave, but the living peace, the living happiness of a soul which is conscious of 
itself, and conscious of having found its own abode in the heart of the Eternal. 
Young India , 24-11-'27 
 
Great as Buddha's contribution to humanity was in resto ring God to His eternal 
place, in my humble opinion, greater still was his con tribution to humanity in his 
exacting regard of all life, be it ever so low. 
Young India , 20-1-'27 
 
I may say that I have never been interested in a hi storical Jesus. I should not 
care if it was proved by someone that the man called  Jesus never lived, and that 
(what) was narrated in the Gospels was a fragment of th e writer's imagination. For 
the Sermom on the Mount would still be true for me. 
Young India , 31-12-'31 
 
I cannot ascribe exclusive divinity to Jesus. He is as d ivine as Krishna or Rama 
or Muhammad or Zoroaster. Similarly I do not regard every word of the Bible as 
the inspired word of God even as I do not regard ev ery word of the Vedas or the 
Koran as inspired. The sum total of each of these book s is certainly inspired, but I 
miss that inspiration in many of the things taken indiv idually. The Bible is as much 
a book of religion with me as the Gita and the Koran . 
Harijan,  6-3-'37 
 
What... does Jesus mean to me? To me, He was one of the  greatest teachers 
humanity has ever had. To His believers, He was God's only begotten Son. Could 
the fact that I do or do not accept this belief make  Jesus have any more or less Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76  influence in my life? Is all the grandeur of His teac hing and of His doctrine to be 
forbidden to me? I cannot believe so. 
The Modern Review, October , '41 
 
I believe that it is impossible to estimate the merits of the various religions of 
the world, and, moreover, I believe that it is unnec essary and harmful even to 
attempt it. But each one of them, in my judgement, embodies a common 
motivating force : the desire to uplift man's life an d give it purpose. And because 
the life of Jesus has the significance and the transce ndency to which I have 
alluded, I believe that He belongs not solely to Chr istianity, but to the entire 
world, to all races and people—it matters little un der what flag, name or doctrine 
they may work, profess a faith or worship a god inheri ted from their ancestors. 
The Modern Review, October , '41 
 
I have not been able to see any difference between t he Sermon on the Mount 
and the Bhagavad Gita. What the Sermon describes in a graphic manner, the 
Bhagavad Gita reduces to a scientific formula. It ma y not be a scientific book in 
the accepted sense of the term, but it has argued out the law of love—the law of 
abandon as I would call it —in a scientific manner. T he Sermon on the Mount gives 
the same law in wonderful language. The New Testament  gave me comfort and 
boundless joy, as it came after the repulsion that part s of the Old had given me. 
Today supposing I was deprived of the Gita and forgot all its contents but had a 
copy of the Sermon, I should derive the same joy fro m it as I do from the Gita. 
Young India , 22-12-'27 
 
I do regard Islam to be a religion of peace in the sa me sense as Christianity, 
Buddhism and Hinduism are. No doubt there are differ ences in degrees, but the 
object of these religions is peace. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77  Young India , 20-1-'27 
 
 Islam's distinctive contribution to India's nationa l culture is its unadulterated 
belief in the oneness of God and a practical applicat ion of the truth of the 
brotherhood of man for those who are nominally with in its fold. I call these two 
distinctive contributions. For in Hinduism the spirit of brotherhood has become too 
much philosophized. Similarly though philosophical Hinduism has no other god but 
God, it cannot be denied that practical Hinduism is n ot so emphatically 
uncompromising as Islam. 
Young India,  21-3-'29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78   
24. GOD AND GODS 
"If Hinduism become monotheistic” suggested the Fathe r, "Christianity and 
Hinduism can serve India in co-operation." 
"I would love to see the co-operation happen," said G andhiji, "but it cannot if 
the present day Christian Missions persist in holding up  Hinduism to ridicule and 
saying that no one can go to heaven unless he renounce s and denounces Hinduism. 
But I can conceive a good Christian, silently workin g away, and shedding the sweet 
aroma of his life on Hindu communities, like the rose  which does not need any 
speech to spread its fragrance but spreads it because it must. Even so a truly 
spiritual life. Then surely there would be peace on e arth and goodwill among men. 
But not so long as there is militant or 'muscular' Ch ristianity. This is not to be 
found in the Bible. But you find it in Germany and other countries." 
"But if Indians begin to believe in one God and give  up idolatry, don't you think 
the whole difficulty will be solved?" 
"Will the Christians be satisfied with it? Are they al l united?" 
"Of course all the Christian sects are not united," sai d the Catholic Father. 
"Then you are asking only a theoretical question. And  may I ask you, is there 
any amalgamation between Islam and Christianity, thou gh both are said to believe 
in one God? If these two have not amalgamated, ther e is less hope of 
amalgamation of Christians and Hindus along the lines y ou suggest. I have my own 
solution; but in the first instance, I dispute the desc ription that Hindus believe in 
many gods and are idolaters. They do say there are m any gods, but they also 
declare unmistakably that there is ONE GOD, the GOD of Gods. It is, therefore, not 
proper to suggest that Hindus believe in many Gods. The y certainly believe in 
many worlds. Just as there is a world inhabited by men , and another by beasts, so 
also is there one inhabited by superior beings called gods whom we do not see but 
who nevertheless exist. The whole mischief is created by the English rendering of Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 79  the word (Deva or Devata) for which you have not fo und a better term than 'god'. 
But God is Ishwara, Devadhideva, God of gods. So you se e it is the word 'god' used 
to describe different divine beings that has given ri se to such confusion. I believe 
that I am a thorough Hindu but I never believe in m any gods. Never even in my 
childhood did I hold that belief, and no one ever t aught me to do so. 
 
Idolatry 
"As for idol-worship, you cannot do without it in som e form or other. Why does 
a Musalman give his life for defending a mosque which he calls a house of God? 
And why does a Christian go to a church, and when he  is required to take an oath 
he swears by the Bible? Not that I see any objection to it. And what is it if not 
idolatry to give untold riches for building mosques a nd tombs? And what do the 
Roman Catholics do when they kneel before Virgin Ma ry and before saints—quite 
imaginary figures in stone or painted on canvas or gla ss?"' 
"But," objected the Catholic Father, "I keep my mot her's photo and kiss it in 
veneration of her. But I do not worship it, nor do I worship saints. When I worship 
God, I acknowledge Him as Creator and greater than a ny human being." 
"Even so, it is not the stone we worship, but it is God we worship in images of 
stone or metal however rude they may be." 
"But villagers worship stones as God." 
"No, I tell you they do not worship anything that is less than God. When you 
kneel before Virgin Mary and ask for her intercession , what do you do? You ask to 
establish contact with God through her. Even so a Hi ndu seeks to establish contact 
with God through a stone image. I can understand you r asking for the Virgin's 
intercession. Why are Mussalmans filled with awe and exu ltation when they enter 
a mosque? Why, is not the whole universe a mosque? And what about the 
magnificent canopy of heaven that spreads over you? I s it any less than a mosque? 
But I understand and sympathize with the Muslims. It is their way of approach to Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 80  God. The Hindus have their own way of approach to th e same Eternal Being. Our 
media of approach are different, but that does not m ake Him different." 
"But the Catholics believe that God revealed to the m the true way." 
"But why do you say that the will of God is expressed o nly in one book called 
the Bible and not in others? Why i do you circumscri be the power of God?" 
"But Jesus proved that he had received the word of Go d through miracles." 
"But that is Mohammed's claim too. If you accept Chri stian testimony you must 
accept Muslim testimony and Hindu testimony too." 
"But Mohammed said he could not do miracles." 
"No. He did not want to prove the existence of God b y miracles. But he 
claimed to receive messages from God.' 
Harijan , 13-3-'37 
 
Incarnation 
God is not a person. To affirm that He descends to -ea rth every now and again 
in the form of a human being is a partial truth whi ch merely signifies that such a 
person lives near to God. Inasmuch as God is omnipresen t, He dwells within every 
human being and all may, therefore, be said to be in carnations of Him. But this 
leads us nowhere. Rama, Krishna, etc. are called incar nations of God because we 
attribute divine qualities to them. In truth they ar e creations of man's 
imagination. Whether they actually lived or not doe s not affect the picture of 
them in men's minds. The Rama and Krishna of history o ften present difficulties 
which have to be overcome by all manner of argument s. 
The truth is that God is the force. He is the essence o f life. He is pure and 
undefied consciousness. He is eternal. And yet, strangel y enough, all are not able 
to derive either benefit from or shelter in the all -pervading living presence. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 81  Electricity is a powerful force. Not all can benefit  from it. It can only be 
produced by following certain laws. It is a lifeless fo rce. Man can utilize it if he 
labours hard enough to acquire the knowledge of its l aws. 
The living force which we call God can similarly be  found if we know and 
follow His law leading to the discovery of Him in us.  
Harijan , 22-6-'47 
 
Hindu Dharma is like a boundless ocean teeming with pr iceless gems. The 
deeper you dive, the more treasures you find. In Hind u religion, God is known by 
various names. Thousands of people look doubtless upon Rama and Krishna as 
historical figures and literally believe that God cam e down in person on earth in 
the form of Rama, the son of Dasharatha, and by worshi pping him one can attain 
salvation. The same thing holds good about Krishna. Hist ory, imagination and truth 
have got so inextricably mixed up. It is next to imp ossible to disentangle them. I 
have accepted all the names and forms attributed to God as symbols connoting 
one formless omnipresent Rama. To me, therefore, Rama described as the lord of 
Sita, son of Dasharatha, is the all-powerful essence w hose name inscribed in the 
heart, removes all suffering—mental, moral and physica l. 
Harijan , 2-6-'46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 82   
25. TEMPLES AND IDOLS 
I do not regard the existence of a temple as a sin or superstition. Some form of 
common worship, and a common place of worship appear  to be a human necessity. 
Whether the temples should contain images or not is a matter of temperament 
and taste. I do not regard a Hindu or a Roman Cathol ic place of worship containing 
images as necessarily bad or superstitious, and a mosque o r a Protestant place of 
worship as good or free of superstition merely because o f their exclusion of 
images. A symbol such as a Cross or a book may easily be come idolatrous, and 
therefore superstitious. And the worship of the image o f Child Krishna or Virgin 
Mary may become ennobling and free of all superstitio n. It depends upon the 
attitude of the heart of the worshipper. 
Young India , 5-11-'25 
 
We the human families are not all philosophers. We ar e of the earth very 
earthy, and we are not satisfied with contemplating  the Invisible God. Somehow or 
other we want something which we can touch, somethin g which we can see, 
something before which we can kneel down. It does no t matter whether it is a 
book, or an empty stone building, or a stone buildin g inhabited by numerous 
figures. A book will satisfy some, an empty building will satisfy some others, and 
many others will not be satisfied unless they see someth ing inhabiting these empty 
buildings. Then I ask you to approach these temples not  as if they represented a 
body of superstitions. If you will approach these tem ples with faith in them, you 
will know that each time you visit them you will com e away from them purified 
and with your faith more and more in the living God . 
Harijan , 23-1-'37 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 83  Temple-going is for the purification of the soul. Th e worshipper draws the best 
out of himself. In greeting a living being, he may d raw the best out of the person 
greeted, if the greeting is selfless. A living being i s more or less fallible like 
oneself. But in the temple, one worships the living God, perfect beyond 
imagination. Letters written to living persons often end in heart-breaking, even 
when they are answered, and there is no guarantee of  their being always 
answered. Letters to God who, according to the devote e's imagination, resides in 
temples, require neither pen nor ink nor paper, not even speech. Mere mute 
worship constitutes the letter which brings its own unf ailing answer. The whole 
function is a beautiful exercise of faith. Here there  is no waste of effort, no heart-
breaking, no danger of being misunderstood. The write r must try to understand 
the simple philosophy lying behind the worship in temp les or mosques or churches. 
He will understand my meaning better if he will real ize that I make no distinction 
between these different abodes of God. They are what faith has made them. They 
are an answer to man's craving somehow to reach the  UNSEEN. 
Harijan , 18-3-'33 
 
I am both an idolater and an iconoclast in what I c onceive to be the true 
senses of the terms. I value the spirit behind idol-wor ship. It plays a most 
important part in the uplift of the human race. And  I would like to possess the 
ability to defend with my life the thousands of holy temples which sanctify this 
land of ours. 
Young India , 28-8-'24 
 
I am an iconoclast in the sense that I break down the subtle form of idolatry in 
the shape of fanaticism that refuses to see any virtue i n any other form of 
worshipping the Deity save one's own. This form of idol atry is more deadly for Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 84  being more fine and evasive than the tangible and gr oss form of worship that 
identifies the Deity with a little bit of a stone or a golden image. 
Young India , 28-8-'24 
 
Temples, churches and mosques very often show corruption , more often 
deterioration. Nevertheless, it would be impossible t o prove that all priests are 
bad or have been bad and that all churches, temples a nd mosques are hotbeds of 
corruption and superstition. Nor does the argument ta ke note of this fundamental 
fact that no faith has done without a habitation; a nd I go further that in the very 
nature of things it cannot exist, so long as man remai ns as he is constituted. His 
very body has been rightly called the temple of the  Holy Ghost, though 
innumerable such temples belie fact and are hot-beds o f corruption used for 
dissoluteness. And I presume that it will be accepted a s a conclusive answer to a 
sweeping suggestion that all bodies should be destroyed for the corruption of 
many, if it can be shown, as it can be, that there a re some bodies which are 
proper temples of the Holy Ghost. The cause for the co rruption of many bodies 
will have to be sought elsewhere. Temples of stone an d mortar are nothing else 
than a natural extension of these human temples and th ough they were in their 
conception undoubtedly habitations of God like human  temples, they have been 
subject to the same law of decay as the latter. 
Harijan , 11-3-'33 
 
I know of no religion or sect that has done or is doin g without its House of 
God, variously described as a temple, a mosque, a chu rch, a synagogue or an 
Agiari. Nor is it certain that any of the great ref ormers including Jesus destroyed 
or discarded temples altogether. All of them sought t o banish corruption from 
temples as well as from society. Some of them, if not all, appear to have preached Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 85  from temples. I have ceased to visit temples for years , but I do not regard myself 
on that account as a better person than before. My mother never missed going to 
the temple when she was in a fit state to go there. Pr obably her faith was far 
greater than mine, though I do not visit temples. The re are millions whose faith is 
sustained through these temples, churches and mosques. Th ey are not all blind 
followers of a superstition, nor are they fanatics. Sup erstition and fanaticism are 
not their monopoly. These vices have their root in o ur hearts and minds. 
Harijan , 11-3-'33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 86   
26. TREE-WORSHIP 
A correspondent writes: 
"It is a common enough sight in this country see men a nd women offering 
worship to stocks and stones and trees, but I was surprise d to find, that eyen 
educated women belonging to the families of enthusias tic social workers were not 
above this practice, borne of these sisters and friends defend the practice by 
saying, that since it is founded on pure reverence for  the divine in nature and no 
false beliefs, it cannot be classed as superstition, and t hey cite the names of 
Satyavan and Savitri whose memory, they say, they co mmemorate in that way. 
The argument does not convince me. May I request you to throw some light 0n the 
matter? 
I like this question. It raises the old, old question o f image-worship. I am both 
a supporter and opponent of image-worship. When imag e-worship degenerates 
into idolatry and becomes encrusted with false belief s and doctrines, it becomes a 
necessity to combat it as a gross social evil. On the  other hand, image-worship in 
the sense of investing one's ideal with a concrete shap e is inherent in man's 
nature, and even valuable as an aid to devotion. Thu s we worship an image when 
we offer homage to a book which we regard as holy or  sacred. We worship an 
image when we visit a temple or a mosque with a feel ing of sanctity or reverence. 
Nor do I see any harm in all this. On the contrary, e ndowed as man is with a finite, 
limited understanding, he can hardly do otherwise. Ev en so far from seeing 
anything inherently evil or harmful in tree- worship , I find in it a thing instinct 
with a deep pathos and poetic beauty. It symbolizes tr ue reverence for the entire 
vegetable kingdom, which with its endless panorama of beautiful shapes and 
forms, declares to us as it were with a million tongu es the greatness and glory of 
God. Without vegetation our planet would not be abl e to support life even for a Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 87  moment. In such a country especially, therefore, in w hich there is a scarcity of 
trees, tree-worship assumes a profound economic signific ance. 
I therefore see no necessity for leading a crusade aga inst tree-worship. It is 
true, that the poor simple-minded women who offer wo rship to trees have no 
reasoned understanding of the implications of their a ct. Possibly they would not 
be able to give any explanation as to why they perfo rm it. They act in the purity 
and utter simplicity of their faith. Such faith is no t a thing to be despised; it is a 
great and powerful force that we should treasure. 
Far different, however, is the case of vows and prayer s which votaries offer 
before trees. The offering of vows and prayers for sel fish ends, whether offered in 
churches, mosques, temples or before trees and shrines, is a thing not to be 
encouraged. Making of selfish requests of offering of  vows is not related to image-
worship as effect and cause. A personal selfish prayer is bad whether made before 
an image or an unseen God. 
Let no one, however, from this understand me to mean  that I advocate tree-
worship in general. I do not defend tree-worship beca use I consider it to be a 
necessary aid to devotion, but only because I recogniz e that God manifests 
Himself in innumerable forms in this universe, and ever y such manifestation 
commands my spontaneous reverence. 
Young India , 26-9-'29 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 88   
27. REASON AND FAITH 
Experience has humbled me enough to let me realize the specific limitations 
of reason. Just as matter misplaced becomes dirt, reason  misused becomes 
lunacy. 
Young India, 14-10-’26 
 
Rationalists are admirable beings, rationalism is a hide ous monster when it 
claims for itself omnipotence. Attribution of omnipot ence to reason is as bad a 
piece of idolatry as is worship of stock and stone beli eving it to be God. I plead 
not for the suppression of reason, but for a due reco gnition of that in us which 
sanctifies reason. 
Young India , 19-10-'26 
 
There are subjects where reason cannot take us far and  we have to accept 
things on faith. Faith then does not contradict reaso n but transcends it. Faith is a 
kind of sixth sense which works in cases which are with out the purview of reason. 
Harijan,  6-3-'37 
 
It is faith that steers us through stormy seas, faith t hat moves mountains and 
faith that jumps across the ocean. That faith is nothin g but a living, wide-awake 
consciousness of God within. He who has achieved that f aith wants nothing. Bodily 
diseased, he is spiritually healthy; physically poor, he rolls in spiritual riches. 
Young India , 24-9-'25 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 89  Without faith this world would come to naught in a m oment. True faith is 
appropriation of the reasoned experience of people whom we believe to have 
lived a life purified by prayer and penance. Belief , therefore, in prophets or 
incarnations who have lived in remote ages is not an i dle superstition but a 
satisfaction of an inmost spiritual want. 
Young India , 14-4-'27 
 
Everyone has faith in God though everyone does not kn ow it. For, everyone has 
faith in himself and that multiplied to the nth degr ee is God. The sum total of all 
that lives is God. We may not be God but we are of Go d—even as a little drop of 
water is of the ocean. Imagine it torn away from the  ocean and flung millions of 
miles away. It becomes helpless torn from its surroundi ngs and cannot feel the 
might and majesty of the ocean. But if someone could  point out to it that it is of 
the ocean, its faith would revive, it would dance wi th joy and the whole of the 
might and majesty of the ocean would be reflected in  it. 
Harijan,  3-6-'39 
 
Seeing God face to face is to feel that He is enthron ed in our hearts even as a 
child feels a mother's affection without needing any demonstration. Does a child 
reason out the existence of a mother's love? Can he  prove it to others? He 
triumphantly declares, 'It is.' So must it be with th e existence of God. He defies 
reason. But He is experienced. Let us not reject the experience of Tulsidas, 
Ghaitanya, Ramadas and a host of other spiritual teac hers even as we do not 
reject that of mundane teachers. 
Young India , 9-7-'25 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 90   
28. SCRIPTURES 
Mr Basil Mathews: Where do you find the seat of autho rity? 
Gandhiji: It lies here (pointing to his breast). I exe rcise my judgment about 
every scripture, including the Gita. I cannot let a scriptural text supersede my 
reason. Whilst I believe that the principal books are  inspired, they suffer from a 
process of double distillation. Firstly they come throu gh a human prophet, and 
then through the commentaries of interpreters. Nothin g in them comes from God 
directly. Mathew may give one version of one text an d John may give another. I 
cannot surrender my reason whilst I subscribe to di vine revelation. And above all, 
'the letter killeth, the spirit giveth life.' But yo u must not misunderstand my 
position. I believe in faith also, in things where r eason has no place, e.g. the 
existence of God. No argument can move me from that faith, and like that little 
girl who repeated against all reason 'yet we are seve n' I would like to repeat, on 
being baffled in argument by a very superior intell ect, 'Yet there is God'. 
Harijan , 5-12-'36 
 
Divine knowledge is not borrowed from books. It has to  be realized in oneself. 
Books are at best an aid, often even a hindrance. 
Young India , 17-7-'24 
 
 An error does not become truth by reason of multipl ied propagation, nor does 
truth become error because nobody sees it. 
Young India , 26-2-'25 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 91   I would reject all authority if it is in conflict with sober reason or the dictates 
of the heart. Authority sustains and ennobles the weak  when it is the handiwork of 
reason, but it degrades them when it supplants reason , sanctioned by the still 
small Voice within. 
Young India , 8-12-'20 
 
I am not a literalist. Therefore I try to understand  the spirit  of the various 
scriptures of the world. I apply the test of Truth and  Ahimsa laid down by these 
very scriptures for interpretation. I reject what is i nconsistent with that test, and I 
appropriate all that is consistent with it. The story  of a Shudra having been 
punished by Ramachandra for daring to learn the Veda s I reject as an inter-
polation. And in any event, I worship Rama, the perf ect being of my conception, 
not a historical person facts about whose life may vary  with the progress of new 
historical discoveries and researches. Tulsidas had nothi ng to do with the Rama of 
history. Judged by historical test, his Ramayana would be fit for the scrap-heap. 
As a spiritual experience, his book is almost unrivalle d at least for me. And then, 
too, I do not swear by every word that is to be found  in so many editions published 
as the Ramayana of Tulsidas. It is the spirit running  through the book that holds 
me spell-bound. 
Young India,  27-8-'25 
 
I have no knowledge that the Krishna of Mahabharata ever lived. My Krishna 
has nothing to do with any historical person. I woul d refuse to bow my head to the 
Krishna who would kill because his pride is hurt, or t he Krishna whom the non-
Hindus portray as a dissolute youth. I believe in Krishn a of my imagination as a 
perfect incarnation, spotless in every sense of the wor d, the inspirer of the Gita 
and the inspirer of the lives of millions of human bei ngs. But if it was proved to Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 92  me that the Mahabharata is history in the sense that m odern historical books are, 
that every word of the Mahabharata is authentic and the Krishna of the 
Mahabharata actually did some of the acts attributed  to him, even at the risk of 
being banished from the Hindu fold I should not hesita te to reject that Krishna as 
God incarnate. But to me the Mahabharata is a profou ndly religious book, largely 
allegorical, in no way meant to be a historical reco rd. It is the description of the 
eternal duel going on within ourselves, given so vi vidly as to make us think for the 
time being that the deeds described therein were actu ally done by the human 
beings. Nor do I regard the Mahabharata as we have it  now as a faultless copy of 
the original. On the contrary I consider that it has undergone many amendations. 
Young India , 1-10-'25 
 
A prayerful study and experience are essential for a c orrect interpretation of 
the scriptures. The injunction that a Shudra may not  study the scriptures is not 
entirely without meaning. A Shudra means a spiritual ly uncultured, ignorant man. 
He is more likely than not to misinterpret the Vedas a nd other scriptures. 
Everyone cannot solve an algebraical equation. Some  preliminary study is a  sine 
qua non.  How will the grand truth 'I am Brahman' lie in the  mouth of a man 
steeped in sin! To what ignoble purposes would he turn it! What a distortion it 
would suffer at his hands! 
A man, therefore, who would interpret the scriptures must have the spiritual 
discipline. He must practise the Yamas and Niyamas—the eternal guides of 
conduct. A superficial practice thereof is useless. The Shastras have enjoined the 
necessity of a Guru. But a Guru being rare in these da ys, a study of modern books 
inculcating  bhakti has been suggested by the sages. Those who are lacking i n  
bhakti , lacking in faith, are all qualified to interpret the scriptures. The learned 
may draw an elaborately learned interpretation out of them, but that will not be Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 93  the true interpretation. Only the experienced will arrive at the true interpretation 
of the scriptures. 
But even for the inexperienced there are certain ca nons. That interpretation is 
not true which conflicts with Truth. To one who doub ts even Truth, the scriptures 
have no meaning. No one can contend with him.  
Young India , 12-11-'25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 94   
29. THE MESSAGE OF THE GITA 
1.  Even in 1888-89, when I first became acquainted with  the Gita, I felt that it 
was not a historical work, but that under the guise o f physical warfare, it 
described the duel that perpetually went on in the h earts of mankind, and 
that physical warfare was brought in merely to make t he description of the 
internal duel more alluring. This preliminary intuit ion became more 
confirmed on a closer study of religion and the Gita.  A study of the 
Mahabharata gave it added confirmation. I do not re gard the Mahabharata as 
a historical work in the accepted sense. The Adiparva contains powerful 
evidence in support of my opinion. By ascribing to th e chief actors 
superhuman or subhuman origins, the great Vyasa made sho rt work of the 
history of kings and their peoples. The persons therein  described may be 
historical, but the author of the Mahabharata has used  them merely to drive 
home his religious theme. 
2.  The author of the Mahabharata has not established the necessity of physical 
warfare; on the contrary he has proved its futility. He has made the victors 
shed tears of sorrow and repentance, and has left them nothing but a legacy 
of miseries. 
3.  In this great work the Gita is the crown. Its second ch apter, instead of 
teaching the rules of physical warfare, tells us how a  perfected man is to be 
known. In the characteristics of the perfected man o f the Gita, I do not see 
any to correspond to physical warfare. Its whole design  is inconsistent with 
the rules of conduct governing the relations between warring parties. 
4.  Krishna of the Gita is perfection and right knowledg e personified; but the 
picture is imaginary. That does not mean that Krishna,  the adored of his 
people, never lived. But perfection is imagined. The  idea of a perfect 
incarnation is an after growth. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 95  5.  In Hinduism, incarnation is ascribed to one who has per formed some 
extraordinary service of mankind. All embodied life is in reality an 
incarnation of God, but it is not usual to consider ev ery living being an 
incarnation. Future generations pay this homage to o ne who, in his own 
generation, has been extraordinarily religious in his conduct. I can see 
nothing wrong in this procedure; it takes nothing fr om God's greatness, and 
there is no violence done to Truth. There is an Urdu saying which means, 
"Adam is not God but he is a spark of the Divine." A nd therefore he who is the 
most religiously behaved has most of the divine spark i n him. It is in 
accordance with this train of thought that Krishna en joys, in Hinduism, the 
status of the most perfect incarnation. 
6.  This belief in incarnation is a testimony of man's lof ty spiritual ambition. Man 
is not at peace with himself till he has become like u nto God. The endeavour 
to reach this state is the supreme, the only ambition w orth having. And this is 
self-realization. This self-realization is the subject o f the Gita, as it is of all 
scriptures. But its author surely did not write it to e stablish that doctrine. 
The object of the Gita appears to me to be that of sh owing the most 
excellent way to attain self-realization. That which  is to be found, more or 
less clearly, spread out here and there in Hindu reli gious books, has been 
brought out in the clearest possible language in the G ita even at the risk of 
repetition. 
7.  That matchless remedy is renunciation of the fruits of  action.  
8.  This is the centre round which the Gita is woven. Thi s renunciation is the 
central sun, round which devotion, knowledge and the  rest revolve like 
planets. The body has been likened to a prison. There must be action where 
there is body. Not one embodied being is exempted fro m labour. And yet all 
religions proclaim that it is possible for man, by tr eating the body as the 
temple of God, to attain freedom. Every action is ta inted, be it ever so 
trivial. How can the body be made the temple of God ? In other words how can 
one be free from action, i.e. from the taint of sin?  The Gita has answered the Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 96  question in decisive language: "By desireless action; by  renouncing the fruits 
of action; by dedicating all activities to God, i.e.  by surrendering oneself to 
Him body and soul." 
9.  But desirelessness or renunciation does not come for the  mere talking about 
it. It is not attained by an intellectual feat. It i s attainable only by a constant 
heart-churn. Right knowledge is necessary for attain ing renunciation. Learned 
men posses a knowledge of a kind. They may recite the  Vedas from memory, 
yet they may be steeped in self-indulgence. In order  that knowledge may not 
run riot, the author of the Gita has insisted on devot ion accompanying it and 
has given it the first place. Knowledge without devot ion will be like a misfire. 
Therefore, says the Gita, “Have devotion, and knowle dge will follow.” This 
devotion is not mere lip-worship, it is a wrestling wit h death. Hence the 
Gita’s assessment of the devotee’s qualities is similar to  that of the sage’s. 
10.  Thus the devotion required by the Gita is no soft-he arted effusiveness. It 
certainly is not blind faith. The devotion of the Gi ta has the least to do with 
externals. A devotee may use, if he likes, rosaries, f orehead marks, make 
offerings, but these things are no test of his devotion . He is the devotee who 
is jealous of none, who is a fount of mercy, who is wi thout egotism, who is 
selfless, who treats alike cold and heat, happiness mi sery, who is ever 
forgiving, who is always contented, whose resolutions  are firm, who has 
dedicated mind and soul to God, who causes exultatio n, sorrow and fear, who 
is pure, who is versed in action and yet remains unaff ected by it, who 
renounces all fruit, good or bad, who treats friends and foe alike, who is by 
praise, who does not go under when people speak ill of  him, who loves silence 
and solitude, who has a disciplined reason. Such devot ion is inconsistent with 
the existence at the same time of strong attachments. 
11.  We thus see, that to be a real devotes is to realize o neself. Self-realization is 
not something apart. One rupee can purchase for us poi son or nectar, but 
knowledge or devotion cannot buy us either salvation or bondage. These are 
net media of exchange. They are themselves the thing  we want. In other Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 97  words if the means and the end are not identical, th ey are almost so. The 
extreme of means is salvation. Salvation of the Gita is perfect peace. 
12.  But such knowledge and devotion, to be true, have to  stand the test of 
renunciation of fruits of action. Mere knowledge of  right and wrong will not 
make one fit for salvation. According to common not ions, a mere learned man 
will pass as a Pandit. He need not perform any service . He will regard it as 
bondage even to lift a little lota.  Where one test of knowledge is non-liability 
for service, there is no room for such mundane work as the lifting of a  lota.  
13.  Or take  bhakti.  The popular notion of  bhakti  is soft-heartedness, telling 
beads and the like and disdaining to do even a loving  service, lest the telling 
of beads etc. might be interrupted. This  bhakta  therefore leaves the rosary 
only for eating, drinking and the like, never for g rinding corn or nursing 
patients. 
14.  But the Gita says: "No one has attained his goal with out action. Even men like 
Janaka attained salvation through action. If even I  were lazily to cease 
working, the world would perish. How much more necess ary then for the 
people at large to engage in action?" 
15.  While on the one hand it is beyond dispute that all a ction binds, on the other 
hand it is equally true that all living beings have to do some work whether 
they will or no. Here all activity, whether mental or physical, is to be 
included in the term action. Then how is one to be f ree from the bondage of 
action, even though he may be acting? The manner in  which the Gita has 
solved the problem is, to my knowledge, unique. The Gita says: "Do your 
allotted work but renounce its fruit—be detached and  work—have no desire 
for reward and work." 
This is the unmistakable teaching of the Gita. He who gives up action falls. He 
who gives up only the reward rises. But renunciation of fruit in no way means 
indifference to the result. In regard to every actio n one must know the result that 
is expected to follow, the means thereto, and the ca pacity for it. He, who, being Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 98  thus equipped, is without desire for the result, and is yet wholly engrossed in the 
due fulfillment of the task before him, is said to hav e renounced the fruits of his 
action. 
16.  Again, let no one consider renunciation to mean wan t of fruit for the 
renouncer. The Gita reading does not warrant such a m eaning. Renunciation 
means absence of hankering after fruit. As a matter of  fact, he who renoun-
ces reaps a thousand fold. The renunciation of the Gi ta is the acid test of 
faith. He who is ever brooding over result often lose s nerve in the 
performance of his duty. He becomes impatient and th en gives vent to anger 
and begins to do unworthy things; he jumps from action  to action, never 
remaining faithful to any. He who broods over result s is like a man given to 
objects of senses; he is ever distracted, he says goodbye  to all scruples, 
everything is right in his estimation and he therefore  resorts to means fair 
and foul to attain his end. 
17.  From the bitter experiences of desire for fruit the a uthor of the Gita 
discovered the path of renunciation of fruit, and pu t it before the world in a 
most convincing manner. The common belief is that re ligion is always 
opposed to material good. "One cannot act religiously  in mercantile and such 
other matters. There is no place for religion in such pursuits; religion is only 
for attainment of salvation," we hear many worldly-w ise people say. In my 
opinion the author of the Gita has dispelled this del usion. He has drawn no 
line of demarcation between salvation and wordly pur suits. On the contrary, 
he has shown that religion must rule even our wordly pursuits. I have felt that 
the Gita teaches us that what cannot be followed out in day-to-day practice 
cannot be called religion. Thus, according to the Gi ta, all acts that are 
incapable of being performed without attachment are  taboo. This golden rule 
saves mankind from many a pitfall. According to this interpretation murder, 
lying, dissoluteness and the like must be regarded as sinful and therefore Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 99  taboo. Man's life then becomes simple, and from that si mpleness springs 
peace. 
18.  Thinking along these lines, I have felt that in tryin g to enforce in one's life the 
central teaching of the Gita, one is bound to follow  truth and Ahimsa. When 
there is no desire for fruit, there is no temptation  for untruth or Himsa. Take 
any instance of untruth or violence, and it will be found that at its back was 
the desire to attain the cherished end. But it may be  freely admitted that the 
Gita was not written to establish Ahimsa. It was an acce pted and primary 
duty even before the Gita age. The Gita had to deli ver the message of 
renunciation of fruit. This is clearly brought out so  early as the second 
chapter. 
19.  But if the Gita believed in Ahimsa or it was includ ed in desirelessness, why 
did the author take a warlike illustration? When the  Gita was written, 
although people believed in Ahimsa, wars were not onl y not taboo but nobody 
observed the contradiction between them and Ahimsa. 
20.  In assessing the implications of renunciation of fruit, we are not required to 
probe the mind of the author of the Gita as to his li mitations of Ahimsa and 
the like. Because a poet puts a particular truth befo re the world, it does not 
necessarily follow that he has known or worked out all  its great 
consequences, or that having done so, he is able alway s to express them 
fully. In this perhaps lies the greatness of the poem and the poet. A poet's 
meaning is limitless. Like man, the meaning of great w ritings suffers 
evolution. On examining the history of languages, we notice that the meaning 
of important words has changed or expanded. This is tru e of the Gita. The 
author has himself extended the meanings of some of the  current words. We 
are able to discover this even on a superficial examin ation. It is possible, that 
in the age prior to that of the Gita, offering of a nimals in sacrifice was 
permissible. But there is not a trace of it in the sac rifice in the Gita sense. In 
the Gita continuous concentration on God is the king of sacrifices. The third 
chapter seems to show that sacrifice chiefly means body- labour for service. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 100  The third and the fourth chapters read together will  give us other meanings 
for sacrifice but never animal-sacrifice. Similarly has the meaning of the word 
Sannyasa undergone, in the Gita, a transformation. The Sannyasa of the Gita 
will not tolerate complete cessation of all activity . The Sannyasa of the Gita 
is all work and yet no work. Thus the author of the G ita by extending 
meanings of words has taught us to imitate him. Let it  be granted, that 
according to the letter of the Gita it is possible to  say that warfare is 
consistent with renunciation of fruit. But after 40 y ears' unremitting 
endeavour fully to enforce the teaching of the Gita  in my own life, I have, in 
all humility, felt that perfect renunciation is impo ssible without perfect 
observance of Ahimsa in every shape and form. 
21.  The Gita is not an aphoristic work; it is a great rel igious poem. The deeper 
you dive into it, the richer the meanings you get. I t being meant for the 
people at large, there is pleasing repetition. With e very age the important 
words will carry new and expanding meanings. But it s central teaching will 
never vary. The seeker is at liberty to extract from this treasure any meaning 
he likes so as to enable him to enforce in his life th e central teaching. 
22.  Nor is the Gita a collection of Do's and Don'ts. What  is lawful for one may be 
unlawful for another. What may be permissible at one  time, or in one place, 
may not be so at another time, and in another place . Desire for fruit is the 
only universal prohibition. Desirelessness is obligatory . 
23.  The Gita has sung the praises of knowledge, but it is b eyond the mere 
intellect; it is essentially addressed to the heart and  capable of being 
understood by the heart. Therefore the Gita is not f or those who have no 
faith. The author makes Krishna say: 
"Do not entrust this treasure to him who is without s acrifice, without devotion, 
without the desire for this teaching and who denies Me . On the other hand those 
who will give this precious treasure to my devotees wi ll by the fact of this service 
assuredly reach Me. And those who, being free from ma lice will with faith absorb Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 101  this teaching, shall, having attained freedom, live where people of true merit go 
after death." 
Young India , 6-8-'31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 102   
30. BEAUTY IN TRUTH 
There are two aspects of thing—the outward and the in ward. It is purely a 
matter of emphasis with me. The outward has no meaning  except in so far as it 
helps the inward. All true art is thus the expression of the soul. The outward forms 
have value only in so far as they are the expression o f the inner spirit in man. Art 
of that nature has the greatest possible appeal for me . But I know that many call 
themselves artists, and are recognized as such, and y et in their works there is 
absolutely no trace of the soul's upward urge and un rest. 
All true art must help the soul to realize its inner self. In my own case, I find 
that I can do entirely without external forms in my soul's realization. I can claim, 
therefore, that there is truly efficient art in my l ife, though you might not see 
what you call works of art about me. My room may hav e blank walls; and I may 
even dispense with the roof, so that I may gaze out a t the starry heavens overhead 
that stretch in an unending expanse of beauty. What c onscious art of man can give 
me the panoramic scenes that open out before me, whe n I look up to the sky 
above with all its shining stars? This, however, does no t mean that I refuse to 
accept the value of production of arts, generally a ccepted as such, but only that I 
personally feel how inadequate these are compared wit h the eternal symbols of 
beauty in Nature. These productions of man's art have  their value only in. so far as 
they help the soul onward towards self-realization. 
I see and find beauty in Truth or through Truth. All  Truths, not merely true 
ideas, but truthful faces, truthful pictures, or songs are highly beautiful. People 
generally fail to see Beauty in Truth, the ordinary man runs away from and 
becomes blind to the beauty in it. Whenever men begi n to see Beauty in Truth, 
then true art will arise. 
To a true artist only that face is beautiful which, q uite apart from its exterior, 
shines with the Truth within the soul. There is ... n o Beauty apart from Truth. On Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 103  the other hand, Truth may manifest itself in forms wh ich may not be outwardly 
beautiful at all. Socrates, we are told, was the most  truthful man of his time, and 
yet his features are said to have been the ugliest in G reece. To my mind he was 
beautiful because all his life was a striving after Tr uth, and you may remember 
that this outward form aid not prevent Phidias from a ppreciating the beauty of 
Truth in him, though as an. artist he was accustomed t o see Beauty in outward 
forms also. 
Truth and untruth often co-exist; good and evil are often found together. In an 
artist also, not seldom, the right perception of thin gs and the wrong co-exist. 
Truly beautiful creations come when right perception  is at work. If these moments 
are rare in life they are also rare in art. 
These beauties ('a sunset or a crescent moon that shine s amid the stars at 
night') are truthful, inasmuch as they make me think of the Creator at the back of 
them. How else could these be beautiful, but for the Truth that is in the centre of 
creation? When I admire the wonder of a sunset or th e beauty of the moon, my 
soul expands in worship of the Creator. I try to see H im and His mercies in all 
these creations. But even the sunsets and sunrises would be mere hindrances if 
they did not help me to think of Him. Anything, whi ch is a hindrance to the flight 
of the soul, is a delusion and a snare; even like the  body, which often does 
actually hinder you in the path of salvation. 
Young India,  13-11-'24 
 
Truth is the first thing to be sought for, and Beauty  and Goodness will then be 
added upto you. That is what Christ really taught in the Sermon on the Mount. 
Jesus was, to my mind, a supreme artist because he saw and expressed Truth; and 
so was Muhammad, the Koran being the most perfect co mposition in all Arabic 
literature—at any rate, that is what scholars say. It i s because both of them strove 
first for Truth that the grace of expression naturall y came  in and  yet neither Jesus Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 104  nor Muhammad wrote on art, That is the Truth and Bea uty I crave for, live for, and 
would die for. 
Young India , 20-11-'24  
 
Here too, just as elsewhere, I must think in terms of th e millions. And to the 
millions we cannot give that training to acquire a p erception of Beauty in such a 
way as to see Truth in it. Show them Truth first and they will see Beauty 
afterwards.... Whatever can be useful to . . . starvi ng millions is beautiful to my 
mind. Let us give today first the vital things of li fe and all the graces and 
ornaments of life will follow. 
Young India , 20-11-'24 
 
True art takes note not merely of form but also of wh at lies behind. There is 
an art that kills and an art that gives life. True ar t must be evidence of happiness, 
contentment and purity of its authors. 
Young India , 11-8-'21 
 
We have somehow accustomed ourselves to the belief that  art is independent 
of the purity of private life. I can say with all th e experience at my command that 
nothing could be more untrue. As I am nearing the en d of my earthly life I can say 
that purity of life is the highest and truest art. The  art of producing good music 
from a cultivated voice can be achieved by many, bu t the art of producing that 
music from the harmony of a pure life is achieved ve ry rarely. 
Harijan , 19-2-'38 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 105   
31 RAMANAMA 
Though my reason and heart long ago realized the hig hest attribute and name 
of God as Truth, I recognize truth by the name of Ra ma. In the darkest hour of my 
trial, that one name has saved me and is still savin g me. It may be the association 
of childhood, it may be the fascination that Tulsida s has wrought on me. But the 
potent fact is there, and as I write these lines, my memory revives the scenes of 
my childhood when I used daily to visit the Ramji Man dir adjacent to my ancestral 
home. My Rama then resided there. He saved me from ma ny fears and sins. It was 
no superstition for me. The custodian of the idol may have been a bad man. I 
know nothing against him. Misdeeds might have gone on  in the temple. Again I 
know nothing of them. Therefore, they would not aff ect me. What was and is true 
of me is true of millions of Hindus. 
Harijan,  18-3-'33 
 
I laugh within myself when someone objects that Rama o r the chanting of 
Ramanama is for the Hindus only, how can Mussulmans ther efore take part in it? Is 
there one God for the Mussulmans and another for the H indus, Parsis, or 
Christians? No, there is only one omnipotent and omni present God. He is named 
variously and we remember Him by the name which is mo st familiar to us. 
My Rama, the Rama of our prayers is not the historica l Rama, the son of 
Dasharatha, the King of Ayodhya. He is the eternal, t he unborn, the one without a 
second. 
Him alone I worship. His aid alone I seek, and so shou ld you. He belongs 
equally to all. I, therefore, see no reason why a Mu ssulman or anybody should 
object to taking His name. But he is in no way bound  to recognize God as Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 106  Ramanama. He may utter to himself Allah or Khuda so as not to mar the harmony 
of the sound. 
Harijan , 28-4-'46 
 
I myself have been a devotee of Tulsidas from my child hood and have, 
therefore, always worshipped God as Rama. But I know that if, beginning with 
Omkar, one goes through the entire gamut of God's nam es current in all climes, all 
countries and languages, the result is the same. He and His Law are one. To 
observe His Law is, therefore, the best form of worship.  A man who becomes one 
with the Law does not stand in need of vocal recitati on of the name. In other 
words, an individual with whom contemplation on God has become as natural as 
breathing is so filled with God's spirit that knowled ge or observance of the Law 
becomes second nature, as it were, with him. Such a on e needs no other 
treatment. 
The question then arises as to why, in spite of having t his prince of remedies 
at hand, we know so little about it and why even tho se who know, do not 
remember Him or remember Him only by lip-service, no t from the heart. Parrot-
like repetition of God's name signifies failure to rec ognize Him as the panacea for 
all ills. 
Harijan , 24-3-'46 
 
A devotee of Rama may be said to be the same as the steadfast one 
(Sthitaprajnya) of the Gita. If one goes a little de eper it will be seen that a true 
devotee of God faithfully obeys the five elemental f orces of Nature. If he so 
obeys, he will not fall ill. If perchance he does, h e will cure himself with the aid of 
the elementals. It is not for the dweller in the body  to get the body cured 
anyhow—he who believes that he is nothing but body wi ll naturally wander to the Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 107  ends of the earth in order to cure the body of its i lls. But he who realizes that the 
soul is something apart from, though in the body that  it is imperishable in contrast 
to the perishable body, will not be perturbed nor m ourn if the elementals fail. On 
the contrary he will welcome death as a friend. He w ill become his own healer 
instead of seeking for medical men. He will live in t he consciousness of the soul 
within and look to the care, first and last, of the in- dweller. 
Such a man will take God's name with every breath. H is Rama will be awake 
even whilst the body is asleep. Rama will always be wit h him in whatever he does. 
The real death for such a devoted man will be the lo ss of this sacred 
companionship. 
As an aid to keeping his Rama with him, he will take what the five elementals 
have to give him. That is to say he will employ the si mplest and easiest way of 
deriving all the benefit he can from earth, air, wa ter, sunlight and ether. This aid 
is not complementary to Ramanama. It is but a means of  its realization. 
Ramanama does not in fact require any aid. But to cl aim belief in Ramanama and 
at the same time to run to doctors do not go hand i n hand. 
Just as the body cannot exist without blood, so the soul needs the matchless 
and pure strength of faith. This strength can renovat e the weakness of all man's 
physical organs. That is why it is said that when Rama nama is enshrined in the 
heart, it means the rebirth of man. This law applies t o the young, the old, man 
and woman alike. 
Harijan,  29-6-'47 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 108   
32. NATURE CURE 
Nature Cure treatment means that treatment which bef its man. By "man" is 
meant not merely man as animal, but as creature possess ing, in addition to his 
body, both mind and soul. For such a being Ramanama i s the truest Nature Cure 
treatment. It is an unfailing remedy. The expression Ramabana or infallible cure is 
derived from it. Nature, too, indicates that for man  it is the worthy remedy. No 
matter what the ailment from which a man may be suff ering, recitation of 
Ramanama from the heart is the sure cure. God has man y names. Each person can 
choose the name that appeals most to him. Ishwara, All ah, Khuda, God mean the 
same. But the recitation must not be parrotlike, it m ust be born of faith of which 
endeavour will be some evidence. What should the ende avour consist of ? Man 
should seek out and be content to confine the means of  cure to the five elements 
of which the body is composed, i.e. earth, water,  akash , sun and air. Of course, 
Ramanama must be the invariable accompaniment. If in  spite of this, death 
supervenes, we may not mind. On the contrary, it shoul d be welcomed. Science 
has not so far discovered any recipe for making the b ody immortal. Immortality is 
an attribute of the soul. That is certainly imperisha ble, but it is man's duty to try 
to express its purity. 
Harijan,  3-3-'46 
 
If we accept the above reasoning., it will automatic ally limit the means 
permissible under Nature Cure. And man is thereby save d from all the 
paraphernalia of big hospitals and eminent doctors et c. The large majority of 
persons in the world can never afford these. Why, then , should the few desire 
what the many cannot have?  
Harijan , 3-3-'46 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 109   
The potency of Ramanama is, however, subject to certa in conditions and 
limitations. Ramanama is not like black magic. If som eone suffers from surfeit and 
wants to be cured of its after-effects so that he can a gain indulge himself at the 
table, Ramanama is not for him. Ramanama can be used  only for a good, not for 
an evil end, or else thieves and robbers would be the  greatest devotees. 
Ramanama is for the pure in heart and for those who w ant to attain purity and 
remain pure. It can never be a means for self-indulge nce. The remedy for surfeit 
is fasting, not prayer. Prayer can come in only when  fasting has done its work. It 
can make fasting easy and bearable. Similarly, the taking of Ramanama will be a 
meaningless force when at the same time you are druggi ng your system with medi-
cines. A doctor who uses his talent to pander to the vi ces of his patient degrades 
himself and his patient. What worse degradation can th ere be for man than that 
instead of regarding his body as an instrument of worshi pping his Maker, he should 
make it the object of adoration and waste money like  water to keep it going 
anyhow? Ramanama, on the other hand, purifies while it cures, and, therefore, it 
elevates. Therein lies its use as well as its limitati on. 
Harijan , 7-4-'46 
 
 An apt question is as to why a man who recites Ramana ma regularly and leads 
a pure life should ever fall ill. Man is by nature im perfect. A thoughtful man 
strives after perfection, but never attains it. He stum bles on the way, however, 
unwittingly. The whole of God's law is embodied in a pure life. The first thing is to 
realize one's limitations. It should be obvious that the moment one transgresses 
those limits one falls ill. Thus a balanced diet eaten in accordance with needs 
gives one freedom from disease. How is one to know what  is the proper diet for 
one? Many such enigmas can be imagined. The purport o f it all is that everyone Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 110  should be his own doctor and find out his limitations.  The man who does so will 
surely live up to 125. 
Harijan , 19-5-'46 
 
My love of Nature Cure and of indigenous systems does no t blind me to the 
advance that Western medicine has made in spite of the  fact that I have 
stigmatized it as black magic. I have used the harsh t erm and I do not withdraw it, 
because of the fact, that it has countenanced vivisect ion and all the awfulness it 
means and because it will stop at no practice, however  bad it may be, if it 
prolongs the life of the body and because it ignores the immortal soul which 
resides in the body. I cling to Nature Cure in spite o f its great limitations and in 
spite of the lazy pretensions of Nature curists. Above  all, in Nature Cure, 
everybody can be his or her own doctor, not so in th e various systems of medicine. 
Harijan , 11-8-'46 
 
Spiritual force is like any other force at the servic e of man. Apart from the 
fact that it has been used for physical ailments for ag es, with more or less 
success, it would be intrinsically wrong not to use it,  if it can be successfully used 
for the cure of physical ailments,, For, man is both  matter and spirit, each acting 
on and affecting the other. If you get rid of malar ia by taking quinine, without 
thinking of the millions who do not get it, why shou ld you refuse to use the 
remedy which is within you, because millions will not  use it through their 
ignorance? May you not be clean and well because mil lions of others will not be so, 
ignorantly or, may be, even cussedly? If you will not  be clean out of false notions 
of philanthropy, you will deny yourselves the duty of  serving the very millions by 
remaining dirty and ill. Surely refusal to be spirit ually well or clean is worse than 
the refusal to be physically clean and well. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 111  Harijan , 1-9-'46 
 
Salvation is nothing more and nothing less than being  well in every way. Why 
should you deny it for yourselves, if thereby you show  the way to others and 
beyond showing it, actually serve them in addition by  reason of your fitness? 
Harijan , l-9-'46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 112   
33. UNITY OF ALL LIFE 
My ethics not only permit me to claim but require me  to own kinship with not 
merely the ape but the horse and the sheep, the lion and the leopard, the snake 
and the scorpion. (Not so need these kinsfolk regard th emselves.) The hard ethics 
which rule my life, and I hold ought to rule that o f every man and woman, imposes 
this unilateral obligation upon us. And it is so impo sed because man alone is made 
in the image of God. That some of us do not recogniz e that status of ours, makes 
no difference, except that then we do not get the b enefit of the status, even as a 
lion brought up in the company of sheep may not kno w his own status and, 
therefore, does not receive its benefits; but it belo ngs to him nevertheless, and, 
the moment he realizes it, he begins to exercise his d ominion over the sheep. But 
no sheep masquerading as a lion can ever attain the leonine status. And, to prove 
the proposition, that man is made in the image of God , it is surely unnecessary to 
show that all men admittedly exhibit that image in t heir own persons. It is enough 
to show that one man at least has done so. And, will  it be denied that the great 
religious teachers of mankind have exhibited the imag e of God in their own 
persons ? 
Young India , 8-7-'26 
 
I do not want to live at the cost of the life even o f a snake. I should let him 
bite me to death rather than kill him. But it is lik ely that if God puts me to that 
cruel test and permits a snake to assault me, I may not  have the courage to die, 
but that the beast in me may assert itself and I may se ek to kill the snake in 
defending this perishable body. I admit that my belie f has not become s6 incar-
nate in me as to warrant my stating emphatically that  I have shed all fear of 
snakes so as to befriend them as I would like to be ab le to. It is my implicit belief 
that snakes, tigers, etc. are God's answer to the poiso nous, wicked, evil thoughts Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 113  we harbour. ... I believe that all life is one. Thou ghts take definite forms. Tigers 
and snakes have kinship with us. They are a warning t o us to avoid harbouring evil, 
wicked, lustful thoughts. If I want to rid the earth of venomous beasts and 
reptiles, I must rid myself of all venomous thoughts. I shall not do so if in my 
impatient ignorance and in my desire to prolong the existence of the body I seek 
to kill the so-called venomous beasts and reptiles. If  in not seeking to defend 
myself against such noxious animals, I die, I should rise again a better and fuller 
man. With that faith in me how should I seek to kill a fellow being in a snake ? 
Young India,  14-4-'27 
 
We are living in the midst of death trying to grope our way to Truth, Perhaps it 
is as well that we are beset with danger at every poi nt in our life, for, in spite of 
our knowledge of the danger and of our precarious ex istence, our indifference to 
the source of all life is excelled only by our amazin g arrogance. 
Young India,  7-7-'27 
 
 All life in the flesh exists by some Himsa. Hence the h ighest religion has been 
defined by a negative word Ahimsa. The world is bound  in a chain of destruction. 
In other words Himsa is an inherent necessity for life  in the body. That is why a 
votary of Ahimsa always prays for ultimate deliverance  from the bondage of the 
flesh. 
Young India,  4-10-'28 
 
 I am painfully aware of the fact that my desire to continue life in the body 
involves me in constant Himsa. That is why I am becomin g growingly indifferent to 
this physical body of mine. For instance, I know that  in the act of respiration I Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 114  destroy innumerable invisible germs floating in the a ir. But I do not stop 
breathing. The consumption of vegetables involves Him sa, but I find that I cannot 
give them up. Again, there is Himsa in the use of anti septics, yet I cannot bring 
myself to discard the use of disinfectants like kerosene,  etc. to rid myself of the 
mosquito pest and the like. I suffer snakes to be kille d in the Ashram when it is 
impossible to catch them and put them out of harm's wa y. I even tolerate the use 
of the stick to drive the bullocks in the Ashram. Th us there is no end to Himsa 
which I directly and indirectly commit. If, as a resu lt of this humble confession of 
mine, friends choose to give me up as lost, I would be  sorry, but nothing will in-
duce me to try to conceal my imperfections in the pr actice of Ahimsa. All I claim 
for myself is that I am ceaselessly trying to understand the implications of great 
ideals like Ahimsa and to practise them in thought, w ord and  deed and that not 
without a certain measure of success as I think. But I k now that I have a long 
distance yet to cover in this direction. 
Young India,  1-11-28 
 
I believe myself to be saturated with Ahimsa—nonviole nce. Ahimsa and Truth 
are as my two lungs. I cannot live without them. Bu t I see every moment, with 
more and more clearness, the immense power of Ahimsa an d the littleness of man. 
Even the forest dweller cannot be entirely free from  violence, in spite of his 
limitless compassion. With every breath he commits a ce rtain amount of violence. 
The body itself is a house of slaughter, and, therefore , Moksha and Eternal Bliss 
consist in perfect deliverance from the body, and the refore, all pleasure, save the 
joy of Moksha, is evanescent, imperfect. That being th e case, we have to drink, in 
daily life, many a bitter draught of violence. 
Young India,  21-10-'26 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 115  I verily believe that man's habit of killing man on  the slightest pretext has 
darkened his reason and he gives himself liberties wit h - other life which he would 
shudder to take if he really believed that God was a  God of Love and Mercy. 
Anyway though for fear of death I may kill tigers, snakes, fleas, mosquitoes and 
the like, I ever pray for illumination that will she d all fear of death and thus refu-
sing to take life know the better way, for : Taught by the Power that pities me I 
learn to pity them. 
Harijan , 9-1-'37 
 
The Cow 
The cow is the purest type of sub-human life. She ple ads before us on behalf 
of the whole of the sub-human species for justice to i t at the hands of man, the 
first among all that lives, She seems to speak to us th rough her eye; You are not 
appointed over us to kill us and eat our flesh or othe rwise ill-treat us, but to be 
our friend and guardian.' 
Young India , 26-6-'24 
 
It is for me a poem of pity. I worship it and I shal l defend its worship against 
the whole world. 
Young India , 1-1-'25 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 116   
34. WHAT IS BRAHMACHARYA 
A friend asks : 'What is Brahmacharya ? Is it possible to practise it to 
perfection? If possible, do you do so ?' 
The full and proper meaning of Brahmacharya is search  of Brahman. Brahman 
pervades every being and can therefore be searched b y diving into and realizing 
the inner self. This realization is impossible without c omplete control of the 
senses. Brahmacharya thus means control in thought, wor d and action of all the 
senses at all times and in all places. 
A man or woman completely practising Brahmacharya is absolutely free from 
passion. Such a one therefore lives nigh unto God, is G odlike. 
I have no doubt that it is possible to practise such Br ahmacharya in thought, 
word and action to the fullest extent. 
Young India , 5-6-'24 
 
The man, who is wedded to Truth and worships Truth alo ne, proves unfaithful 
to her, if he applies his talents to anything else. How  then can he minister to the 
senses? A man whose activities are wholly consecrated to the realization of Truth, 
which requires utter selflessness, can have no time for the selfish purpose of 
begetting children and running a household. Realizat ion of Truth through self- 
gratification should, after what has been said before , appear a contradiction in 
terms. 
If we look at it from the standpoint of Ahimsa (nonvi olence), we find that the 
fulfillment of Ahimsa is impossible without utter self lessness. Ahimsa means 
universal love. If a man gives his love to one woman,  or a woman to one man, 
what is there left for all the world besides? It simpl y means, "We two first, and the Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 117  devil take all the rest of them." As a faithful wife  must be prepared to sacrifice  
her all for the sake of her husband, and a faithful husband for the sake of his wife, 
it is clear that such persons cannot rise to the height of universal love, or look 
upon all mankind as kith and kin. For they have crea ted a boundary wall round 
their love. The larger their family, the farther ar e they from universal love. Hence 
one who would obey the law of Ahimsa cannot marry, not to speak of gratification 
outside the marital bond. 
Then what about people who are already married? Wil l they never be able to 
realize Truth? Can they never offer up their all at  the altar of humanity ? There is 
a way out for them. They can behave as if they were not married. Those who have 
enjoyed this happy condition will be able to bear me  out. Many have to my 
knowledge successfully tried the experiment. If the  married couple can think of 
each other as brother and sister, they are freed for universal service. The very 
thought that all women in the world are one's sisters , mothers or daughters will at 
once ennoble a man and snap his chains. The husband an d wife do not lose 
anything here, but only add to their resources and e ven to their family. Their love 
becomes free from the impurity of lust and so grows str onger. With the 
disappearance of this impurity, they can serve each ot her better, and the 
occasions for quarrel become fewer. There are more oc casions for quarrel, where 
the love is selfish and bounded. 
If the foregoing argument is appreciated, a considera tion of the physical 
benefits of chastity becomes a matter of secondary im portance. How foolish it is 
intentionally to dissipate vital energy in sensual enjo yment! It is a grave misuse to 
fritter away for physical gratification that which is given to man and woman for 
the full development of their bodily and mental pow ers. Such misuse is the root 
cause of many a disease. 
Brahmacharya, like all other observances, must be obse rved in thought, word 
and deed. We are told in the Gita, and experience w ill corroborate the statement, Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 118  that the foolish man, who appears to control, his body  but is nursing evil thoughts 
in his mind, makes a vain effort. It may be harmful t o suppress the body, if the 
mind is at the same time allowed to go astray. Where the mind wanders, the body 
must follow sooner or later. 
It is necessary here to appreciate a distinction. It is one thing to allow the 
mind to harbour impure thoughts; it is a different t hing altogether if it strays 
among them in spite of ourselves. Victory will be ours in the end, if we non-co-
operate with the mind in its evil wanderings. 
We experience every moment of our lives that often while the body is subject 
to our control, the mind is not. This physical contro l should never be relaxed, and 
in addition we must put forth a constant endeavour to  bring the mind under 
control. We can do nothing more, nothing less. If we give way to the  mind, the 
body and the mind will pull different ways, and we shall be false to ourselves. 
Body and mind may be said to go together, so long as we continue to resist the 
approach of every evil thought. 
The observance of Brahmacharya has been believed to b e very difficult, almost 
impossible. In trying to find a reason for this belief , we see that the term 
Brahmacharya has been taken in a narrow sense. Mere c ontrol of animal passion 
has been thought to be tantamount to observing Brahma charya. I feel that this 
conception is incomplete and wrong. Brahmacharya mea ns control of all the 
organs of sense. He, who attempts to control only one o rgan and allows all the 
others free play, is bound to find his effort futile. To hear suggestive stories with 
the ears, to see suggestive sights with the eyes, to tast e stimulating food with the 
tongue, to touch exiting things with the hands, and t hen at the same time expect 
to control the only remaining organ, is like putting  one's hands in a fire, and then 
expecting to escape being burnt. He, therefore, who is resolved to control the one 
must be likewise determined to control the rest. I hav e always felt that much 
harm has been done by the narrow definition of Brahm acharya. If we practise Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 119  simultaneous self-control in all directions, the attemp t will be scientific and 
possible of success. Perhaps the palate is the chief sinn er. That is why in the 
Ashram we have assigned to control of the palate a sepa rate place among our 
observances. 
Let us remember the root meaning of Brahmacharya. Ch arya means course of 
conduct; Brahmacharya conduct adapted to the search of Brahma, i.e. Truth. 
From this etymological meaning, arises the special mean ing, viz., control of all the 
senses. "We must entirely forget the incomplete definit ion which restricts itself to 
the sexual aspect only. 
From Yeravda Mandir , Chapter III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 120   
35. STEPS TO BRAHMACHARYA 
The first step is the realization of its necessity. 
The next is gradual control of the senses. A Brahmacha ri must needs control 
his palate. He must eat to live, and not for enjoyme nt. He must see only clean 
things and close his eyes before anything unclean. It  is thus a sign of polite 
breeding to walk with one's eyes towards the ground a nd not wandering about 
from object to object. A Brahma- chari will likewise  hear nothing obscene or 
unclean, smell no strong, stimulating things. The smel l of clean earth is far 
sweeter than the fragrance of artificial scents and e ssences. Let the aspirant to 
Brahmacharya also keep his hands and feet engaged in  all the waking hours in 
healthful activity. Let him also fast occasionally. 
The third step is to have clean companions—clean frie nds and clean books. 
The last and not the least is prayer. Let him repeat R amanama with all his 
heart regularly everyday, and ask for divine grace. 
None of these things are difficult for an average ma n or woman. They are 
simplicity itself. But their very simplicity is embarra ssing. Where there is a will, 
the way is simple enough. Men have not the will for i t and hence vainly grope. The 
fact that the world rests on the observance, more or less, of Brahmacharya or 
restraint, means that it is necessary and practicable.  
Young India, 29-4-'26 
 
Many aspirants after Brahmacharya fail, because in the  use of their other 
senses they want to carry on as those who are not Brahm acharis. Their effort is 
therefore identical with the effort to experience t he bracing cold of winter in the 
scorching summer months. There should be a clear line b etween the life of a Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 121  Brahmachari and of one who is not. The resemblance th at there is between the 
two is only apparent. The distinction ought to be cl ear as daylight. Both use their 
eyesight, but whereas the Brahmachari uses it to see t he glories of God, the other 
uses it to see the frivolity around him. Both use thei r ears, but whereas the one 
hears nothing but praises of God, the other feasts his e ars upon ribaldry. Both 
often keep late hours, but whereas the one devotes th em to prayer, the other 
fritters them away in wild and wasteful mirth. Both f eed the inner man, but the 
one does so only to keep the temple of God in good r epair, while the other gorges 
himself and makes the sacred vessel a stinking gutter.  Thus both live as the poles 
apart, and the distance between them will grow and n ot diminish with the passage 
of time. 
Brahmacharya means control of the senses in thought, word and deed. Every 
day I have been realizing more and more the necessity  for restraints of the kind I 
have detailed above. There is no limit to the possibi lities of renunciation, even as 
there is none to those of Brahmacharya. Such Brahmach arya is impossible of 
attainment by limited effort. For many, it must rem ain only as an ideal. An 
aspirant after Brahmacharya will always be consciou s of his shortcomings, will 
seek out the passions lingering in the innermost recesses o f his heart, and will 
incessantly strive to get rid of them. So long as thou ght is not under complete 
control of the will, Brahmacharya in its fulness is ab sent. Involuntary thought is an 
affection of the mind; and curbing of thought there fore means curbing of the mind 
which is even more difficult to curb than the wind. Nevertheless the existence of 
God within makes even control of the mind possible. Le t no one think that it is 
impossible because it is difficult. It is the highest go al, and it is no wonder that 
the highest effort should be necessary to attain it. 
But it was after coming to India that I realized tha t such Brahmacharya was 
impossible to attain merely by human effort. Until th en I had been labouring under 
the delusion that fruit diet alone would enable me to eradicate all passions, and I 
had flattered myself with the belief that I had noth ing more to do. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 122  But I must not anticipate the chapter of my struggles.  Meanwhile let me make 
it clear that those who desire to observe Brahmacharya  with a view to realizing 
God need not despair, provided their faith in God i s equal to their confidence in 
their own effort: 
/glyph874वषया  /glyph874व/glyph470नवत/glyph110/glyph220ते /glyph470नराहार/glyph233य  दे/glyph466हनः।  
रसवज/glyph110 रसोऽ/glyph221य/glyph233य  परं /glyph507/glyph232/glyph619वा  /glyph470नवत/glyph110ते ॥ 
(The sense-objects turn away from an abstemious soul, l eaving the relish 
behind. The relish also disappears with the realizati on of the Highest.) 
Therefore His name and His grace are the last resource s of the aspirant after 
Moksha. This truth came to me only after my return to  India. 
Autobiography (1948), pp. 258-60 
 
For me the observance of even bodily Brahmacharya ha s been full of 
difficulties. Today I may say that I feel myself fairl y safe, but I have yet to achieve 
complete mastery over thought, which is so essential. Not that the will or effort is 
lacking, but it is yet a problem to me wherefrom und esirable thoughts spring their 
insidious invasions. I have no doubt that there is a ke y to lock out undesirable 
thoughts, but everyone has to find it out for himself.  Saints and seers have left 
their experiences for us, but they have given us no in fallible and universal 
prescription. For perfection or freedom from error c omes only from grace, and so 
seekers after God have left us Mantras, such as Rama- n ama, hallowed by their 
own austerities and charged with their purity. Withou t an unreserved surrender to 
His grace, complete mastery over thought is impossible . This is the teaching of 
every great book of religion, and I am realizing th e truth of it every moment of my 
striving after that perfect Brahmacharya.  
Autobiography (1948), p. 388 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 123   
I must confess that the observance of the law of cont inence is impossible 
without a living faith in God which is living Truth.  It is the fashion nowadays to 
dismiss God from life altogther and insist on the possib ility of reaching the highest 
kind of life without the necessity of a living faith in a living God. I must confess my 
inability to drive the truth of the law home to tho se who have no faith in and no 
need for a Power infinitely higher than themselves. My own experience has led me 
to the knowledge that fullest life is impossible withou t an immovable belief in a 
living law in obedience to which the whole universe moves. A man without that 
faith is like a drop thrown out of the ocean bound t o perish. Every drop in the 
ocean shares its majesty and has the honour of giving us the ozone of life. 
Harijan , 25-4-'36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 124   
36. MARRIAGE, A SACRAMENT 
Man is, undoubtedly, an artist and creator. Undoubted ly he must have -beauty 
and, therefore, colour. His artistic and creative nat ure at its best taught him to 
discriminate, and to know that any conglomeration o f colours was no mark of 
beauty, nor every sense of enjoyment good in itself. His eye for art taught man to 
seek enjoyment in usefulness. Thus, he learnt at an ear ly stage of his evolution 
that he was to eat not for its own sake, as some of us st ill do, but he should eat to 
enable him to live. At a later stage, he learnt furt her that there was neither 
beauty nor joy in living for its own sake, but that h e must live to serve his fellow 
creatures and through them his Maker. Similarly, when  he pondered over the 
phenomenon of the pleasurableness of sexual union, he d iscovered that like every 
other organ of sense this one of generation had its use and abuse. And he saw that 
its true function, its right use, was to restrict it to  generation. Any other use he 
saw was ugly, and he saw further that it was fraught w ith very serious 
consequences, as well to the individual as to the race.  
Harijan , 4-4-'36 
 
Human society is a ceaseless growth, an unfoldment in t erms of spirituality. If 
so, it must be based on ever increasing restraint upon t he demands of the flesh. 
Thus, marriage must be considered to be a sacrament imp osing discipline upon the 
partners, restricting them to the physical union only  among themselves and for the 
purpose only of procreation when both the partners de sire and are prepared for it. 
Young India , 16-9-'26 
 
There can be no two opinions about the necessity of bi rth-control. But the only 
method handed down from ages past is self-control or Brahmacharya. It is an Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 125  infallible sovereign remedy doing good to those who p ractise it. And medical men 
will earn the gratitude of mankind, if instead of de vising artificial means of birth-
control they will find out the means of self-control.  
Young India , 12-3-'25 
 
Artificial methods are like putting a premium upon v ice. They make man and 
woman reckless. And respectability that is being given  to the methods must hasten 
the dissolution of the restraints that public opinion p uts upon one. Adoption of 
artificial methods must result in imbecility and ne rvous prostration. The remedy 
will be found to be worse than the disease. 
 Young India , 12-3-'25 
 
It is wrong and immortal to seek to escape the conseque nces of one's acts. It is 
good for a person who overeats to have an ache and a fast. It is bad for him to 
indulge his appetite and then escape the consequence b y taking tonics or other 
medicine. It is still worse for a person to indulge in  his animal passions and escape 
the consequences of his acts. Nature is relentless and wil l have full revenge for 
any such violation of her laws. Moral results can only  be produced by moral 
restraints. All other restraints defeat the very purpo se for which they are 
intended. 
Young India , 12-3-'25 
 
The world depends for its existence on the act of gen eration, and as the world 
is the playground of God and a reflection of His glo ry, the act of generation should 
be controlled for the ordered growth of the world. 
Autobiography  (1948), p. 251 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 126   
Sex urge is a fine and noble thing. There is nothin g to be ashamed of in it. But 
it is meant only for the act of creation. Any other use of it is a sin against God and 
humanity. 
Harijan , 28-3-'46 
 
It is a sin to bring forth unwanted children, but I think it is a greater sin to 
avoid the consequences of one's own action. It simply unmans man. 
 Harijan , 7-9-'35 
 
Man must choose either of the two courses, the upwar d or the downward; but 
as he has the brute in him, he will more easily choose  the downward course than 
the upward, especially when the downward course is pre sented to him in a 
beautiful garb. Man easily capitulates when sin is prese nted in the garb of virtue, 
and that is what Marie Stopes and others are doing. 
Harijan , 31-1-'35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 127   
37. GOSPEL OF NON-POSSESSION 
A seeker after Truth, a follower of the Law of Love,  cannot hold anything 
against tomorrow. God never provides for the morrow. He never creates more 
than what is strictly needed from day to day. If, th erefore, we repose faith in His 
Providence, we should rest assured that he will give us  every day our daily bread, 
meaning everything that we require. . . Our ignoran ce or negligence of the Divine 
Law, which gives to man from day to day his daily br ead and no more, has given 
rise to inequalities with all the miseries attendant up on them. The rich have a 
superfluous store of things which they do not need and which are, therefore, 
neglected and wasted; while millions starve and are f roze 1 to death for want of 
them. If each retained possession only of what he need ed, no one would be in 
want and all would live in contentment. As it is, the  rich are discontented no less 
than the poor. The poor man would fain become a mil lionaire and the millionaire a 
multi millionaire. The poor are often not satisfied w hen they get just enough to 
fill their stomaches; but they are clearly entitled t o it and society should make it a 
point to see that, they get it. The rich must take a n initiative in the matter with a 
view to a universal diffusion of the spirit of content ment. If only they keep their 
own property within moderate limits the poor will be  easily fed; and will learn the 
lesson of contentment along with the rich. Perfect f ulfillment of the ideal of non-
possession requires that man should, like the birds, have no roof over his head, no 
clothing and no stock of food for the morrow. He wil l, indeed, need his daily 
bread, but it will be God's business, and not his to p rovide for it. Only a very few 
rare soul can attain, this ideal, however. We ordin ary seekers can only keep it 
constantly in view, and in the light thereof, critic ally examine our property and 
try to reduce it every day. Civilization in the rea l sense of the term consists hot in 
the multiplication but in the deliberate and volunt ary reduction of wants, which 
promotes real happiness and contentment and increases t he capacity for service. 
One can reduce one's wants by perseverance, and the re duction of wants makes Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 128  for happiness—a healthy body and a peaceful mind. Fr om the standpoint of pure 
truth, the body too is property acquired by the soul.  By means of a desire for 
enjoyment we have created and continue to maintain this encumbrance in the 
shape of the body. When this desires vanishes there rem ains no further need for 
the body, and man is free from the vicious cycle of b irths and deaths. The soul is 
omnipresent; why should she care to be confined with in the cage like body, or do 
evil and even kill for the sake of the cage? We thus arrive at the ideal of total 
renunciation and learn to use the body for the purpo ses of service so long as it 
exists, so much so that service and no bread becomes wi th us the staff of life. We 
eat and drink, sleep and awake for service alone. Thi s brings us real happiness, 
and the beatific vision in the fullness of time. Let u s all examine our possession 
from this standpoint. 
We should remember that non-possession is a principle a pplicable to thoughts 
as well as to things. One who fills his brain with usele ss knowledge violates that 
inestimable principle. Thoughts which turn us away fro m God or do not turn us 
towards Him constitute impediments which one must soon get rid of. In this 
connection we may consider the definition of knowled ge contained in the 13th 
Chapter of the Gita. We are there told that humilit y etc., constitute knowledge, 
and all the rest is ignorance. If this is true and th ere is no doubt that it is true 
much that we hug today is knowledge is ignorance pu re and simple and, therefore, 
only does us harm instead of conferring any benefit. I t makes the mind wander 
and even reduces it to a vacuity, and discontent flo urishes in endless ramifications 
of evil. Needless to say, this is not a plea for inerti a. Every moment of our lives 
should be filled with activity, but that activity sho uld be Sattvika tending to truth. 
One who has concecrated his life to service cannot be idle for a single moment. 
But one has to learn to distinguish between good activ ity and evil activity. This 
discernment goes naturally with a single-minded devoti on to service. 
From Yeravda Mandir , Chapter VI Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 129   
Therefore, renounce all and dedicate it to God and then 1ive. The right of 
living is thus derived from renunciation. it does not  say, 'When all do their part of 
the work I too will do it.' It says, 'Don't bother about others, do your job first, and 
leave the rest to Him.' 
Harijan , 6-3-'37 
 
Jesus, Muhammad, Buddha, Nanak, Kabir, Chaitanya, Sh ankara, Dayananda, 
Ramakrishna were men who exercised an immense influenc e over and moulded the 
character of* thousands of men. The world is the rich er for their having lived in it. 
And they were all men who deliberately embraced pov erty as their lot. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahattna Gandhi , (1933), p. 353  
 
The golden rule... is resolutely to refuse to have wha t millions cannot. This 
ability to refuse will not descend upon us all of a s udden. The first thing is to 
cultivate the mental attitude that will not have po ssessions or facilities denied to 
millions, and the next immediate thing is to re-arran ge our lives as fast as possible 
in accordance with that mentality. 
Young India, 24-6-'26 
 
If we will take care of today, God will take care o f tomorrow.  
Young India,  13-10-21 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 130   
38. WORK AS WORSHIP 
'Brahma created His people with the duty of sacrific e l aid upon them, and said: 
"By this do you flourish. Let it be the fulfiller o f all your desires." 'Be who eats 
without performing this sacrifice, eats stolen bread.'— thus says the Gita. 'Earn thy 
bread by the sweat of thy brow,' says the Bible. Sacr ifices may be of many kinds. 
One of them may well be bread labour. If all labour ed for their bread and no 
more, then there would be enough food and enough le isure for all. Then there 
would be no cry of over-population, no disease, and no such misery as we see 
around. Such labour will be the highest form of sacri fice. Men will no doubt do 
many other things, either through their bodies or thr ough their minds, but all this 
will be labour of love, for the common good. There will then be no rich and no 
poor, none high and none low, no touchable and no u ntouchable.  
Harijan,  29-6-'35 
 
This may be an unattainable ideal. But we need not, therefore, cease to strive 
for it. Even if, without fulfilling the whole law o f sacrifice, that is, the law of our 
being, we performed physical labour enough for our d aily bread, we should go a 
long way towards the ideal. 
Harijan,  29-6-'35 
 
If we did so, our wants would be minimized, our food would be simple. We 
should then eat to live, not live to eat. Let anyone  who doubts the accuracy of 
this proposition try to sweat for his bread, he will d erive the greatest relish from 
the productions of his labour, improve his health, an d discover that many things 
he took were superfluities. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 131  Harijan,  29-6-'35 
 
May not men earn their bread by intellectual labour ? No. The needs of the 
body must be supplied by the body. 'Render unto Caesar  that which is Caesar's' 
perhaps applies here as well. Mere mental, that is, int ellectual labour is for the 
soul and is its own satisfaction. It should never deman d payment. In the ideal 
State, doctors, lawyers and the like will work solel y for the benefit of society, not 
for self. 
Obedience to the law of bread labour will bring abo ut a silent revolution in the 
structure of society. Men's triumph will consist in subst ituting the struggle for exis-
tence by the struggle for mutual service. The law of the brute will be replaced by 
the law of man. 
Harijan , 29-6-'35 
 
Return to the villages means a definite voluntary rec ognition of the duty of 
bread labour and all it connotes. 
Harijan , 29-6-'35 
 
God of Himself seeks for His seat the heart of him who serves his fellowmen. 
Such was Abu Ben Adhem. He served his fellowmen and th erefore his name topped 
the list of those who served God. 
Young India,  24-9-'25 
 
 But who are the suffering and the woe-begone? The su ppressed and the 
poverty-stricken. He who would be a bhakta,  therefore, must serve these by Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 132  body, soul and mind. He who does not even condescen d to exert his body to the 
extent of spinning for the sake of the poor and trots out lame excuses does not 
know the meaning of service. He who spins before the poor inviting them to do 
likewise serves God as no one else does. "He who gives me  even a trifle as a fruit 
or a flower or even a leaf in the spirit of bhakti  is my servant", says the Lord in the 
Bhagavadgita. And He hath His footstool where live "t he humble, the lowliest and 
lost". Spinning, therefore, for such is the greatest pr ayer, the greatest worship, 
the greatest sacrifice. 
Young India,  24-9-'25 
 
Q: Would it not be better for a man to give the tim e he spends on the worship 
of God to the service of the poor? And should not tr ue service make devotional 
worship unnecessary for such a man ? 
A:  I sense mental laziness as also agnosticisrf 1 question. The biggest of 
Karmayogis never give up devotional songs or worship.  Idealistically it may be that 
true service of others is itself worship and that suc'^ devotees do not need to 
spend any time in songs, etc. As f- matter of fact, Bh ajans, etc. are a help to true 
service and keep the remembrance of God fresh in the  heart of the devotee.  
Harijan,  13-10-'46 
 
No work that is done in His name and dedicated to Him  is small. All work when 
so done assumes equal merit. A scavenger who works in Hi s service shares equal 
distinction with a king who uses his gifts in His name a nd  as a mere trustee. 
Young India , 25-11-'26 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 133  I cannot imagine anything nobler or more national t han that for, say, one hour 
in the day, we should do the labour that the poor mu st do, and thus identify 
ourselves with them and through them with all mankind . I cannot imagine better 
worship of God than that m His name I should labour f or the poor even as they do. 
Young India , 20-10-'21 
 
There can never be too' much emphasis placed on work . I am simply repeating 
the gospel taught by the Gita where the Lord says, 'I f I did not remain ever at work 
sleeplessly, I should set a wrong example to mankind.' 
Harijan , 2-10-'35 
 
We should be ashamed of resting or having a square me al so long as there is 
one able-bodied man or woman without work or food.  
Young India , 6-I0-'21 
 
Service is not possible unless it is rooted in love or Ahimsa. True love is 
boundless like the ocean and rising and swelling withi n one spreads itself out and 
crossing all boundaries and frontiers envelops the whol e world. This service is 
again impossible without bread labour, otherwise descri bed in the Gita as Yajna. It 
is only when a man or woman has done bodily labour f or the sake of service that 
he or she has the right to live. 
Young India , 20-9-'28 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 134   
39. SARVODAYA 
This body. . . has been given to us only in order that  we may serve all Creation 
with it. And, therefore, says the Gita, he who eats wi thout offering Yajna eats 
stolen food. Every single act of one who would lead a  life of purity should be in 
the nature of Yajna*. Yajna having come to us with our birth, we are debtors all 
our lives, and thus for ever bound to serve the univer se. And even as bondslave 
receives food, clothing and so on from the master w hom he serves, so should we 
gratefully accept such gifts as may be assigned to us b y the Lord of the universe. 
What we receive must be called a gift; for as debtors we are entitled to no 
consideration for the discharge of our obligations. 
Therefore we may not blame the Master, if we fail t o get it. Our body is His to 
be cherished or cast away according to His will. This i s not a matter for complaint 
or even pity; on the contrary, it is a natural and e ven a pleasant and desirable 
state, if only we realize our proper place in God's sc heme. We do indeed need 
strong faith, if we would experience this supreme bli ss. "Do not worry in the least 
about yourself, leave all worry to God,"... this app ears to be the commandment in 
all religions. 
This need not frighten any one. He who devotes himsel f to service with a clear 
conscience will day by day grasp the necessity for it i n greater measure, and will 
continually grow richer in faith. The path of servic e can hardly be trodden by one, 
who is not prepared to renounce self- interest, and to  recognize the conditions of 
his birth. Consciously or unconsciously every one of us d oes render some service or 
other. If we cultivate this habit of doing this servic e deliberately, our desire for 
service will steadily grow stronger, and will make not  only for our own happiness 
but that of the world at large. 
From Yervada Mandir,  Chapter XIV Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 135   
A votary of Ahimsa cannot subscribe to the utilitari an formula (of the greatest 
good of the greatest number). He will strive for the greatest good of all and die in 
the attempt to realize the ideal. He will, therefor e, be willing to die, so that the 
others may live. He will serve himself with the rest, b y himself dying. The greatest 
good of all inevitably includes the good of the grea test number, and therefore, he 
and the utilitarian will converge in many points in their career but there does 
come a time when they must part company, and even w ork in opposite directions. 
The utilitarian to be logical will never sacrifice himself. 
Young India , 9-12-'26 
 
I do  not believe .., that an individual may gain spiritua lly and those who 
surround him suffer. I believe in Advaita. I believe in the essential unity of man 
and, for that matter, of all that lives. Therefore, I believe that if one man gains 
spiritually, the whole world gains with him and, if o ne man falls, the whole world 
falls to that extent. 
Young India , 4-12-'24 
 
There is not a single virtue which aims at, or is conte nt with, the welfare of 
the individual alone. Conversely, there is not a sing le offence which does not, 
directly or indirectly, affect many others besides the  actual offender. Hence, 
whether an individual is good or bad is not merely hi s own concern, but really the 
concern of the whole community, nay, of the whole w orld. 
Ethical Religion  (1927), p. 55 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 136  A life of service must be one of humility. He, who w ould sacrifice his life for 
others, has hardly time to reserve for himself a place in the sun. Inertia must not 
be mistaken for humility, as it has been in Hinduism. T rue humility means most 
strenuous and constant endeavour entirely directed to the service of humanity. 
God is continuously in action without resting for a s ingle moment. If we would 
serve Him or become one with Him, our activity must be as unwearied as His. 
From Yeravda Mandir , Chapter XII 
 
There may be momentary rest in store for the drop whi ch is separated from 
the ocean, but not for the drop in the ocean, which  knows no rest. The same is 
the case with ourselves. As soon as we become one with th e ocean in the shape of 
God, there is no more rest for us, nor indeed do we ne ed rest any longer. Our very 
sleep is action. For we sleep with the thought of God in our hearts. This 
restlessness constitutes true rest. This never-ceasing agi tation Therefore we may 
not blame the Master, if we fail to get it. Our body  is His to be cherished or cast 
away according to His will. This is not a matter for  complaint or even pity; on the 
contrary, it is a natural and even a pleasant and de sirable state, if only we realize 
our proper place in God's scheme. We do indeed need  strong faith, if we would 
experience this supreme bliss. "Do not worry in the lea st about yourself, leave all 
worry to God," ... this appears to be the commandment  in all religions. 
This need not frighten any one. He who devotes himsel f to service with a clear 
conscience will day by day grasp the necessity for it i n greater measure, and will 
continually grow richer in faith. The path of servic e can hardly be trodden by one, 
who is not prepared to renounce self- interest, and to  recognize the conditions of 
his birth. Consciously or unconsciously every one of us d oes render some service or 
other. If we cultivate this habit of doing this servic e deliberately, our desire for 
service will steadily grow stronger, and will make not  only for our own happiness 
but that of the world at large. Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 137  From Yeravda Mandir , Chapter XIV 
 
A votary of Ahimsa cannot subscribe to the utilitari an formula (of the greatest 
good of the greatest number). He will strive for the greatest good of all and die in 
the attempt to realize the ideal. He will, therefor e, be willing to die, so that the 
others may live. He will serve himself with the rest, b y himself dying. The greatest 
good of all inevitably includes the good of the grea test number, and therefore, he 
and the utilitarian will converge in many points in their career but there does 
come a time when they must part company, and even w ork in opposite directions. 
The utilitarian to be logical will never sacrifice himself. 
Young India , 9-12-'26 
 
I do not believe that an individual may gain spirit ually and those whose 
surround him suffer. I believe in Advaita. I believe in the essential unity of man 
and, for that matter, of all that lives. Therefore, I believe that if one man gains 
spiritually, the whole world falls to that extent. 
Young India, 4-12-24 
 
There is not a single virtue which aims at, or is conte nt with, the welfare of 
the individual alone. Conversely there is not a singl e offence which does not, 
directly or indirectly, affect many others besides the  actual offender. Hence, 
whether an individual is good or bad is not merely hi s own concern, but really the 
concern of the whole community, nay, of the whole w orld. 
Ethical Religion  (1927), p. 55 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 138  A life of service must be one of humility. He, who w ould sacrifice his life for 
others, has hardly time to reserve for himself a place  in the sun. Intertia must not 
be mistaken for humility, as it has been in Hinduism. T rue humility means most 
strenuous and constant endeavour entirely directed to  the service of humanity. 
God is continuously in action without resting for a s ingle moment. If we would 
serve Him or become one with Him, our activity must be as unwearied as His. 
From Yeravda Mandir , Chapter XII 
 
There may momentary rest in store for the drop which is separated from the 
ocean, but not for the drop in the ocean, which kno ws no rest. The same is the 
case with ourselves. As soon As we become one with the o cean in the shape of 
God, there is no more rest for us, nor indeed do we ne ed rest any longer. Our very 
sleep is action. For we sleep with the thought of god in our hearts. This 
restlessness constitutes true rest. This never ceasing agit ation holds the key to 
peace ineffable. This supreme state of total surrender is difficult to describe, but 
not beyond the bounds of human experience. It has bee n attained by many 
dedicated souls, and may be attained by ourselves as well. 
From Yeravda Mandir , Ch. XII 
 
What Yajna means has been explained by Gandhiji in an  earlier paragraph. He 
says: "Yajna means an act directed to the welfare of others, done without desiring 
any return for it, whether of a temporal or spiritua l nature. 'Act' here must be 
taken in its widest sense, and includes thought and wor d, as well as deed. 'Others' 
embraces not only humanity, but all life. Therefore,  and from the standpoint of 
Ahimsa it is not a Yajna to sacrifice lower animals eve n with a view to the service 
of humanity." 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 139   
40. ETHICS OF THE ATOM BOMB 
It has been suggested by American friends that the ato m bomb will bring in 
Ahimsa as nothing else can. It will, if it is meant t hat its destructive power will so 
disgust the world that it will turn it away from viol ence for the time being. This is 
very like a man glutting himself with dainties to the  point of nausea and turning 
away from them only to return with redoubled zeal a fter the effect of nausea is 
well over. Precisely in the same manner will the worl d return to violence with 
renewed zeal after the effect of disgust is worn out.  
Often does good come out of evil. But that is God's,  not man's plan. Man 
knows that only evil can come out of evil, as good ou t of good. 
That atomic energy, though harnessed by American scie ntists and army men 
for destructive purposes, may be utilized by other scie ntists for humanitarian 
purposes is undoubtedly within the realm of possibility.  But that is not what was 
meant by my American friends. They were not so simple  as to put a question 
which connoted an obvious truth. An incendiary uses fi re for his destructive and 
nefarious purpose, a housewife makes daily use of it in preparing nourishing food 
for mankind. 
So far as I can see, the atomic bomb has deadened the  finest feeling that has 
sustained mankind for ages. There used to be the so-call ed laws of war which 
made it tolerable. Now we know the naked truth. War  knows no law except that 
of might. The atom bomb brought an empty victory to  the Allied arms but it 
resulted for the time being in destroying the soul of Japan. What has happened to 
the soul of the destroying nation is yet too early to  see. Forces of Nature act in a 
mysterious manner. We can but solve the mystery by ded ucing the unknown result 
from the known results of similar events. A slaveholder  cannot hold a slave 
without putting himself or his deputy in the cage ho lding the slave. Let no one run 
away with the idea that I wish to put in a defence o f Japanese misdeeds in Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 140  pursuance of Japan's unworthy ambition. The differenc e was only one of degree. I 
assume that Japan's greed was more unworthy. But the g reater unworthiness 
conferred no right on the less unworthy of destroying  without mercy men, women 
and children of Japan in a particular area. 
The moral to be legitimately drawn from the supreme tragedy of the bomb is 
that it will not be destroyed by counter-bombs even a s violence cannot be by 
counter- violence. Mankind has to get out of violenc e only through non-violence. 
Hatred can be overcome only by love. Counter-hatred  only increases the surface 
as well as the depth of hatred. I am aware that I am repeating what I have many 
times stated before and practised to the best of my ab ility and capacity. What I 
first stated was itself nothing new. It was as old as th e hills. Only I recited no 
copy-book maxim but definitely announced what I bel ieved in every fiber of my 
being. Sixty years of practice in various walks of lif e has only enriched the belief 
which experience of friends has fortified. It is, h owever, the central truth by 
which one can stand alone without flinching. I belie ve in what Max Muller said 
years ago, namely, that truth needed to be repeated as long as there were men 
who disbelieved it. 
Harijan , 7-7-'46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 141   
41. PEACE ON EARTH 
It is my firm opinion that Europe today represents not  the spirit of God or 
Christianity but the spirit of Satan. And Satan's suc cesses are the greatest when 
he appears with the name of God on his lips. Europe is today only nominally 
Christian. It is really worshipping Mammon. It is easier  for a camel to pass through 
the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter th e Kingdom.' Thus really spoke 
Jesus Christ. His so-called followers measure their moral  progress by their 
material possessions. 
Young India,  8-9-'20 
 
By all means drink deep of the fountains that are gi ven to you in the Sermon 
on the Mount, but then you will have to take sackcl oth and ashes. The teaching of 
the Sermon was meant for each and every one of us. Y ou cannot serve both God 
and Mammon. God the Compassionate and the Merciful, Tolerance incarnate, 
allows Mammon to have his nine days' wonder. But I say to you ... fly from that 
self-destroying but destructive show of Mammon. 
Young India,  8-12-'27 
 
A time is coming when those, who are in the mad rush t oday of multiplying 
their wants, vainly thinking that they add to the r eal substance, real knowledge of 
the world, will retrace their steps and say: 'What ha ve we done?' Civilizations have 
come and gone, and in spite of all our vaunted prog ress I am tempted to ask again 
and again 'To what purpose ?' Wallace, a contemporar y of Darwin, has said the 
same thing. Fifty years of brilliant inventions and di scoveries, he has said, have 
not added one inch to the moral height of mankind. So said a dreamer and Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 142  visionary if you will—Tolstoy. So said Jesus, and Buddh a, and Muhammad, whose 
religion is being denied and falsified in my own coun try today. 
Young India , 8-12-'27 
 
Not to believe in the possibility of permanent peace is to disbelieve in the 
Godliness of human nature. Methods hitherto adopted ha ve failed because rock-
bottom sincerity on the part of those who have strive n has been lacking. Not that 
they have realized this lack. Peace is unattained by part performance of 
conditions, even as a chemical combination is impossib le without complete 
fulfillment of the conditions of attainment thereof.  If the recognized leaders of 
mankind who have control over the engines of destruct ion were wholly to 
renounce their use, with full knowledge of its impli cations, permanent peace can 
be obtained. This is clearly impossible without the gr eat powers of the earth 
renouncing their imperialistic design. This again seem s impossible without great 
nations ceasing to believe in soul- destroying compet ition and to desire to 
multiply wants and, therefore, increase their materi al possessions. It is my con-
viction that the root of the evil is want of a livin g faith in a living God. It is a first-
class human tragedy that peoples of the earth who cla im to believe in the 
message of Jesus whom they describe as the Prince of Peac e show little of that 
belief in actual practice. It is painful to see sinc ere Christian divines limiting the 
scope of Jesus' message, to select individuals. I have been taught from my 
childhood and tested the truth by experience that th e primary virtues of mankind 
are possible of cultivation by the me&iest of the huma n species. It is this 
undoubted universal possibility that distinguishes the h umans from the rest of 
God's creation. If even one nation were unconditiona lly to perform the supreme 
act of renunciation, many of us would see in our life time visible peace established 
on earth. 
Harijan , 18-6-'38 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 143   
If the best minds of the world have not imbibed the sp irit of non-violence, 
they would have to meet gangsterism in the orthodox way. But that would only 
show that we have not gone far beyond the law of the  jungle, that we have not 
yet learnt to appreciate the heritage that God has g iven us, that, in spite of the 
teaching of Christianity which is 1,900 years old and  of Hinduism and Buddhism 
which are older, and even of Islam, we have not made  much headway as human 
beings. But whilst I would understand the use of forc e by those who have not the 
spirit of nonviolence in them I would have those who know non-violence to throw 
their whole weight in demonstrating that even gangste rism has to be met with 
non-violence. 
Harijan , 10-12-'38 
 
Brute force has been the ruling factor in the world for thousands of years, and 
mankind has been reaping its bitter harvest all along , as he who runs may read. 
There is little hope of anything good coming out of it in the future. If light came 
out of darkness, then alone can love emerge from hatr ed. 
Satyagraha in South Africa , p. 289 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 144   
42 OBITER DICTA 
Death 
Why should we be upset when children or young men or  old men die? Not a 
moment passes when someone is not born or is not dead i n this world. We should 
feel the stupidity of rejoicing in a birth and lamen ting a death. Those who believe 
in the soul—and what Hindu, Mussalman or Parsee is ther e who does not?—know 
that the soul never dies. The souls of the living as well as of the dead are all one. 
The eternal processes of creation and destruction are going on ceaselessly. There 
is nothing in it for which we might give ourselves up  to joy or sorrow. Even if we 
extend the idea of relationship only to our countrym en and take all the births in 
the country as taking place in our family, how many births shall we celebrate? If 
we weep for all the deaths in our country, the tears in our eyes would never dry. 
This train of thought should help us to get rid of all  fear of death.  
Young India , 13-10-'21 
 
Birth and death are not two different states, but th ey are different aspects of 
the same state. There is as little reason to deplore t he one as there is to be 
pleased over the other. 
Young India , 20-11-'24 
 
Immortality 
I believe in the immortality of the soul. I would li ke to give you the analogy of 
the ocean. The ocean is composed of drops of water, ea ch drop is an entity and 
yet it is part of the whole, 'the one and the many'.  In this ocean of life we are all 
little drops. My doctrine means that I must identify m yself with life, with Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 145  everything that lives, that I must share the majesty o f life in the presence of God. 
The sum total of this life is God. 
India's Case for Swaraj  (1932), p. 245 
 
Insurance 
I had thought that life insurance implied fear and w ant of faith in God. .. In 
getting my life insured I had robbed my wife and ch ildren of their self-reliance. 
Why should they be not expected to take care of the mselves? What happened to 
the families of the numberless poor in the world? Why should I not count myself as 
one of them? What reason had I to assume that death w ould claim me earlier than 
the others? After all the real protector was neither  I nor my brother but God 
Almighty. 
Autobiography  (1948), pp. 320-21 
 
Means and Ends 
They say, 'means are after all means.' I would say, ' means are after all 
everything.' As the means so the end. There is no wal l of separation between the 
means and the end. Indeed the Creator has given us con trol (and that too very 
limited) over means, none over the end. Realization  of the goal is in exact 
proportion to that of the means. This is a proposition that admits of no exception. 
Young India , 17-7-'24 
 
Politics  
To see the universal and all-pervading spirit of Truth  face to face one must be 
able to love the meanest of creation as oneself. And a  man who aspires after that 
cannot afford to keep out of any field of life. Tha t is why my devotion to Truth Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 146  has drawn me into the field of politics; and I can sa y without the slightest 
hesitation, and yet in all humility, that those who s ay that religion has nothing to 
do with politics do not know what religion means. 
Autobiography  (1948), p. 615 
 
For me, politics bereft of religion are absolute dir t, ever to be shunned. 
Politics concern nations and that which concerns the w elfare of nations must be 
one of the concerns of a man who is religiously incli ned, in other words a seeker 
after God and Truth. For me God and Truth are conve rtible terms, and if anyone 
told me that God was a God of untruth or a God of to rture I would decline to 
worship Him. Therefore, in politics also we have to e stablish the Kingdom of 
Heaven. 
Young India, 18-6-'25 
 
I could not be leading a religious life unless I ident ified myself with the whole 
of mankind, and that I could not do unless I took par t in politics. The whole gamut 
of man's activities today constitutes an indivisible wh ole. You cannot divide 
social, economic, political and purely religious work  into watertight 
compartments. I do not know any religion apart from human activity. It provides a 
moral basis to all other activities which they would  otherwise lack, reducing life 
to a maze of 'sound and fury signifying nothing'. 
Harijan , 24-12-'38 
 
Predestination  
Q : Are the time, place and manner of death predest ined by the Almighty for 
each individual? If so, why worry even if we are ill ? Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 147  A:  I do not know whether time, place and the manner o f death are 
predestined. All I do know is that 'not a blade of g rass moves but by His will'. This 
too I know hazily. What is hazy today will be clear tomorrow or the day after by 
prayerful waiting. Let this however be quite clear. The Almighty is not a person 
like us. He or It is the greatest living Force or Law  in the world. Accordingly He 
does not act by caprice, nor does that Law admit of a ny amendment or 
improvement. His will is fixed and changeless, everyth ing else changes every 
second. Surely, it does not follow from the doctrine of predestination that we 
may not 'worry' in the care of ourselves even if we a re ill. Indifference to illness is 
a crime greater than that of falling ill. There is no end to the effort to do better 
today than yesterday. We have to 'worry' and find ou t why we are or have become 
ill. Health, not 'illth', is the law of nature. Let us investigate the law of nature and 
obey it, if we will not be ill or, if having fallen  ill, will be restored. 
Harijan , 28-7-'46 
 
Progress  
Evolution is always experimental. All progress is gaine d through mistakes and 
their rectification. No good comes fully fashioned, out of God's hand, but has to 
be carved out through repeated experiments and repea ted failures by ourselves. 
This is the law of individual growth. The same law con trols social and political 
evolution also. The right to err, which means the fr eedom to try experiments, is 
the universal condition of all progress. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi  (1933), p. 245  
 
The nations have progressed both by evolution and revo lution. The one is as 
necessary as the other. Death, which is an eternal veri ty, is revolution as birth 
and after is slow and steady evolution. Death is as nec essary for man's growth as 
life itself. God is the greatest revolutionary the wor ld has ever known or will Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 148  know. He sends storms where a moment ago there was calm . He levels down 
mountains which He builds with exquisite care and inf inite patience. I do watch 
the sky and it fills me with awe and wonder. In the se rene blue sky, both of India 
and England, I have seen clouds gathering and burstin g with a fury which has 
struck me dumb. History is more a record of wonderful revolutions than the so-
called ordered progress. . . . 
Young India , 2-2-'22 
 
Rebirth  
I am a believer in previous births and rebirths. All our relationships are the 
result of the Sanskaras we carry from previous births. God's laws are inscrutable 
and are the subject of endless search. No one will fath om them. 
Harijan , 18-8-'40 
 
Religious Education 
I do not believe that the State can concern itself o r cope with religious 
instruction. I believe that religious education must  be the sole concern of 
religious associations. Do not mix up religion and ethi cs. I believe that 
fundamental ethics is common to all religions. Teachi ng of fundamental ethics is 
undoubtedly a function of the State. By religion I have not in mind fundamental 
ethics but what goes by the name of denominationalism . We have suffered enough 
from State-aided religion and a State- church. A soc iety or group, which depends 
partly or wholly on State aid for the existence of i ts religion, does not deserve or, 
better still, does not have any religion worth the na me. I do not need to give any 
illustrations in support of this obvious truth as it is t o me. 
Harijan,  31-8-'47 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 149  Religious Ideal 
...The very virtue of a religious ideal lies in the f act that it cannot be 
completely realized in the flesh. For a religious ide al must be proved by faith, and 
how can faith have play if perfection could be atta ined by the spirit while it was 
still surrounded by its 'earthly vesture of decay'? Whe re would there be scope for 
its infinite expansion which is its essential characteri stic? Where would be room 
for that constant striving, that ceaseless quest after th e ideal that is the basis of 
all spiritual progress, if mortals could reach the per fect state while still in the 
body ? If such easy perfection in the body was possible , all we would have to do 
would be simply to follow a cut and dry model. Simil arly if a perfect code of 
conduct were possible for all there would be no room for a diversity of faiths and 
religions because there would be only one standard rel igion which everybody 
would have to follow. 
Young India , 22-11-'28 
 
The virtue of an ideal consists in its boundlessness. But  although religious 
ideals must thus, from their nature, remain unattaina ble by imperfect human 
beings, although by virtue of their boundlessness they may seem ever to recede 
further away from us, the nearer we go to them, stil l they are closer to us than 
our very hands and feet because we are more certain o f their reality and truth 
than even of our own physical being. This faith in on e's ideals alone constitutes 
true life, in fact, it is man's all in all. 
Young India , 22-11-'28 
 
Rights 
The true source of rights is duty. If we all discharge our duties, rights will not 
be far to seek. If leaving duties unperformed we run after rights, they will escape Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 150  us like a will-o'-the-wisp. The more we pursue them, t he farther will they fly. The 
same teaching has been embodied by Krishna in the immo rtal words: 'Action alone 
is thine. Leave thou the fruit severely alone.' Actio n is duty; fruit is the right. 
Young India , 8-1-'25 
 
Secrecy 
I have come to regard secrecy as a sin.... If we reali zed the presence of God 
as witness to all we say and do, we would not have anyt hing to conceal from 
anybody on earth. For we would not think unclean th oughts before our Maker, 
much less speak them. It is uncleanness that seeks secrecy and darkness. The 
tendency of human nature is to hide dirt; we do not want to see or touch dirty 
things; we want to put them out of sight. And so must  it be with our speech. I 
would suggest that we should avoid even thinking thou ghts we would hide from 
the world. 
Young India , 22-12-'20 
 
Sin  
I do not seek redemption from the consequences of my  sin; I seek to be 
redeemed from sin itself or rather from the very tho ught of sin. Until I have 
attained that end I shall be content to be restless. 
Mahatma Gandhi's Ideas  (1930), p. 70 
 
A sinner is equal to the saint in the eye of God. Both  will have equal justice, 
and both an equal opportunity either to go forward or to go backward. Both are 
His children, His creation. A saint who considers himsel f superior to a sinner 
forfeits his sainthood and becomes worse than the sinner , who, unlike the proud 
saint, knows not what he is doing.  Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 151  Harijan,  14-10-'33 
 
I have made the frankest admission of my many sins. But I do not carry their 
burden on my shoulders. If I am journeying Godward, a s I feel I am, it is safe with 
me. For I feel the warmth of the sunshine of His presen ce. My austerities, fastings 
and prayers are, I know, of no value, if I rely upon  them for reforming me. But 
they have an inestimable value, if they represent, as  I hope they do, the 
yearnings of a soul striving to lay his weary head in the lap of his Maker. 
Harijan,  18-4-'36 
 
Spiritualism 
I never receive communications from the spirits of th e dead. I have no 
evidence warranting a disbelief in the possibility of such communications. But I do 
strongly disapprove of the practice of holding or at tempting to hold such 
communications. They are often deceptive and are pr oducts of the imagination. 
The practice is harmful both to the medium and the spirits, assuming the 
possibility of such communications. It attracts and ties to the earth the spirit so 
invoked whereas its effort should be to detach itself f rom the earth, and rise 
higher. A spirit is not necessarily purer because it is disembodied. It takes with it 
most of the frailties to which it was liable when on earth. Information or advice, 
therefore, given by it need not be true or sound. T hat the spirit likes 
communications with those on earth is no matter for pl easure. On the contrary it 
should be weaned from such unlawful attachment. So mu ch for the harm done to 
the spirits. 
Young India , 12-9-'29 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 152  As for the medium, it is a matter of positive knowledg e with me that all those 
within my experience have been deranged or weak-bra ined and disabled for 
practical work whilst they were holding, or thought they were holding, such 
communications. I can recall no friend of mine who having held such 
communications had benefited in any way. 
Young India , 12-9-'29 
 
Superstition 
Superstitions and undesirable things go as soon as we b egin to live the correct 
life. I concern myself not with belief but with askin g to do the right thing. As soon 
as they do it, their belief rights itself.  
Young India . 11-8-'27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 153   
NON-ENGLISH WORDS WITH THEIR MEANINGS 
Abhyasa - repetition; practice; study 
Abu Ben Adhem - a saintly Muslim character, the creation of Leigh Hun t's poetic  
imagination, who is represented as one who, though he was 
content to be known merely as a lover of his fellowme n, found 
his name in the recording angel's book leading the li st of those 
who loved the Lord 
Adi Parva - first book of the Hindu epic, Mahabharata 
Advaita - Hindu philosophy of Non-dualism 
Advaitist - a believer in non-dualism 
Agiari - Zoroastrian fire-temple 
Ahimsa -  non-violence 
Ahriman - Spirit of Evil, in Zoroastrian religion 
Ahurmazd - Zoroastrian name of God 
Akash - ether; sky 
Allah - Muslim name of God 
Amanifvam - humility 
Ananda - joy 
Anekantavada - belief in many doctrines; skepticism 
Anekaniavadi - a believer in many doctrines; a sceptic  
Arya Samaj - a Hindu reformist organization founded by Swami Daya nanda 
Saraswati in the last century  
Ashram - abode of a spiritual teacher; hermitage; one of the four 
stages of life according to Hinduism  Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 154  Avatara - incarnation of God 
Ayodhya - capital of the kingdom of Rama, the epic hero  
 
Bansi - flute 
Bhagavadgita - The Song Celestial , a highly philosophical poem of 700 verses 
which occurs in the Mahabharata and in which Krishna,  
incarnate God, discourses on eternal verities 
Bhajan - hymn; singing of hymns  
Bhakta - a devotee  
Bhakti - devotion 
Brahma  - Hindu name of God, the Creator  
Brahmachari - a celibate; one who lives a life of self-restraint  
Brahmacharya - celibacy; continence; life of self-restraint  
Brahman - God 
Brahmana - member of the first (priestly) caste among Hindus 
Brahmaputra - a river of north-eastern India 
 
Chaitanya - Bengali religious reformer of the 15th century A. D.  who 
preached Bhakti or devotion to God  
Chapati - thin, flat cake made of floor  
Charya - conduct; practice  
Chit - knowledge 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 155   
Dada Hormazda - Zoroastrian name of God  
Daridranarayana - God in the form of the poor  
Dasharatha - King of Ayodhya and father of Rama, the epic hero 
Dayananda - Swami Dayananda Saraswati, founder of the Arya Sama j  
Devadhideva - God of Gods  
Dava, Devata - god 
Dharma - religion; law of one's being; duty  
Dvaita - Hindu philosophy of Dualism  
Dvaitism - doctrine of Dualism  
 
Ganga - well-known sacred river of northern India  
Gayatri - sacred Vedic Mantra (or formula) which is recited by  orthodox 
Hindus in their daily worship  
Gita - same as Bhagavadgita 
Guru - teacher; religious preceptor 
 
Hanuman - monkey-chief of the epic Ramayana, whom Hindus vener ate 
as a divinity  
Harishchandra - an ancient Hindu king who sacrificed his all for th e sake of 
truth  
Hirrtsa - violence 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 156  Imam Hasan and Imam Husain  - saintly sons of Hazrat Ali, son-in-law of Prophet 
Muhammad  
Ishwara - Hindu name for God  
Islam - religion founded by Prophet Muhammad  
 
Jainism - an ancient religion of India propagated by 24 Tirth ankars or 
Saviours, the first of whom was Rishabha and the last M ahavira, 
who was a contemporary of Buddha in the 6th century B. C. 
One of the cardinal doctrines of Jainism is Ahimsa or N on-
violence 
Janaka - an ancient Hindu king who was a great philosopher  
Janmashtami - birthday of Shri Krishna, Hindu incarnation of God, to whom 
the Bhagavadgita or  The Song Celestial is ascribed  
Japa - silent repetition  
Jehova - Hebrew name of God  
Judaism - the religion of the Jews 
Kabir - poet-saint of northern India who lived in the 15th century A. 
D. and who preached the essential unity of the Godhea d and 
harmony of all religions  
Kalma - a Muslim formula of prayer  
Karmayogi - a follower of the path of selfless action  
Khuda - Muslim name for God  
Koran - Book of Revelation of Islam 
Krishna - central figure of the epic, Mahabharata, who is ven erated by 
Hindus as God incarnate  Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 157   
Lila - play 
 
Mahabharata - Hindu epic of about 1,00,000 verses, the central the me of 
which is the great war between the Pandavas and thei r cousins 
the Kauravas, who were rival claimants to the throne of 
Hastinapur (ancient Delhi)  
Mandir - Hindu temple  
Mantra - a sacred text or formula  
Manu - ancient Hindu law-giver  
Maya - illusion; divine power  
Moksha - liberation; freedom from birth and death  
 
Namaz - daily prayer of Muslims  
Nanak - founder of Sikhism (1469-1538 or 1539 A. D.)  
Narasinha Mehta - poet-saint of Gujarat who lived in the 15th century 
Nirvana - final emancipation from sway of passions; Buddhist goal  of 
life  
Niyamas - rules of conduct  
 
Omkar - the sacred and mystic syllable   
Om Paramatma - the Supreme Self or God  
 
Pariahs - 'untouchables' among Hindus Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 158  Prahlad - son of a mythological demon-king and devotee of God Vishnu, 
who faced dreadful ordeals in defence of his faith, r emaining 
steadfast to the end  
Puranas - Hindu mythological books  
 
Rahaman - Muslim name of God  
Rahim - Muslim name of God 
Rama, Ramachandra - hero of the epic, Ramayana, who is regarded as an 
incarnation of God by Hindus 
Ramakrishna - Bengali saint (1836-86 A.D.) who taught the oneness o f the 
Godhead and the basic harmony of all religions. The 
Ramakrishna Mission is named after him  
Ratnanama - name of Rama (i.e. God) 
Ramayana - Hindu epic which relates the story of the abduction o f Sita, 
wife of Rama, prince of Ayodhya, by Ravana, demon-k ing of 
Lanka, and her rescue by Rama after the destruction of the 
demon 
Ramanuja - Hindu philosopher-saint of the 11th century A. D. w ho was an 
exponent of Vishishtadvaita or qualified Monism  
 
Sanatani - a follower of orthodox Hinduism  
Sannyasa - renunciation of worldly ties  
Sanskaras - innate tendencies inherited from past lives  
Sarvodaya - welfare of all  
Sat - truth; that which exists  Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 159  Sat-Chit-Ananda - Truth-Knowledge-Bliss  
Sattvika - endowed with goodness; virtuous  
Satya - truth 
Satyagraha - recourse to truth-force or soul-force  
Satyavan - husband of Savitri, heroine of well-known mythologic al 
episode. She wins back his life from Yama, the god of death  
Savitri - heroine of the Satyavan-Savitri episode  
Shankara - Hindu philosopher of the 8th century A. D. who was an  
exponent of Advaita or Absolute Non-Dualism; a name o f the 
Deity  
Shankaracharya - same as Shankara; also a member of the order of monks  
founded by Shankara  
Shastra - Hindu scripture  
Shastri - one versed in scriptures 
Shuddhi— lit. - "purification"; conversion to Hindu faith 
Shudra - member of the fourth of menial caste among Hindus 
Sthitaprajna - one who is firmly established in transcendental kno wledge 
Surdas - blind Hindi poet-saint of northern India who lived in the 16th 
century A. D. 
Syadvada - philosophy of "probability" in matters of perception by the 
senses; a form of scepticism. Which is professed by a secti on of 
Jain thinkers  
Syadvadi - a believer in Syadvada  
 
Tabligh - propaganda and conversion to Islam  Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 160  Tapas - penance; religious austerity 
Trappist - an order of Christian monks who observe the vow of sil ence 
Tulsidas - Hindi poet of northern India who lived in the 16th century 
A.D. and whose work   
 
Ramacharitamanasa - recounting the story of the epic hero, Rama, has 
become universally popular with Hindus  
 
Upanishads - ancient philosophical treatises which are believed by  Hindus 
to contain revealed truth  
Vairagya - aversion to worldly life 
Vaishnava - a devotee of God Vishnu, the "Preserver" among the Hi ndu 
Trinity 
Varnashrama - four-fold division of Hindu society  
Vedas - most ancient scriptures of Hindus which are believed t o 
embody revealed truth  
Vedic - belonging to Vedas  
Vishnu - the "Preserver" among Hindu Trinity  
Vyasa - compiler of the Vedas and author of the Mahabharata  
Yajna - sacrifice 
Yamuna - a river of northern India, hallowed by its associatio ns with 
Krishna, the Hindu incarnation  
 
Zend Avesta - Zoroastrian scripture Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 161  Zoroaster - founder of Zoroastrian religion which is professed b y the 
Parsees of India. He is also known as Zarathustra or Zerdusht 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 162   
SOURCES 
An Autobiography or the Story of My Experiments wit h Truth 
By M. K. Gandhi. Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedaba d-14, Edi. 1948. 
The Bombay Chronicle 
Daily newspaper published at Bombay 
Ethical Religion 
By Mahatma Gandhi. S. Ganesan, Madras, 1927 
From Yeravda Mandir   
By M. K. Gandhi. Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedaba d-14, Edi. 1945.  
Harijan, 
Weekly journal, formerly edited by Mahatma Gandhi a nd others. Now defunct. 
Published at the Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedab ad-14 
Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
By M. K. Gandhi. Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedaba d-14. Edi. 1946. 
Mahatma Gandhi  
Ganesh & Co., Madras, 1918 
Mahatma Gandhi's Ideas 
By C. F. Andrews, Allen and Unwin, London, 1930 
The Modern Review 
Monthly journal published at Calcutta  
 Truth is God 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 163  The Nation's Voice, 
Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad-14. Edi. 1947 . 
Satyagraha in South Africa 
By M. K. Gandhi. Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedaba d-14. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi 
G. A. Natesan, Madras (4th Edi.), 1933  
Young India  
Weekly journal, was edited by Mahatma Gandhi (1919- 1932) and published at 
Ahmedabad 
 
 
 