 
Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
A paraphrase 
 
 
By : M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Translated into the Gujarati by : Valji Govindji Desai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
 
  Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2  
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE 
In a chapter in his  Autobiography  (Part IV, Chapter XVIII) entitled 'The Magic 
Spell of a Book' Gandhiji tells us how he read Ruskin's  Unto This Last on the 
twenty-four hours' journey from Johannesburg to Durban. 'The train reached 
there in the evening. I could not get any sleep that night. I determined to 
change my life in accordance with the ideals of the book.... I translated it later 
into Gujarati, entitling it Sarvodaya.' 
Sarvodaya  is here re-translated into English, Ruskin's winged words being 
retained as far as possible. 
At the end of that chapter Gandhiji gives us a summary of the teachings of  Unto 
This Last as he understood it: 
1. The good of the individual is contained in the good of all. 
2. A lawyer's work has the same value as the barber's, as all have the same 
right of earning their livelihood from their work. 
3. A life of labour, i.e. the life of the tiller of the  soil and the 
handicraftsman is the life worth living. 
Nothing more need be said as regards the paraphrase of Ruskin's four chapters, 
but Gandhiji's conclusion (pp. 77-80), written as it was in South Africa long 
before he returned to India in 1915, is prophetic and fit to be treasured by 
India for all time to come. And the last paragraph of the booklet is a pearl 
beyond price. 
V G. D. 
2007, Bhadra vadi 5  
 
 
 
 Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3  
[SECOND EDITION] 
This is a reprint of the first edition except for a few verbal alterations 
suggested by my friend Shri Verrier Elwin who was good enough to go through 
the translation at my request. 
V G. D. 
Vasantapanchami, 2012  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4  
INTRODUCTION 
People in the West generally hold that the whole duty of man is to promote the 
happiness of the majority of mankind, and happiness is supposed to mean only 
physical happiness and economic prosperity. If the laws of morality are broken 
in the conquest of this happiness, it does not matter very much. Again, as the 
object sought to be attained is the happiness of the majority, Westerners do 
not think there is any harm if this is secured by sacrificing a minority. The 
consequences of this line of thinking are writ large on the face of Europe. 
This exclusive search for physical and economic well-being prosecuted in 
disregard of morality is contrary to divine law, as some wise men in the West 
have shown. One of these was John Ruskin who contends in  Unto This Last  that 
men can be happy only if they obey the moral law. 
We in India are very much given nowadays to an imitation of the West. It is 
necessary to imitate the virtues of the West, but there is no doubt that 
Western standards are often bad, and every one will agree that we should shun 
all evil things. 
The Indians in South Africa are reduced to a sorry plight. We go abroad in order 
to make money, and in trying to get rich quick, we lose sight of morality and 
forget that God will judge all our acts. Self-interest absorbs our energies and 
paralyzes our power of discrimination between good and evil. The result is that 
instead of gaining anything, we lose a great deal by staying in foreign 
countries; or at least we fail to derive full benefit from it. Morality is an 
essential ingredient in all the faiths of the world, but apart from religion, our 
common sense indicates the necessity of observing the moral law. Only by 
observing it can we hope to be happy, as Ruskin shows in the following pages. 
Socrates in Plato's Apology1 gives us some idea of our duty as men. And he was 
as good as his word. I feel that Ruskin's  Unto This Last  is an expansion of 
Socrates' ideas; he tells us how men in various walks of life should behave if 
they intend to translate these ideas into action. What follows is not a Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5 translation of Unto This Last  but a paraphrase, as a translation would not be 
particularly useful to the readers of  Indian Opinion. Even the title has not been 
translated but paraphrased as  Sarvodaya  [the welfare of all], as that was what 
Ruskin aimed at in writing this book. 
 
1 Gandhiji had published a summary of The Apology in Indian Opinion before 
Sarvodaya was written.  
 V G. D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6  
01. THE ROOTS OF TRUTH 
Among the delusions which at different periods have afflicted mankind, 
perhaps the greatest—certainly the least creditable—is modern economics 
based on the idea that an advantageous code of action may be determined 
irrespectively of the influence of social affection. 
Of course, as in the case of other delusions, political economy has a plausible 
idea at the root of it. 'The social affections,' says the economist, 'are accidental 
and disturbing elements in human nature; but avarice and the desire for 
progress are constant elements. Let us eliminate the inconstant, and 
considering man merely as a money-making machine, examine by what laws of 
labour, purchase and sale, the greatest amount of wealth can be accumulated. 
Those laws once determined, it will be for each individual afterwards to 
introduce as much of the disturbing affectionate element as he chooses.' 
This would be a logical method of analysis if the accidentals afterwards to be 
introduced were of the same nature as the powers first examined. Supposing a 
body in motion to be influenced by constant and inconstant forces, it is the 
simplest way of examining its course to trace it first under the persistent 
conditions and afterwards introduce the causes of variation. But the disturbing 
elements in the social problem are not of the same nature as the constant 
ones; they alter the essence of the creature under examination the moment 
they are added. They operate not mathematically but chemically, introducing 
conditions which render ail our previous knowledge unavailable. 
I do not doubt the conclusions of the science if its terms are accepted. I am 
simply uninterested in them, as I should be in those of a science of gymnastics 
which assumed that men had no skeletons. It might be shown on that 
supposition that it would be advantageous to roll the students up into pellets, 
flatten them into cakes, or stretch them into cables; and that when these 
results were effected, the reinsertion of the skeleton would be attended with 
various inconveniences to their constitution. The reasoning might be admirable, Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7 the conclusions true, and the science deficient only in applicability. Modern 
political economy stands on a precisely similar basis. It imagines that man has a 
body but no soul to be taken into account and frames its laws accordingly. How 
can such laws possibly apply to man in whom the soul is the predominant 
element? 
Political economy is no science at all. We see how helpless it is when labourers 
go on a strike. The masters take one view of the matter, the operatives 
another; and no- political economy can set them at one. Disputant after 
disputant vainly strives to show that the interests of the masters are not 
antagonistic to those of the men. In fact it does not always follow that the 
persons must be antagonistic because their interests are. If there is only a crust 
of bread in the house, and mother and children are starving, their interests are 
not the same. If the mother eats it, the children want it; if the children eat it, 
the mother must go hungry to her work. Yet it does not follow that there is 
antagonism between them, that they will fight for the crust, and the mother, 
being strongest, will get it and eat it. Similarly it cannot be assumed that 
because their interests are diverse, persons must regard one another with 
hostility and use violence or cunning to obtain the advantage. 
Even if we consider men as actuated by no other moral influences than those 
which affect rats or swine, it can never be shown generally either that the 
interest of master and labourer are alike or that they are opposed; for 
according to circumstances they may be either. It is indeed the interest of both 
that the work should be rightly done and a just price obtained for it but in the 
division of profits, the gain of the one may or may not be the loss of the other. 
It is not the master's interest to pay wages so low as to leave the men sickly 
and depressed, nor the workman's interest to be paid high wages if the 
smallness of the master's profit hinders him from conducting it in a safe and 
liberal way. A stoker ought not to desire high pay if the company is too poor to 
keep the engine-wheels in repair. 
All endeavour, therefore, to deduce rules of action from balance of expediency 
is in vain. And it is meant to be in vain. For no human actions ever were Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8 intended by the Maker of men to be guided by balances of expediency but by 
balances of justice. He has therefore rendered all endeavours to determine 
expediency futile •for evermore. No man can know what will be the ultimate 
result to himself or others of any given line of conduct. But every man may 
know and most of us do know what is a just and an unjust act. And all of us 
may know also that the consequences of justice will be ultimately the best 
possible, both to others and ourselves, though we can neither say what  is best, 
or how it is likely to come about. 
I have meant in the term justice to include affection—such affection as one 
man owes to another. All right relations between master and operative 
ultimately depend on this. 
As an illustration let us consider the position of domestic servants. 
We will suppose that the master of a household tries only to get as much work 
out of his servants as he can, at the rate of wages he gives. He never allows 
them to be idle; feeds them as poorly and lodges them as ill as they will 
endure. In doing this, there is no violation on his part of what is commonly 
called 'justice'. He agrees with the domestic for his whole time and service and 
takes them, the limits of hardship in treatment being fixed by the practice of 
other masters in the neighbourhood. If the servant can get a better place, he is 
free to take one. 
This is the politico-economical view of the case according to the doctors of that 
science who assert that by this procedure the greatest average of work will be 
obtained from the servant, and therefore the greatest benefit to the 
community, and through the community, to the servant himself. 
That however is not so. It would be so if the servant were an engine of which 
the motive power was steam, magnetism or some such agent of calculable 
force. But on the contrary he is an engine whose motive power is the Soul. Soul 
force enters into all the economist's equations without his knowledge and 
falsifies every one of their results. The largest quantity of work will not be 
done by this curious engine for pay or under pressure. It will be done when the Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9 motive force, that is to say, the will or spirit of the creature, is brought to its 
greatest strength by its own proper fuel, namely by the affections. 
It does happen often that if the master is a man of sense and energy, much 
material work may be done under pressure; also it does happen often that if 
the master is indolent and weak, a small quantity of work, and that bad, may 
be produced by his servant. But the universal law of the matter is that, 
assuming any given quantity of energy and sense in master and servant, the 
greatest material result obtainable by them will be not through antagonism to 
each other, but through affection for each other. 
Nor is this one whit less generally true because indulgence will be frequently 
abused, and kindness met with ingratitude. For the servant who, gently 
treated, is ungrateful, treated urgently, will be revengeful; and the man who is 
dishonest to a liberal master will be injurious to an unjust man. 
In any case and with any person, this unselfish treatment will produce the most 
effective return. I am here considering the affections wholly as a motive 
power; not at all as things in themselves desirable or noble. I look at them 
simply as an anomalous force, rendering every one of the ordinary economist's 
calculations nugatory. The affections only become a true motive power when 
they ignore every other motive and condition of economics. Treat the servant 
kindly with the idea of turning his gratitude to account, and you will get, as 
you deserve, no gratitude nor any value for your kindness; but treat him kindly 
without any economical purpose, and all economical purposes will be 
answered; here as elsewhere whoever will save his life shall lose it, whoso loses 
it shall find it. 
The next simplest example of relation between master and operative is that 
which exists between the commander of a regiment and his men. 
Supposing the officer only desires to apply the rules of discipline so as, with 
least trouble to himself to make the regiment most effective, he will not be 
able, by any rules, on this selfish principle, to develop the full strength of his 
subordinates. But if he has the most direct personal relations with his men, the Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10 most care for their interests, and the most value for their lives, he will develop 
their effective strength, through their affection for his own person and trust in 
his character, to a degree wholly unattainable by other means. This applies 
more stringently as the numbers concerned are larger: a charge may often be 
successful though the men dislike their officers; a battle has rarely been won, 
unless they loved their general. 
A body of men associated for the purposes of robbery (as a Highland clan in 
ancient times) shall be animated by perfect affection, and every member of it 
be ready to lay down his life for the life of his chief. But a band of men 
associated for purposes of legal production is usually animated by no such 
emotions, and none of them is willing to give his life for the life of his chief. 
For a servant or a soldier is engaged at a definite rate of wages for a definite 
period; but a workman at a rate of wages variable according to the demand for 
labour, and with the risk of being at any time thrown out of employment by 
chances of trade. Now as under these conditions no action of the affections can 
take place, but only an explosive action of disaffections , two points offer 
themselves for consideration in the matter: 
1. How far the rate of wages may be so regulated as not  to vary with the 
demand for labour; 
2. How far it is possible that bodies of workmen may be  engaged and 
maintained at such fixed rate of wages (whatever the state of trade may 
be), without enlarging or diminishing their number, so as to give them 
permanent interest in the establishment with which they are connected, 
like that of the domestic servants in an old family, or an  esprit de corps,  
like that of the soldiers in a crack regiment. 
1. A curious fact in the history of human error is the denial by the 
economist of the possibility of so regulating wages as not to vary with 
the demand for labour. 
We do not sell our prime-minister by Dutch auction. Sick, we do not 
inquire for a physician who takes less than a guinea; litigious, we never 
think of reducing six-and-eight pence to four-and-sixpence; caught in a Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11 shower we do not canvass the cabmen to find one who values his driving 
at less than sixpence a mile. 
The best labour always has been, and is, as all labour ought to be, paid 
by an invariable standard. 
'What!' the reader perhaps answers amazedly: 'to pay good and bad 
workmen alike?' 
Certainly. You pay with equal fee, contentedly, the good and bad 
preachers (workmen upon your soul) and the good and bad physicians 
(workmen upon your body); much more may you pay, contentedly, with 
equal fees, the good and bad workmen upon your house. 
'Nay, but I choose my physician, thus indicating my sense of the quality 
of their work.' By all means choose your bricklayer; that is the proper 
reward of the good workman, to be 'chosen'. The right system respecting 
all labour is, that it should be paid at a fixed rate, but the good workman 
employed, and the bad workman unemployed. The false system is when 
the bad workman is allowed to offer his work at half-price, and either 
take the place of the good or to force him by his competition to work for 
an inadequate sum. 
2. This equality of wages, then, being the first object towards which we 
have to discover the road, the second is that of maintaining constant 
numbers of workmen in employment, whatever may be the accidental 
demand for the article they produce. 
The wages which enable any workman to live are necessarily higher if his work 
is liable to intermission, than if it is assured and continuous. In the latter case 
he will take low wages in the form of a fixed salary. The provision of regular 
labour for the workman is good for him as well as for his master in the long run, 
although he cannot then make large profits or take big risks or indulge in 
gambling. 
The soldier is ready to lay down his life for his chief and therefore he is held in 
greater honour than an ordinary workman. Really speaking, the soldier's trade Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12 is not slaying, but being slain in the defence of others. The reason the world 
honours the soldier is, because he holds his life at the service of the State. 
Not less is the respect we pay to the lawyer, physician and clergyman, founded 
ultimately on their self-sacrifice. Set in a judge's seat, the lawyer will strive to 
judge justly, come of it what may. The physician will treat his patients with 
care, no matter under what difficulties. The clergyman will similarly instruct 
his congregation and direct it to the right path. 
All the efficient members of these so-called learned professions are in public 
estimate of honour preferred before the head of a commercial firm, as the 
merchant is presumed to act always selfishly. His work may be very necessary 
to the community; but the motive of it is understood to be wholly personal. 
The merchant's first object in all his dealings must be (the public believe) to 
get as much for himself and leave as little to his customer as possible. 
Enforcing this upon him, by political statute, as the necessary principle of his 
action; recommending it to him, and themselves reciprocally adopting it, 
proclaiming for law of the universe that a buyer's function is to cheapen, and a 
seller's to cheat, - the public, nevertheless, involuntarily condemn the man of 
commerce for his compliance with their own statement, and stamp him forever 
as belonging to an inferior grade of human personality. 
This they must give up doing. They will have to discover a kind of commerce 
which is not exclusively selfish. Or rather they must discover that there never 
was or can be any other kind of commerce; and that this which they have 
called commerce was not commerce at all but cozening. In true commerce, as 
in true preaching or true fighting, it is necessary to admit the idea of 
occasional voluntary loss;—that sixpences have to be lost, as well as lives, 
under a sense of duty; that the market may have its martyrdoms as well as the 
pulpit; and trade its heroism as well as war. 
Five great intellectual professions exist in every civilized nation: 
The Soldier's profession is to  defend it. 
The Pastor's to  teach it. Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13 The Physician's to  keep it in health. 
The Lawyer's to  enforce justice in it. 
The Merchant's to  provide for it. 
And the duty of all these men is on due occasion to  die for it. For truly the man 
who does not know when to die does not know how to live. 
Observe, the merchant's function is to provide for the nation. It is no more his 
function to get profit for himself out of that provision than it is a clergyman's 
function to get his stipend. This stipend is a necessary adjunct but not the 
object of his life if he be a true clergyman, any more than his fee (or 
honorarium) is the object of life to a true physician. Neither is his fee the 
object of life to a true merchant. All three, if true men, have a work to be 
done irrespective of fee—to be done even at any cost, or for quite the contrary 
of fee; the pastor's function being to teach, the physician's to heal and the 
merchant's to provide. That is to say, he has to apply all his sagacity and 
energy to the producing the thing he deals in perfect state and distributing it 
at the cheapest possible price where it is most needed. 
And because the production of any commodity involves the agency of many 
lives and hands, the merchant becomes in the course of his business the master 
and governor of large masses of men in a more direct way than a military 
officer or pastor, so that on him falls, in great part, the responsibility for the 
kind of life they lead; and it becomes his duty not only to produce goods in the 
purest and cheapest forms, but also to make the various employments involved 
in the production most beneficial to the men employed. 
And as into these two functions, requiring for their right exercise the highest 
intelligence as well as patience, kindness and tact, the merchant is bound to 
put all his energy, so for their just discharge he is bound, as soldier or physician 
is bound, to give up, if need be, his life, in such way as it may be demanded of 
him. 
Two main points he has to maintain: first his engagements; and secondly the 
perfectness and purity of the thing provided by him; so that rather than fail in Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14 any engagement or consent to any deterioration, adulteration, or unjust or 
exorbitant price of that which he provides, he is bound to meet fearlessly any 
form of distress, poverty or labour which may through maintenance of these 
points come upon him. 
Again in his office as governor of the 'men employed by him, the merchant is 
invested with a paternal authority and responsibility. In most cases a youth 
entering a commercial establishment is withdrawn altogether from home 
influence; his master must become his father; else he has, for practical and 
constant help, no father at hand. So that the only means which the master has 
of doing justice to the men employed by him is to ask himself sternly whether 
he is dealing with such subordinate as he would with his own son, if compelled 
by circumstances to take such a position. 
Supposing the captain of a frigate were obliged to place his own son in the 
position of a common sailor; as he would then treat his son, he is bound always 
to treat every one of the men under him. So also supposing the master of a 
factory were obliged to place his own son in the position of an ordinary 
workman; as he would then treat his son, he is bound always to treat every one 
of his men. This is the only effective, true or practical Rule which can be given 
on this point of economics. 
And as the captain of a ship is bound to be the last man to leave his ship in 
case of wreck and to share his last crust with the sailors in case of famine, so 
the manufacturer, in any commercial crisis, is bound to take the suffering of it 
with his men, and even to take more of it for himself than he allows his men to 
feel; as a father would in a famine, shipwreck or battle sacrifice himself for his 
son. 
All this sounds very strange; the only real strangeness in the matter being, 
nevertheless, that it should so sound. For all this is true everlastingly and 
practically; all other doctrine than this being impossible in practice, 
consistently with any progressive state of national life; all the life which we 
now possess as a nation showing itself in the denial by a few strong minds and 
faithful hearts of the economic principle taught to our multitudes, which Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15 principles, so far as accepted, lead straight to national destruction. Respecting 
the modes and forms of destruction to which they lead I hope to reason farther 
in a following paper. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  
02. THE VEINS OF  WEALTH 
The answer which would be made by any ordinary economist to the statement 
in the preceding paper, is in a few words as follows: 
"It is true that certain advantages of a general nature may be obtained by the 
development of social affections. But economists never take such advantages 
into consideration. Our science is simply the science of getting rich. So far from 
being fallacious, it is found by experience to be practically effective. Persons 
who follow its precepts do become rich, and persons who disobey them become 
poor. Every capitalist of Europe has acquired his fortune by following the laws 
of our science. It is vain to bring forward tricks of logic against the force of 
accomplished facts. Every man of business knows by experience how money is 
made and how it is lost." 
Pardon me. Men of business do indeed make money, but they do not know if 
they make it by fair means or if their money-making contributes to national 
welfare. They rarely know the meaning of the word 'rich'. At least if they know, 
they do not allow for the fact that it is a relative word, implying its opposite 
'poor' as positively as the word 'north' implies its opposite 'south'. Men write as 
if it were possible, by following certain scientific precepts, for everybody to be 
rich. Whereas riches are a power like that of electricity, acting only through 
inequalities or negations of itself. The force of the guinea you have in your 
pocket depends wholly on the default of a guinea in your neighbour's pocket. If 
he did not want it, it would be of no use to you; the degree of power it 
possesses depends accurately upon the need he has for it, and the art of 
making yourself rich, in the ordinary mercantile economist's sense, is therefore 
equally and necessarily the art of keeping your neighbour poor. 
I wish the reader clearly to understand the difference between the two 
economies, to which the terms, 'political' and 'mercantile' might be attached. 
 Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17 Political economy consists simply in the production, preservation and 
distribution, at fittest time and place, of useful or pleasurable things. The 
farmer who cuts his hay at the right time; the builder who lays good bricks in 
well-tempered mortar; the housewife who takes care of her furniture in the 
parlour and guards against all waste in her kitchen are all political economists 
in the true and final sense, adding continually to the riches and well-being of 
the nation to which they belong. 
But mercantile economy signifies the accumulation, in the hands of individuals, 
of legal claim upon, or power over, the labour of others; every such claim 
implying precisely as much poverty or debt on one side as it implies riches or 
right on the other. 
The idea of riches among active men in civilized nations generally refers to 
such commercial wealth; and in estimating their possessions, they rather 
calculate the value of their horses and fields by the number of guineas they 
could get for them, than the value of their guineas by the number of horses and 
fields they could buy with them. 
Real property is of little use to its owner, unless together with it he has 
commercial power over labour. Thus suppose a man has a large estate of 
fruitful land with rich beds of gold in its gravel; countless herds of cattle; 
houses, and gardens and storehouses; but suppose, after all, that he could get 
no servants? In order that he may be able to have servants, some one in his 
neighbourhood must be poor and in want of his gold or his corn. Assume that no 
one is in want of either, and that no servants are to be had. He must therefore 
bake his own bread, make his own clothes, plough his own ground and shepherd 
his own flocks. His gold will be as useful to him as any other yellow pebbles on 
his estate. His stores must rot, for he cannot consume them. He can eat no 
more than another man could eat, and wear no more than another man could 
wear. He must lead a life of severe and common labour to procure even 
ordinary comforts. Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18 The most covetous of mankind would, with small exultation, I presume, accept 
riches of this kind on these terms. What is really desired, under the name of 
riches is, essentially, power over men; in its simplest sense, the power of 
obtaining for our own advantage the labour of servant, tradesman and artist. 
And this power of wealth of course is greater or less in direct proportion to the 
poverty of the men over whom it is exercised and in inverse proportion to the 
number of persons who are as rich as ourselves, and who are ready to give the 
same price for an article of which the supply is limited. If the musician is poor, 
he will sing for small pay, as long as there is only one person who can pay him; 
but if there be two or three, he will sing for the one who offers him most. So 
that the art of becoming 'rich' in the common sense is not only the art of 
accumulating much money for ourselves but also of contriving that our 
neighbours shall have less. In accurate terms it is 'the art of establishing the 
maximum inequality in our own favour'. 
The rash and absurd assumption that such inequalities are necessarily 
advantageous lies at the root of most of the popular fallacies on the subject of 
economics. For the beneficialness of the inequality depends first, on the 
methods by which it was accomplished and secondly, on the purposes to which 
it is applied. Inequalities of wealth, unjustly established, have assuredly 
injured the nation in which they exist during their establishment; and unjustly 
directed, injure it yet more during their existence. But inequalities of wealth, 
justly established, benefit the nation in the course of their establishment; and 
nobly used, aid it yet more by their existence. 
Thus the circulation of wealth in a nation resembles that of the blood in the 
natural body. There is one quickness of the current which comes of cheerful 
emotion or wholesome exercise; and another which comes of shame or of 
fever. There is a flush of the body which is full of warmth and life; and another 
which will pass into putrefaction. 
Again even as diseased local determination of the blood involves depression of 
the general health of the system, all morbid local action of riches will be found 
ultimately to involve a weakening of the resources of the body politic. Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19 Suppose two sailors cast away on an uninhabited coast and obliged to maintain 
themselves there by their own labour for a series of years. 
If they both kept their health, and worked steadily and in amity with each 
other, they might build themselves a house and in time to come possess some 
cultivated land together with various stores laid up for future use. All these 
things would be real riches or property; and supposing the men both to have 
worked equally hard, they would each have right to equal share or use of it. 
Their political economy would consist merely in the careful preservation and 
just division of these possessions. 
Perhaps however after some time one or other might be dissatisfied with the 
results of their common farming; and they might in consequence agree to 
divide the land into equal shares, so that each might thenceforward work in his 
own field and live by it. Suppose that after this arrangement had been made, 
one of them was to fall ill, and be unable to work on his land at a critical 
time—say of sowing or harvest. He would naturally ask the other to sow or reap 
for him. 
Then his companion might say, with perfect justice, 'I will do this additional 
work for you; but if I do it, you must promise to do as much for me at another 
time. I will count how many hours I spend on your ground, and you shall give 
me a written promise to work for the same number of hours on mine, whenever 
I need your help, and you are able to give it.' 
Suppose the disabled man's sickness to continue, and that under various 
circumstances, for several years, requiring the help of the other, he on each 
occasion gave a written pledge to work, as soon as he was able, at his 
companion's orders, for the same number of hours as the other had given up to 
him. 
What will the positions of the two men be when the invalid is able to resume 
work? Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20 Considered as a 'polis' or state, they will be poorer than they would have been 
otherwise; poorer by the withdrawal of what the sick man's labour would have 
produced in the interval. His friend may perhaps have toiled with an energy 
quickened by the enlarged need but in the end his own land must have suffered 
by the withdrawal of so much of his time from it; and the united property of 
the two men will be less than it would have been if both had remained in 
health and activity. 
But the relations in which they stand to each other are also widely altered. The 
sick man has not only pledged his labour for some years, but will have 
exhausted his share of the stores, and will be in consequence for some time 
dependent on the other for food, for which he can only 'pay' him by yet more 
deeply pledging his own labour. 
Supposing the written promises to be held entirely valid, the person who had 
hitherto worked for both might now, if he chose, rest altogether, and pass his 
time in idleness, not only forcing his companion to redeem all his previous 
pledges but exacting from him pledges for further labour, to an arbitrary 
amount, for what food he had to advance to him. 
There might not be the least illegality (in the ordinary sense of the word) in the 
arrangement; but if a stranger arrived on the coast at this advanced stage of 
their political economy, he would find one man commercially Rich; the other 
commercially Poor. He would see, with no small surprise, one passing his days 
in idleness; the other labouring for both and living sparely, in the hope of 
recovering his independence at some distant period. 
What I want the reader to note especially is the fact that the establishment of 
the mercantile wealth which consists in a claim upon labour signifies a political 
diminution of the real wealth which consists in substantial possessions. 
Take another example, more consistent with the ordinary course of affairs of 
trade. Suppose that three men, instead of two, formed the little isolated 
republic, and were obliged to separate, in order to farm different pieces of 
land at some distance from each other: each estate furnishing a distinct kind of Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21 produce and each in need of the material raised on the other. Suppose that the 
third man, in order to save the time of all three, simply superintends the 
transference of commodities from one farm to the other, on condition of 
receiving a share of every parcel of goods conveyed. 
If this carrier always brings to each estate, from the other, what is chiefly 
wanted, at the right time, the operations of the two farmers will prosper, and 
the largest possible result in produce or wealth will be attained by the little 
community. But suppose no intercourse between the landowners is possible, 
except through the travelling agent; and that after a time, this agent keeps 
back the articles with which he has been entrusted until there comes a period 
of extreme necessity for them, on one side or other, and then exacts in 
exchange for them all that the distressed farmer can share of other kinds of 
produce; it is easy to see that by ingeniously watching his opportunities, he 
might possess himself of the greater part of the surplus produce of the two 
estates, and at last, in a year of scarcity, purchase both for himself and 
maintain the former proprietors thenceforward as his labourers or servants. 
This would be a case of commercial wealth acquired on the exactest principles 
of modern political economy. But it is clear in this instance also that the 
wealth of the State or of the three men considered as a society, is collectively 
less than it would have been if the merchant had been content with juster 
profit. The operations of the two farmers have been cramped to the utmost; 
the limitations of the supply of things they wanted at critical times, together 
with the failure of courage consequent on the prolongation of a struggle for 
mere existence, must have diminished the effective results of their labour; and 
the stores accumulated by the merchant will not be of equivalent value to 
those which, had he been honest, would have filled the granaries of the 
farmers and his own. 
The question, therefore, respecting not only the advantage but even the 
quantity of national wealth, resolves itself finally into one of abstract justice. 
The - real value of acquired wealth depends on the moral sign attached to it, 
just, as sternly as that of a mathematical quantity depends on the algebraical Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22 sign attached to it. Any given accumulation of commercial wealth, may be 
indicative, on the one hand, of faithful industries, progressive energies and 
productive ingenuities; or on the other hand, it may be indicative of mortal 
luxury, merciless tyranny, ruinous chicanery. 
And these are not merely moral attributes of riches, which the seeker of riches 
may, if he chooses, despise; the, are literally material attributes of riches, 
depreciating or exalting the monetary signification of the sum in question. One 
mass of money is the outcome of action which has created,—another, of action 
which has annihilated,—ten times as much in the gathering of it. 
Therefore the idea that directions can be given for the gaining of wealth, 
irrespectively of the consideration of its moral sources is perhaps the most 
insolently futile of all that ever beguiled men through their vices. So far as I 
know, there is not in history record of anything, so disgraceful to the human 
intellect as the modern idea that the commercial text 'Buy in the cheapest 
market and sell in the dearest' represents an available principle of national 
economy. Buy in the cheapest market?—yes; but what made your market cheap 
? Charcoal may be cheap among your roof timbers after a fire and bricks may 
be cheap in your streets after an earthquake; but fire and earthquake may not 
therefore be national benefits. Sell in the dearest?—yes, truly; but what made 
your market dear? You sold your bread well today; was it to a dying man who 
gave his last coin for it and will never need bread more; or to a rich man who 
tomorrow will buy your farm over your head; or to a soldier on his way to 
pillage the bank in which you have put your fortune? 
None of these things you can know. One thing only you can know; namely 
whether this dealing of yours is a just and faithful one, which is all you need 
concern yourself about respecting it; sure thus to have done your part in 
bringing about ultimately in the world a state of things which will not issue in 
pillage or in death. 
 Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23 It has been shown that the chief value of money consists in its having power 
over human beings; that without this power large material possessions are 
useless, and to a person possessing such power, comparatively unnecessary. But 
power over human beings is attainable by other means than by money. 
In this moral power there is a monetary value as real as that represented by 
more ponderous currencies. A man's hand may be full of invisible gold, and the 
wave of it or the grasp shall do more than another's with a shower of bullion. 
But farther. Since the essence of wealth consists in its authority over men, if 
the apparent wealth fails in this power, it ceases to be wealth at all. It does 
not appear lately in England that our authority over men is absolute. 
Finally since the essence of wealth consists in power over men, will it not 
follow that the nobler and the more in number the persons are over whom it 
has power, the greater the wealth? Perhaps it may even appear after some 
consideration that the persons themselves  are the wealth; not gold and silver. 
The true veins of wealth are purple—and not in Rock but in Flesh. The final 
consummation of all wealth is in the producing as many as possible full-
breathed, bright-eyed and happy-hearted human beings. In some far-away and 
yet undreamt-of hour I can even imagine that instead of adorning the turbans 
of her slaves with diamonds from Golkonda and thus showing off her material 
wealth, England, as a Christian mother, may at last attain to the virtues and 
the treasures of a non-Christian one and be able to lead forth her Sons, saying, 
"These are MY Jewels." 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  
03. EVEN-HANDED  JUSTICE 
Some centuries before the Christian era, a Jew merchant, reported to have 
made one of the largest fortunes of his time (held also in repute for much 
practical sagacity), left among his ledgers some general maxims which have 
been preserved even to our own days. They were held in respect by the 
Venetians who placed a statue of the old Jew on the angle of one of their 
principal buildings. Of late years these writings have fallen into disrepute, 
being opposed to the spirit of modern commerce. 
He says for instance in one place: 'The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is 
a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death'; adding in another, with the 
same meaning: 'Treasures of wickedness profit nothing; but truth delivers from 
death.' Both these passages are notable for their assertions of death as the only 
real issue and sum of attainment by any unjust scheme of wealth. If we read 
instead of 'lying tongue', 'lying label, title, pretence or advertisement', we shall 
more clearly perceive the bearing of these words on modern business. 
Again the wise man says: 'He that oppresseth the poor to increase his riches 
shall surely come to want.' And again more strongly: 'Rob not the poor because 
he is poor; neither oppress the afflicted in the place of business. For God shall 
spoil the soul of those that spoiled them.' 
This 'robbing the poor because he is poor' is especially the mercantile form of 
theft, consisting in taking advantage of a man's necessities in order to obtain 
his labour or property at a reduced price. The ordinary highwayman robs the 
rich, but the trader robs the poor. 
But the two most remarkable passages are the following: 
'The rich and the poor have met. 
God is their maker.' 
'The rich and the poor have met. 
God is their light.' Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25 They 'have met.' That is to say, as long as the world lasts the action and 
counteraction of wealth and poverty is just as appointed a law of the world as 
the flow of stream to sea: 'God is their maker.' But also this action may be 
either gentle and just, or convulsive and destructive; it may be by rage of 
devouring flood or by lapse of serviceable wave. And which of these it shall be, 
depends on both rich and poor knowing that God is their light. 
The flowing of streams is in one respect a perfect image of the action of 
wealth. Where the land falls, the water flows. So wealth must go where it is 
required. But the disposition and administration of rivers can be altered by 
human forethought. Whether the stream shall be a curse or a blessing depends 
upon man's labour and administrating intelligence. For centuries districts of 
the world, rich in soil and favoured in climate, have lain desert under the rage 
of their own rivers; not only desert, but plague-struck. The stream which, 
rightly directed, would have flowed in soft irrigation from field to field—would 
have purified the air, given food to man and beast, and carried their burdens 
for them on its bosom—now overwhelms the plain and poisons the wind; its 
breath pestilence, and its work famine. In like manner human laws can guide 
the flow of wealth. This the leading trench and limiting mound can do so 
thoroughly that it shall become water of life—the riches of the hand of 
wisdom; or on the contrary, by leaving it to its own lawless flow, they may 
make it the last and deadliest of national plagues: water of Marah—the water 
which feeds the roots of all evil. 
The necessity of these laws of distribution or restraint is curiously overlooked 
in the ordinary economist's definition of his own 'science'. He calls it the 
'science of getting rich'. But there are many sciences as well as many arts of 
getting rich. Poisoning people of large estates was one employed largely in the 
middle ages; adulteration of food of people of small estates is one employed 
largely now. All these come under the general head of sciences or arts of 
getting rich. 
 Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26 So the economist in calling his science the science of getting rich must attach 
some ideas of limitation to its character. Let us assume that he means his 
science to be the science of 'getting rich by legal or just means'. In this 
definition is the word 'just' or 'legal' finally to stand ? For it is possible that 
proceedings may be legal which are by no means just. If therefore we leave at 
last only the word 'just' in that place of our definition, it follows that in order 
to grow rich scientifically, we must grow rich justly; and therefore know what 
is just. It is the privilege of the fishes, as it is of rats, and wolves, to live by 
the laws of demand and supply; but it is the distinction of humanity to live by 
those of right. 
We have to examine then what are the laws of justice respecting payment of 
labour. 
Money payment, as stated in my last paper, consists radically in a promise to 
some person working for us, that for the time and labour he spends in our 
service today we will give or procure equivalent time and labour in his service 
at any future time when he may demand it. 
If we promise to give him less labour than he has given us, we under-pay him. 
If we promise to give him more labour than he has given us, we over-pay him. 
In practice, when two men are ready to do the work and only one man wants 
to have it done, the two men underbid each other for it; and the one who gets 
it to do is under-paid. But when two men want the work done and there is only 
one man ready to do it, the two men who want it done overbid each other, 
and the workman is over-paid. The central principle of right or just payment 
lies between these two points of injustice. 
Inasmuch as labour rightly directed is fruitful just as seed is, the fruit (or 
'interest' as it is called) of the labour first given, or 'advanced', ought to be 
taken into account and balanced by an additional quantity of labour in the 
subsequent repayment. Therefore the typical form of bargain will be: If you 
give me an hour today, I will give you an hour and five minutes on demand. If 
you give me a pound of bread today, I will give you seventeen ounces on 
demand and so on. Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27 Now if two men are ready to do the work and if I employ one who offers to 
work at half price he will be half-starved while the other man will be left out 
of employment. Even if I pay due wages to the workman chosen by me, the 
other man will be unemployed. But then my workman will not have to starve, 
and I shall have made a just use of my money. If I pay due wages to my man, I 
shall not be able to amass unnecessary riches, to waste money on luxuries and 
to add to the mass of poverty in the world. The workman who receives due 
wages from me will act justly to his subordinates. Thus the stream of justice 
will not dry up, but gather strength as it flows onward. And the nation with 
such a sense of justice will be happy and prosperous. 
We thus find that the economists are wrong in thinking that competition is 
good for a nation. Competition only enables the purchaser to obtain his labour 
unjustly cheap, with the result that the rich grow richer and the poor poorer. 
In the long run it can only lead the nation to ruin. A workman should receive a 
just wage according to his ability. Even then there will be competition of a 
sort, but the people will be happy and skilful, because they will not have to 
underbid one another, but to acquire new skills in order to secure 
employment. This is the secret of the attractiveness of government services in 
which salaries are fixed according to the gradation of posts. The candidate for 
it does not offer to work with a lower salary but only claims that he is abler 
than his competitors. The same is the case in the army and in the navy, where 
there is little corruption. But in trade and manufacture there is oppressive 
competition, which results in fraud, chicanery and theft. Rotten goods are 
manufactured. The manufacturer, the labourer, the consumer,—each is 
mindful of his own interest. This poisons all human intercourse. Labourers 
starve and. go on strike. Manufacturers become rogues and consumers too 
neglect the ethical aspect of their own conduct. One injustice leads to many 
others, and in the end the employer, the operative and the customer are all 
unhappy and go to rack and ruin. The very wealth of the people acts among 
them as a curse. Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28 Nothing in history has been so disgraceful to human intellect as the acceptance 
among us of the common doctrines of economics as a science. I know no 
previous instance in history of a nation's establishing a systematic disobedience 
to the first principles of its professed religion. 
The writings which we (verbally) esteem as divine not only denounce the love 
of money as the source of all evil, and as an idolatry abhorred of the deity, but 
declare mammon service to be the accurate and irreconcilable opposite of 
God's service; and whenever they speak of riches absolute and poverty 
absolute, declare woe to the rich and blessing to the poor. 
True economics is the economics of justice. People will be happy in so far as 
they learn to do justice and be righteous. All else is not only vain but leads 
straight to destruction. To teach the people to get rich by hook or by crook is 
to do them an immense disservice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  
04. AD VALOREM 
We have seen how the ideas upon which political economy is based are 
misleading. Translated into action they can only make the individual and the 
nation unhappy. They make the poor poorer and the rich richer and none are 
any the happier for it. 
Economics do not take the conduct of men into account but hold that the 
accumulation of wealth is the sign of prosperity, and that the happiness of 
nations depends upon their wealth alone. The more factories, the merrier. 
Thus men leave village farms with their spring winds and coming to cities, live 
diminished lives in the midst of noise, of darkness, and of deadly exhalation. 
This leads to deterioration of the national ph3'sique, and to increasing avarice 
and immorality. If someone talks of steps to be taken to eradicate vice, so-
called wise men will say that it is of no use at all that the poor should receive 
education and that it is best to let things alone. They however forget that the 
rich are responsible for the immorality of the poor, who work like slaves in 
order to supply them with their luxuries, and have not a moment which they 
can call their own for self-betterment. Envying the rich, the poor also try to be 
rich, and when they fail in this effort, they are angry. They then lose their 
senses and try to make money by force or fraud. Thus both wealth and labour 
are barren of all fruit or else are utilized for chicanery. 
Labour in the real sense of the term is that which produces useful articles. 
Useful articles are those which support human life, such as food, clothes or 
houses, and enable men to perfect the functions of their own lives to the 
utmost and also to exercise a helpful influence over the lives of others. The 
establishment of big factories with a view to getting rich may lead a person 
into sin. Many people amass riches but few make a good use of it. Accumulated 
wealth which leads to the destruction of a nation is of no earthly use. The 
capitalists of modern times are responsible for widespread and unjust wars 
which originate from the covetousness of mankind. Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30 Some people say that it is not possible to impart knowledge so as to ameliorate 
the condition of the masses; let us therefore live as seems fit and amass riches. 
But this is an immoral attitude. For the good man who observes ethical rules 
and does not give way to greed has a disciplined mind, does not stray from the 
right path, and influences others by his acts. If the individuals who constitute a 
nation are immoral, so is the nation too. If we behave as we choose and at the 
same time take our neighbours to task for their wrongdoing, the results can 
only be disappointing. 
We thus see that money is only an instrument which makes for misery as well 
as happiness. In the hands of a good man it helps in the cultivation of land and 
the harvesting of crops. Cultivators work in innocent contentment and the 
nation is happy. But in the hands of a bad man, money helps to produce say 
gunpowder which works havoc among its manufacturers as well as among its 
victims. Therefore  THERE IS NO WEALTH  BUT LIFE. That country is the richest 
which nourishes the greatest number of noble and happy human beings; that 
man is richest who, having perfected the functions of his own life to the 
utmost, has also the widest helpful influence, both personal and by means of 
his possessions, over the lives of others. 
This is not a time for self-indulgence but for each of us to labour according to 
our capacity. If one man lives in idleness, another has to put. in a double 
amount of work. This is at the root of the distress of the poor in England. Some 
so-called work is nugatory as in jewel- cutting and even destructive as in war. 
It brings about a diminution in the national capital, and is not beneficial to the 
worker himself. It seems as if men are employed, but really they are idle. The 
rich oppress the poor by misuse of riches. Employers and employees are at 
daggers drawn with one another, and men are reduced to the level of beasts. 
 
 
 
 Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  
CONCLUSION 
Ruskin's book thus paraphrased has a lesson for Indians no less than for the 
Englishmen to whom it was primarily addressed. New ideas are in the air in 
India. Our young men who have received Western education are full of spirit. 
This spirit should be directed into the right channels, as otherwise it can only 
do us harm. 'Let us have Swaraj' is one slogan; let us industrialize the country' 
is another. 
But we hardly understand what Swaraj is. Natal for instance enjoys Swaraj but 
her Swaraj stinks in our nostrils, for she crushes the negroes, and oppresses the 
Indians. If by some chance the negroes and the Indians left Natal, its white men 
would fight among themselves and bring about their own destruction. 
If not like Natal's will we have Swaraj as in the Transvaal one of whose leaders, 
General Smuts, breaks his promises, says one thing and does another? He has 
dispensed with the services of English policemen and employed Afrikanders 
instead. I do not think that this is going to help any of the two nationalities in 
the long run. Selfish men will loot their own people, when there are no more 
'outsiders' left to be looted. 
Thus Swaraj is not enough to make a nation happy. What would be the result of 
Swaraj being conferred on a band of robbers? They would be happy only if they 
were placed under the control of a good man who was not a robber himself. 
The United States, England and France for instance are powerful States, but 
there is no reason to think that they are really happy. 
Swaraj really means self-control. Only he is capable of self-control who 
observes the rules of morality, does not cheat or give up truth, and does his 
duty to his parents, wife and children, servants and neighbours. Such a man is 
in enjoyment of Swaraj, no matter where he lives. A State enjoys Swaraj if it 
can boast of a large number of such good citizens. Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32 It is not right that one people should rule another. British rule in India is an 
evil, but let us not run away with the idea that all will be well when the British 
quit India. 
The existence of British rule in the country is due to our disunity, immorality 
and ignorance. If these national defects were overcome, not only would the 
British leave India without a shot being fired but we would be enjoying real 
Swaraj. 
Some foolish Indians rejoice in bomb-throwing, but if all the Britishers in the 
country were thus killed, the killers would become the rulers of India who 
would only have a change of masters. The bomb now thrown at Englishmen will 
be aimed at Indians after the English are there no longer. It was a Frenchman 
who murdered the President of the French Republic. It was an American who 
murdered President Cleveland. Let us not blindly imitate Western people. 
If Swaraj cannot be attained by the sin of killing Englishmen, it cannot be 
attained either by the erection of huge factories. Gold and silver may be 
accumulated but they will not lead to the establishment of Swaraj. Ruskin has 
proved this to the hilt. Western civilization is a mere baby, a hundred or only 
fifty years old. And yet it has reduced Europe to a sorry plight. Let us pray that 
India is saved from the fate that has overtaken Europe, where the nations are 
poised for an attack on one another, and are silent only because of the 
stockpiling of armaments. Some day there will be an explosion, and then 
Europe will be a veritable hell on earth. Non-white races are looked upon as 
legitimate prey by every European State. What else can we expect where 
covetousness is the ruling passion in the breasts of men? Europeans pounce 
upon new territories like crows upon a piece of meat. I am inclined to think 
that this is due to their mass-production factories. 
India must indeed have Swaraj but she must have it by righteous methods. Our 
Swaraj must be real Swaraj, which cannot be attained by either violence or 
industrialization. India was once a golden land, because Indians then had hearts 
of gold. The land is still the same but it is a desert because we are corrupt. It Ruskin UNTO THIS LAST  
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33 can become a land of gold again only if the base metal of our present national 
character is transmuted into gold. The philosopher's stone which can effect this 
transformation1 is a little word of two syllables – Satya (Truth). If every Indian 
sticks to truth, Swaraj will come to us of its own accord. 
1 ‘Institutions’, says Herbert Spencer, ‘are dependent on character; and however changed 
in their superficial aspects, cannot be changed in their essential natures faster than 
character changes.’ 
V.G.D. 
 