 
Village Swaraj 
 
 
Written by: M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Compiled by: H. M. Vyas 
 
 
Rs. 35/-  
 
 
 
First Published: December 1962 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: 079 – 27540635 
E-mail: jitnavjivanlO@gmail.com 
Website: www.navajivantrust.org   
Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
FOREWORD 
It is, indeed, a matter for gratification that the Navajivan Trust is publishing 
selections from Mahatma Gandhi's writings on "Villa ge Swaraj" in a book form. 
The publication contains Gandhiji's views on differ ent aspects of rural life 
including agriculture, village industry, animal hus bandry, transport, basic 
education, health and hygiene. At a time when we ar e endeavouring to 
establish Panchayati Raj in India on the basis of w ide decentralization of 
political and economic power, this book is bound to  be of great value to a large 
number of official as well as non-official workers.  The Community Development 
movement should not be regarded as some kind of a p rogramme which has been 
largely imported from the Western democracies; it m ust necessarily be based 
on Indian conditions and traditions. It is, therefo re, of paramount importance 
that all workers who are being trained for particip ating in this movement 
should possess ample knowledge about Gandhiji's ide as in regard to various 
aspects of rural reconstruction. If we overlook and  bypass Gandhiji's experience 
and ideals about the pattern of Indian planning, we  shall be doing so at great 
peril to the evolution of our democracy on sound fo undations. 
It is wrong to think that Gandhiji entertained outm oded ideas regarding modern 
Industrialization. As a matter of fact, he was not against mechanization as 
such; he strongly objected to "the craze for machin ery". He welcomed every 
improvement in small machines which could provide e mployment to millions of 
artisans in the villages. In place of mass producti on by big factories he 
advocated production by the masses in their own hom es and cottages. Gandhiji 
was most anxious to provide full employment to ever y able-bodied citizen of 
India, and he maintained that this objective could be achieved only by 
organizing village and cottage industries in the co untryside in an efficient 
manner. Any economic planning which did not utilize  fully the idle manpower in 
the rural areas could not be termed as sound or rat ional. "To a people, 
famishing and idle," said Gandhiji, "the only accep table form in which God can 
dare appear is work and promise of food as wages." ( Selections from Gandhi , by 
N. K. Bose, p. 49) This ideal of full employment is  now recognized by Western Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3  economists as basic to planned economic development , particularly of 
underdeveloped countries with large and growing pop ulations. Prof. Galbraith is 
of the view that "full employment is more desirable  than increased production 
combined with unemployment". ( The Affluent Society , p. 155) 
Mahatrtia Gandhi strongly pleaded for decentralizat ion of economic and 
political power through the organization of Village  Panchayats. He was of the 
definite view that Panchayat system in India, if wo rked on scientific lines, 
could not only build up the social and economic str ength of the countryside but 
also strengthen the forces of national defence agai nst the risk of foreign 
invasion. Acharya Vinoba Bhave has also been laying  great stress on the urgent 
need for organizing the Indian villages on a co-ope rative community basis 
through  Gramadana.  This ideal of decentralized democracy or Panchayat i Raj 
should not be regarded as a sentimental proposition  based on medieval notions. 
A study of modern economic and political thought in  the West would indicate 
that decentralized institutions are now regarded as  crucial to the establishment 
of democracy on stable foundations. "If man's faith  in social action is to be 
revivified," states Prof. Joad, "the State must be cut up and its functions 
distributed." ( Modern Political Theory , pp. 120-21) In his  Fabian Socialism, 
Prof. Cole maintains that for diffusing widely amon g ordinary men and women a 
capacity for collective activity "we must set out t o build our society upon little 
democracies". From this standpoint, the experiment of Panchayati Raj which 
has been launched in India's countryside with zeal and vigour is a right step 
towards the goal of "Village Swaraj" envisaged by G andhiji. 
Above all, we should be clear in our minds that Gan dhiji did not stand for a 
social and economic order based on material values alone. He always upheld 
the ideal of plain living and high thinking and wor ked for a higher  standard of 
life  and not merely for a higher standard of living.  "Civilization, in the real 
sense of the term", remarks Gandhiji, "consists not  in the multiplication but in 
the deliberate and voluntary restriction of wants."  
Unfortunately, this ethical and moral aspect of eco nomic life has often been 
neglected to the detriment of real human welfare. M odern economists are now Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  emphasizing the urgent need for 'investment in man'  in addition to 'investment 
in goods' for achieving broad- based and speedy eco nomic growth. Prof. 
Schumpeter rightly observes that for the success of  economic and political 
democracy, "individuals with adequate ability and m oral character must exist in 
sufficient numbers". (Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy)  The same idea has 
been forcefully expressed by Mr. Crosland in the fo llowing words: "We do not 
want to enter the age of abundance only to find tha t we have lost the values 
which might teach us how to enjoy it."  (Future of Socialism,  p. 529) It is, 
therefore, this human and moral aspect of our plann ing which must be 
constantly borne in mind by all workers, officials as well as non- officials, who 
are engaged in this great adventure of building up a New India of Gandhiji's 
dreams. 
New Delhi 
13-11-1962 
Shriman Narayan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5   
PREFACE 
Never before in history did the ideal of human unit y attract so much attention 
of world statesmen and scientists, literary men and  laymen alike as it does 
today. In the words of Shri Aurobindo, "Today the i deal of human unity is more 
or less vaguely making its way to the front of our consciousness. The 
intellectual and material circumstances of the age have prepared and almost 
imposed upon it, especially the scientific discover ies which have made our 
earth so small that its vastest kingdoms seem now n o more than the provinces 
of a single country."* Arnold Toynbee observes righ tly, "The West's prowess in 
technology has, as we put it poetically, 'annihilat ed distance' and has at the 
same time armed human hands, for the first time in history with weapons 
capable of annihilating the humane race. . . . The reason why we need unity so 
urgently now is both sensational and commonplace. I t has been put curtly in 
the epigram 'one world or none'. It is obvious to e very politically conscious man 
and woman in the world today that in the Atomic Age  if we do not now abolish 
war, war is going to abolish us."2 Pitirim Sorokin has in his inimitable language 
put the present problem that faces the world thus: "Bleeding from war wounds 
and frightened by the atomic Frankensteins of destr uction, humanity is 
desperately looking for a way out of the deathtrap.  It craves life instead of 
inglorious death. It wants peace in place of war. I t is hungry for love in lieu of 
hate. It aspires for order to replace disorder. It dreams of a better humanity, of 
greater wisdom, of a finer cultural mantle for its body than the bloody rags of 
its robot civilization. Having foolishly manoeuvred  itself into a deathtrap and 
facing the inexorable problem, 'To be or not to be' , it is forced to pursue, more 
desperately than ever before, its eternal quest for  survival and immortality."3 
If humanity that is now challenged by death- dealin g weapons fails to act in 
time on right lines the alternative is total destru ction. The saving of mankind 
lies in the establishment of World Government. The necessity of abolishing war 
makes it inevitable. The establishment of a genuine  World Government Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6  necessarily involves the abolition of the national sovereignty of the existing 
States. 
How the World Government will be established is an important question as the 
shedding of national sovereignty will not be easy t o achieve. There will be but 
very few politicians who would say like Gandhiji: " I see nothing grand or 
impossible about our expressing our readiness for u niversal interdependence 
rather than independence... The logical sequel of s elf-sacrifice is that the 
individual sacrifices himself for the community, th e community for the district, 
the district for the province, the province for the  nation, and the nation for the 
world." Arnold Toynbee observes, "In the Atomic Age , the spirit that we need in 
our statesmen is surely Ashoka's spirit (i.e. non-v iolence). We can no longer do 
without unity. But we can also no longer afford to pursue this indispensable 
objective by methods of coercion. Conversion not co ercion, is in our day, the 
only means that we can employ for unity of mankind.  In the Atomic Age, the 
use of force would result not in union, but in self -destruction. In this age, fear, 
as well as conscience, commands a policy that Ashok a in his time, was inspired 
to follow by conscience alone." It is thus clear th at the way of violence is 
closed to humanity for all time. Mahatma Gandhi obs erved in his Foreword to 
Shri Bharatan Kumarappa's Villagism : "The past two wars of our generation have 
proved the utter bankruptcy of such economic orders . Incidentally, the wars 
seem to me to have proved the bankruptcy of war." M ay we say that it is now 
the Age of Non-violence that has set in! The world will have no alternative but 
to tap this inexhaustible treasure of non-violence which hitherto was looked 
upon as if in contempt by all- wise politicians of the world. Gandhiji believed 
that India had a definite mission to fulfill. He sa ys: "An India awakened and free 
has a message of peace and good-will to a groaning world." Another time he 
said, "I feel in the innermost recesses of my heart ... that the world is sick unto 
death of blood-spilling. The world is seeking a way  out, and I flatter myself 
with the belief that perhaps it will be the privile ge of the ancient land of India 
to show the way out to the hungering world." Accord ing to Arnold Toynbee 
"India's special contribution will have been her la rge-heartedness and broad-
mindedness... and this, I believe, is going to be r ecognized by future Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  generations, in retrospect as having been India's c haracteristic gift to a united 
human race." 
Establishment of world peace through World Governme nt will remain an empty 
dream so long as the ultimate sanction for resolvin g disputes remains military 
force. Use of force must be completely ruled out if  we want permanent peace. 
It is only the World Government backed by a moral s anction that can ensure 
lasting peace. A world federation based on equality  and fraternity of all 
component units, big or small, would go a long way in the direction of securing 
world peace. A World Government by itself cannot gu arantee peace. For roots 
of war lie in the conflict-breeding socio-economic systems of the nations. 
Unless they are transformed from the root, the hope  of world peace would be a 
chimera. A world organization, therefore, should en sure the working of real 
democracy and elimination of exploitation in every shape or form. It is only the 
small units which help the working of real democrac y and provide a field for 
the full growth of individuals. The larger the unit s, the lesser the scope for 
individual initiative and freedom. Larger organizat ions tend to curb the 
individuals and smaller groups as they would work f or uniformity and 
regimentation. They ultimately result in increasing  stagnancy and decay. 
Therefore, it is imperative that for achieving last ing world peace, the present 
political and economic systems be re-orientated so as to build small 
decentralized units. Else, the very object of world  peace will be frustrated and 
the World Government will be imperilled bringing in  its train vast insurmount-
able problems. The inevitable choice, therefore, is  decentralized political and 
economic units. 
The experience of mankind testifies to the fact tha t collective life is more 
genial, varied and fruitful when it is concentrated  in small units and simpler 
organizations. It is only small units which have ha d the most intense life. 
Collective life diffusing itself in vast areas woul d be wanting in concessiveness 
and productiveness. 
Ancient Greek City States and Village Republics of India provided specimens of 
all-round development of rich and puissant life. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8  Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru wrote: 
“This system of village self-government was the fou ndation of the Aryan 
polity. It was this that gave it strength. So jealo us were the village assemblies 
of their liberties that it was laid down that no so ldier was to enter a village 
except with a royal permit. The  Nitisara  says that when the subjects 
complain of an officer the king ' should take the s ide not of his officers but of 
his subjects'; and if many people complain the offi cer was to be dismissed, 
'for', says the  Nitisara, '  who does not get intoxicated by drinking of the va nity 
of office?' Wise words which seem to apply especial ly to the crowds of 
officials who misbehave and misgovern us in this co untry today ! 
“As late as 1830 a British Governor in India, Sir C harles Metcalfe, described 
the village communities as follows: 
‘The village communities are little republics havin g nearly everything they 
want within themselves and almost independent of fo reign relations. They 
seem to last where nothing else lasts. This union o f the village communities, 
each one forming a separate little State in itself ... is in a high degree 
conducive to their happiness, and to the enjoyment of a great portion of 
freedom and independence.' 
"This description is very complimentary to the old village system. We have a 
picture of an almost idyllic state of affairs. Undo ubtedly, the great deal of 
local freedom and independence that the villages ha d was a good thing, and 
there were other good features also. . . . The work  of rebuilding and rebirth 
(of Village Republics) still remains to be done by us."4  
The picture of Village Swaraj as conceived by Gandh iji is not the resurrection of 
the old village Panchayats but the fresh formation of independent village units 
of Swaraj in the context of the present- day world.  Village Swaraj is the 
practical embodiment of non-violence in the spheres  of politics, economics and 
sociology. 
According to Gandhiji, ideal society is a Stateless  democracy, the state of 
enlightened anarchy where social life has become so  perfect that it is self-
regulated. "In the ideal state, there is no politic al power because there is no 
State." Gandhiji believed that perfect realization of an ideal is impossible. 
However "the ideal is like Euclid's line that is on e without breadth but no one Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  has so far been able to draw it and never will. All  the same it is only by keeping 
the ideal line in mind that we have made progress i n geometry." In the political 
field he gave us Village Swaraj nearing the concept ion of his ideal of Stateless 
Democracy. He considers that Government best which governs the least. 
According to the communist philosophy, the final ph ase is the "withering away 
of the State". But in the totalitarian State of Rus sia there is concentration of all 
power in the State. It is difficult to believe that  at any time the State there will 
wither away. Mahatma Gandhi being a practical ideal ist, realized the practical 
usefulness of the ideal of Stateless Democracy, and  presented Village Swaraj 
which is not the "withering away of the State" but "scattering of the State". 
Thus, Village Swaraj is the ideal given expression to on a realizable plane unlike 
the distant goal of the "withering away of the Stat e". 
Modern democracies are election-centred, party-domi nated, power-aimed, 
centralized complicated mechanisms. Concentration o f authority marks almost 
all present political systems which have become unw ieldy and top-heavy, be 
they capitalist, socialist or communist systems. Th e individuals count no more 
though as voters they are styled as masters. They p resent themselves at 
periodical elections for casting votes and then sle ep away until the next one. 
This is the only political action the individual pe rforms once in a stipulated 
period. That he is driven to do under the direction s of a centralized party 
system, and guidance of the newspapers which are ma inly tools of the 
centralized economic powers. The individual has lit tle or no voice in the 
shaping of the policy of the government. In a welfa re State or totalitarian 
regime he is reduced to the position of a well-fed,  dumb, driven animal in 
human form. 
Gandhiji wanted true democracy to function in India . He, therefore, observed: 
"True democracy cannot be worked by twenty men sitt ing at the centre. It has 
to be worked from below by the people of every vill age." In Village Swaraj, the 
village being the decentralized small political uni t endowed with fullest 
powers, every individual will have a direct voice i n the government. The 
individual is the architect of his own government. The government of the Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  village will be conducted by a Panchayat of five pe rsons annually elected by 
adult villagers possessing minimum prescribed quali fications. 'It will have all 
the authority and jurisdiction. The Panchayat will be the legislature, judiciary 
and executive rolled into one as there will be no s ystem of punishment in it. 
In such a system of government there will be citize ns who are self-controlled, 
not authority-controlled; endowed with initiative a nd highly developed sense of 
civic responsibility in place of those who look to government for all things. 
Real Democracy, i. e. Swaraj works for the full fre edom and growth of the 
individual who is the ultimate motive power of a re al political system. 
Village Swaraj as conceived by Gandhiji is thus a g enuine and virile democracy 
which offers a potent cure for many of the politica l ills that mark the present 
political systems. Such a pattern of decentralized genuine democracy will have 
a message for the whole of humanity. 
To Gandhiji political power was not an end in itsel f, but one of the means for 
enabling people to better their condition in every sphere of life. He, therefore, 
observed in his famous "Last Will and Testament" th at though India has attained 
political independence, she “has still to attain so cial, moral and economic 
independence, in terms of seven hundred thousand vi llages as distinguished 
from the cities and towns." It embodied a picture a nd a programme of Village 
Swaraj that is Panchayat Raj which in other terms i s a non-violent self-
sufficient, economic unit with fullest political po wer. The Village Swaraj as 
conceived by Gandhiji is man-centred unlike the Wes tern economy which is 
wealth-centred. The former is the life economy the latter is the death 
economy. 
Laying down the duties of the village worker who na turally occupies the pivotal 
position in the planning of Village Swaraj of Gandh iji's conception, he says that 
the village worker will organize the villages so as  to make them self-contained 
and self-supporting through agriculture and handicr afts, will educate the 
village folk in sanitation and hygiene and will tak e all measures to prevent ill-
health and disease among them and will organize the  education of the village 
folk from birth to death along the lines of Nai Tal im. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11  The politicians of the world who aspire for world p eace would think of 
attempting to plan from top to bottom whereas Gandh iji proposed to work from 
bottom upwards. He, therefore, says, “Independence must begin at the 
bottom. Thus every village will be a Republic or Pa nchayat having full powers. 
It follows therefore, that every village has to be self-sustained and capable of 
managing its affairs even to the extent of defendin g itself against the whole 
world. It will be trained and prepared to perish in  the attempt to defend itself 
against any onslaught from without. Thus ultimately  it is the individual who is 
the unit." To Gandhiji self-government means contin uous effort to be 
independent of government control whether it is for eign government or 
whether it is national. Swaraj government will be a  sorry affair if people look 
up to it for the regulation of every detail of life ." In Village Swaraj the ultimate 
power will rest with the individual. He must first attain "Swaraj" if he wants to 
see in reality the full picture of" Village Swaraj ". As is the individual so is the 
universe. Village Swaraj will thus be the mirror of  the spirit of Swaraj which 
individuals constituting it will manifest in their daily life. Therefore, the Village 
worker will have to focus his attention first on th e true education. That 
education should be a harmonious development of thr ee H's—Head, Heart and 
Hand. Nai Talim is the fruit of Gandhiji's  tapasya.  Gandhiji was an incarnation 
of the harmonious whole of the three H's. The spiri t of non-violence permeates 
the entire scheme of Nai Talim which aims to make a ll-round development of 
the child in body, mind and spirit through handicra ft. With the capital 
equipment of the true education on Nai Talim lines,  the citizen will be a great 
asset in the construction of Village Swaraj. 
Village Swaraj is man-centred non-exploiting decent ralized, simple village 
economy providing for full employment to each one o f its citizens on the basis 
of voluntary co-operation and working for achieving  self-sufficiency in its basic 
requirements of food, clothing and other necessitie s of life. 
Modern economic systems rooted as they are in self- indulgence, multiplicity of 
wants and divorce of ethics from economics are larg e-scale mechanized, 
centralized, complicated organizations. They are di sfigured by unemployment, Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12  under-employment, pauperism, exploitation, a mad ra ce for capturing markets 
and conquering lands for raw-materials. Competition s, conflicts and class wars 
corrode the social fabric. They involve enslavement  of the individual, treating 
man only as a hand feeding the machine, reducing hi m to a mere adjunct of the 
machine. He loses his fine sensitiveness owing to s oul-killing repetitive jobs and 
consequently rushes to demoralizing cinema theatres , wine shops and 
prostitution homes for recreation as an escape from  the tyranny of the tiring 
task of the factory. Society is divided into the pr ivileged and the under-
privileged, the rich and the poor. Never before was  there such economic 
inequality as is seen today where the multimilliona ire is living aimlessly in the 
lap of luxury and the hard-working toiler has hardl y enough to keep his skin and 
bones together. Highly technically advanced countri es like the U. K. and the U. 
S. A. have yet to solve the problem of unemployment  which presents itself to 
India in a magnified form raised to the nth degree in the context of her vast 
millions scattered in the seven lakhs of villages m ainly living on agriculture 
from times immemorial. 
Village Swaraj is the fruit of life-long search by Gandhiji who having identified 
his heart with the starving millions of India has s uggested this talisman as an 
infallible remedy for the ills of India, nay, of th e whole world, in whose history 
the peasantry has always been everywhere exploited and has been on 
starvation level. In a. letter to Pandit Nehru date d 5-10-'45, Gandhiji wrote: 
"I am convinced that if India is to attain true fre edom and through India the 
world also, then sooner or later the fact must be r ecognized that the people 
will have to live in villages, not in towns, in hut s, not in palaces. Crores of 
people will never be able to live in peace with eac h other in towns and 
palaces. They will then have no recourse but to res ort to both violence and 
untruth. 
“I hold that without truth and non-violence there c an be nothing but 
destruction for humanity. We can realize truth and non-violence only in the 
simplicity of village life and this simplicity can best be found in the Charkha 
and all that the Charkha connotes. I must not fear if the world today is 
going the wrong way. It may be, that India too will  go that way and like the Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13  proverbial moth burn itself eventually in the flame  round which it dances 
more and more fiercely. But it is my bounden duty u p to my last breath to 
try to protect India and through India the entire w orld from such a doom. 
“The essence of what I have said is that man should  rest content with what 
are his real needs and become self- sufficient. If he does not have this 
control, he cannot save himself. After all, the wor ld is made up of 
individuals just as it is the drops that constitute  the ocean.... This is a well-
known truth. 
Gandhiji thus, stood for simplicity in life and vol untary poverty. That does not 
mean that man should not have creature comforts. He  said that everyone 
should have a balanced diet, necessary clothing and  shelter. He believed that 
every living being has a right to food. He observed : "According to me the 
economic constitution of India and for the matter o f that of the world, should 
be such that no one under it should suffer from wan t of food and clothing. In 
other words, everybody should be able to get suffic ient work to enable him to 
make the two ends meet. And this ideal can be unive rsally realized only if the 
means of production of the elementary necessaries o f life remain in the control 
of the masses. These should be freely available to all as God's air and water are 
or ought to be. They should not be made a vehicle o f traffic for the 
exploitation of others. Their monopolization by any  country, nation or group of 
persons would be unjust. The neglect of this simple  principle is the cause of the 
destitution that we witness today not only in this unhappy land but in other 
parts of the world too." 
To build such a non-violent economy providing for f ull employment of all 
citizens he ruled out industrialism, centralized in dustries and unnecessary 
machinery. He considered cities as agencies exploit ing villages. He even called 
them boils on the body social of the country. He su ggested that the hope of the 
future world order lies in the villages, i.e., smal l peaceful co-operatives where 
there is no compulsion, no force but where all acti vities are carried on in 
voluntary cooperation. There being the reign of lov e in the entire edifice of 
Village Swaraj, there is none high none low. All ar e equal. There will be neither Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14  castes nor classes; no untouchability, no Hindu-Mus lim quarrels. All individuals 
will be restored to their natural height and status . 
Village Swaraj working in full swing will provide a  model for the world to copy. 
It will then be a gift of India to the world. Self- governing village units of the 
world will then be a living brotherhood of highly c ultured, intelligent, and 
vigorous men and women. To live in this society wil l itself be an education and 
a fulfillment. Life therein will be one of self- ex pression of all of one's faculties 
and exchange of feelings of mutual reverence and lo ve manifested through acts 
of mutual service. Culture, art, poetry, painting a nd science will find their 
perfect fulfillment. It will be the Kingdom of God on earth. 
Village Swaraj has such high potentiality in it. It  is for us all to make it dynamic 
and real. To fulfill the Dream of the Father of the  Nation becomes the duty of 
his heirs who have inherited from him a rich and im mortal legacy. It is, 
therefore, right and proper that the present State Governments have enacted 
legislations to create Gram Panchayats investing th em with larger powers. We 
hope the Gram Panchayats will keep before their min d's eye the picture of 
Village Swaraj conceived by Gandhiji and work on th e lines laid down by him.  
Village Swaraj should be implemented in the spirit in which Gandhiji has 
conceived it. If the spirit of selfless service and  love transcending limits of 
caste, creed or class is lacking in those who would  shoulder the responsibilities 
of working the Gram Panchayats, Village Swaraj will  not yield sweet fruits that 
Gandhiji expected it to bear. 
Let us remember the words of Pandit Nehru in respec t of Village systems: "The 
more a person or a group keeps to himself or itself , the more danger there is of 
him or it becoming self-centred and selfish and nar row-minded."* Our villages 
are at present suffering from social discords, cast eism and narrowness. The way 
of making a success of Gram Panchayats is not strew n with roses. The real 
missionary spirit is expected of village leaders. M ay the ancient land rise to the 
occasion and fulfill the mission of India and there by share the real glory of 
having worked for the world. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  An attempt has been made here to collect together r elevant passages from 
Mahatma Gandhi's writings having a bearing on the s ubject of Village Swaraj 
and present his thoughts as far as possible in an u ninterrupted manner. To 
maintain uniformity, indirect narration has been ch anged to direct speech at a 
few places. Except for slight editing and omissions , the original text has been 
faithfully preserved. 
I am indebted to Shri Shriman Narayan for writing a  Foreword to the 
compilation. 
22-11-'62 
H. M. Vyas 
 
1 The Ideal of Human Unity. 
2. One World and India. All quotations of Toynbee ar e from this book. 
3. Reconstruction of Humanity. 
4 Glimpses of World History. 
5 Glimpses of World History. 
 
TO THE READER 
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wr itings and to others who are 
interested in them that I am not at all concerned w ith appearing to be 
consistent. In my search after Truth I have discard ed many ideas and learnt 
many new things. Old as I am in age, I have no feel ing that I have ceased to 
grow inwardly or that my growth will stop at the di ssolution of the flesh. What I 
am concerned with is my readiness to obey the call of Truth, my God, from 
moment to moment, and, therefore, when anybody find s any inconsistency 
between any two writings of mine, if he has still f aith in my sanity, he would do 
well to choose the later of the two on the same sub ject. 
M. K. Gandhi 
Harijan,  29-4-'33, p. 2 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16   
CHAPTER 1 
THE MEANING OF SWARAJ 
The word Swaraj is a sacred word, a Vedic word, mea ning self-rule and self-
restraint, and not freedom from all restraint which  'independence' often means. 
Y.I., 19-3-’31, p. 38 
 
As every country is fit to eat, to drink and to bre athe, even so is every nation 
fit to manage its own affairs, no matter how badly.  
Y.I., 15-10-’31, p. 305 
 
By Swaraj I mean the government of India by the con sent of the people as 
ascertained by the largest number of the adult popu lation, male or female, 
native-born or domiciled, who have contributed by m anual labour to the service 
of the State and who have taken the trouble of havi ng registered their names as 
voters.... Real Swaraj will come not by the acquisi tion of authority by a few but 
by the acquisition of the capacity by all to resist  authority when it is abused. In 
other words, Swaraj is to be obtained by educating the masses to a sense of 
their capacity to regulate and control authority.  
Y.I., 29-1-’25, p. 40-41 
 
By political independence I do not mean an imitatio n of the British House of 
Commons or the Soviet rule of Russia or the Fascist  rule of Italy or the Nazi rule 
of Germany. They have systems suited to their geniu s. We must have ours 
suited to ours. What that can be is more than I can  tell. I have described it as 
Ramaraj, i.e. sovereignty of the people based on pu re moral authority.  
H., 2-1-’37, p. 374 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17  Self-government depends entirely upon our internal strength, upon our ability 
to fight against the heaviest odds. Indeed, self-go vernment which does not 
require that continuous striving to attain it and t o sustain it is not worth the 
name. I have, therefore, endeavoured to show both i n word and deed, that 
political self- government, that is, self-governmen t for a large number of men 
and women, is no better than individual self-govern ment, and, therefore, it is 
to be attained by precisely the same means that are  required for individual 
self-government or self-rule. 
Y.I., 1-12-’27, p. 402-03 
 
Self-government means, continuous effort to be inde pendent of government 
control, whether it is foreign government or whethe r it is national. Swaraj 
government will be a sorry affair if people look up  to it for the regulation of 
every detail of life.   
Y.I., 6-8-’25, p. 276 
 
My Swaraj is to keep intact the genius of our civil ization. I want to write many 
new things but they must all be written on the Indi an slate. I would gladly 
borrow from the West when I can return the amount w ith decent interest. 
Y.I., 26-6-’24, p. 210 
 
Swaraj can be maintained, only where there is major ity of loyal patriotic 
people to whom the good of the nation is paramount above all other 
considerations whatever including their personal pr ofit. Swaraj means 
government by the many. Where the many are immoral or selfish, their 
government can spell anarchy and nothing else. 
Y.I., 28-7-’21, p. 238 
 
The Swaraj of my... our... dream recognizes no race  or religious distinctions. 
Nor is it to be the monopoly of the lettered person s nor yet of moneyed men. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  Swaraj is to be for all, including the farmer, but emphatically including the 
maimed, the blind, the starving toiling millions.  
Y.I., 1-5-’30, p. 149 
 
It has been said that Indian Swaraj will be the rul e of the majority community, 
i.e. the Hindus. There could not be a greater mista ke than that. If it were to be 
true, I for one would refuse to call it Swaraj and would fight it with all the 
strength at my command, for to me Hind Swaraj is th e rule of all people, is the 
rule of justice. 
Y.I., 16-4-’31, p. 78 
 
If Swaraj was not meant to civilize us, and to puri fy and stabilize our 
civilization, it would be nothing worth. The very e ssence of our civilization is 
that we give a paramount place to morality in all o ur affairs, public or private. 
Y.I., 23-1-’30, p. 26 
 
Poorna Swaraj 1—'Poorna' complete because it is as much for the pr ince as for 
the peasant, as much for the rich landowner as for the landless tiller of the 
soil, as much for the Hindus as for the Musalmans, as much for Parsis and 
Christians as for the Jains, Jews and Sikhs, irresp ective of any distinction of 
caste or creed or status in life.  
Y.I., 5-3-’31, p. 1 
 
The very connotation of the word and the means of i ts attainment to which we 
are pledged—'truth and non-violence—precludes all p ossibility of that Swaraj 
being more for someone than for the other, being pa rtial to some and 
prejudicial to others.  
Y.I., 5-3-’31, p. 1 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19  The Swaraj of my dream is the poor man's Swaraj. Th e necessaries of life 
should be enjoyed by you in common with those enjoy ed by the princes and the 
moneyed men. But that does not mean that they shoul d have palaces like 
theirs. They are not necessary for happiness. You o r I would be lost in them. 
But you ought to get all the ordinary amenities of life that a rich man enjoys. I 
have not the slightest doubt that Swaraj is not  Poorna  Swaraj until these 
amenities are guaranteed to you under it.  
Y.I., 26-3-’31, p. 46-47 
 
My notion of Poorna Swaraj is not isolated independ ence but healthy and 
dignified independence. My nationalism, fierce thou gh it is, is not exclusive, is 
not devised to harm any nation or individual. Legal  maxims are not so legal as 
they are moral. I believe in the eternal truth of ' sic utere tuo ut alienum non 
laedas ' ('Use thy own property so as not to injure thy ne ighbour's').  
Y.I., 26-3-’31, p. 51 
 
Complete Independence through truth and nonviolence  means the 
independence of every unit, be it the humblest of t he nation, without 
distinction of race, colour or creed. This Independ ence is never exclusive. It is 
therefore wholly compatible with inter-dependence w ithin or without. Practice 
will always fall short of the theory, even as the d rawn line falls short of the 
theoretical line of Euclid. Therefore complete Inde pendence will be complete 
only to the extent of our approach in practice to t ruth and non-violence.  
Constructive Programme, 1961, p. 7 
 
It all depends upon what we mean by and want throug h Poorna Swaraj. If we 
mean an awakening among the masses, a knowledge amo ng them of their true 
interest and ability to serve that interest against  the whole world and if 
through Poorna Swaraj we want harmony, freedom from  aggression from within 
or without, and a progressive improvement in the ec onomic condition of the Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20  masses, we can gain our end without political power  and by directly acting 
upon the powers that be.  
Y.I., 18-6-’31, p. 147 
 
Let there be no mistake about my conception of Swar aj. It is complete 
independence of alien control and complete economic  independence. So at one 
end you have political independence, at the other t he economic. It has two 
other ends. One of them is moral and social, the co rresponding end is Dharma, 
i.e. religion in the highest sense of the term. It includes Hinduism, Islam, 
Christianity, etc., but is superior to them all.... Let us call this the square of 
Swaraj, which will be out of shape if any of its an gles is untrue. 
H., 2-1-’37, p. 374 
 
The Swaraj of my conception will come only when all  of us are firmly persuaded 
that our Swaraj has got to be won, worked and maint ained through truth and 
Ahimsa alone. True democracy or Swaraj of the masse s can never come through 
untruthful and violent means, for the simple reason  that the natural corollary 
to their use would be to remove all opposition thro ugh the suppression or 
extermination of the antagonists. That does not mak e for individual freedom. 
Individual freedom can have the fullest play only u nder a regime of 
unadulterated Ahimsa.  
H., 27-5-’39, p. 143 
 
In Swaraj based on Ahimsa people need not know thei r rights, but it is 
necessary for them to know their duties. There is n o duty but creates a corres-
ponding right, and those only are true rights which  flow from a due 
performance of one's duties. Hence rights of citize nship accrue only to those 
who serve the State to which they belong. And they alone can do justice to the 
rights that accrue to them. Everyone possesses the right to tell lies or resort to  
goondaism. But the exercise of such a right is harmful both to  the exerciser and Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21  society. But to him who observes truth and non-viol ence comes prestige, and 
prestige brings rights. And people who obtain right s as a result of performance 
of duty, exercise them only for the service of soci ety, never for themselves. 
Swaraj of a people means the sum total of the Swara j (self-rule) o f individuals. 
And such Swaraj comes only from performance by indi viduals of their duty as 
citizens. In it no one thinks of his rights. They c ome, when they are needed, for 
better performance of duty."  
H., 25-3-’39, p. 64 
 
Under Swaraj based on non-violence nobody is anybod y's enemy, everybody 
contributes his or her due quota to the common goal , all can read and write, 
and their knowledge keeps growing from day to day. Sickness and disease are 
reduced to the minimum. No one is a pauper and labo ur can always find 
employment. There is no place under such a governme nt for gambling, drinking 
and immorality or for class hatred. The rich will u se their riches wisely and 
usefully, and not squander them in increasing their  pomp and worldly 
pleasures. It should not happen that a handful of r ich people should live in 
jewelled palaces and the millions in miserable hove ls devoid of sunlight or 
ventilation. In non-violent Swaraj there can be no encroachment upon just 
rights; contrariwise no one can possess unjust righ ts. In a well-organized State, 
usurpation should be an impossibility and it should  be unnecessary to resort to 
force for dispossessing an usurper.  
H., 25-3-’39, p. 65 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22   
CHAPTER 2 
A PICTURE OF AN IDEAL SOCIETY 
[Gandhiji found the picture of his free India in it s essentials embodied in a song that was 
sung at one of his evening prayers in Bhangi Colony , New Delhi. It gripped "him. He 
translated it into English and had it sent to Lord Pethick-Lawrence. It was as follows:] 
We are inhabitants of a country 
where there is no sorrow and no suffering,  
Where there is no illusion nor anguish, 
no delusion nor desire, 
Where flows the Ganges of love 
and the whole creation is full of joy,  
Where all minds flow in one direction, 
and where there is no occasion for sense of time,  
All have their wants satisfied;  
Here all barter is just,  
Here all are cast in the same mould,  
Here is no lack nor care, 
No selfishness in any shape or form,  
No high no low, no master no slave;  
All is light, yet no burning heat,  
That country is within you— 
It is Swaraj, Swadeshi,  
The home within you— 
Victory! Victory! Victory!  
He realizes it who longs for it. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23  Mahatma Gandhi – The Last Phase, 1956, Vol. I, p. 1 90-91 
 
[What emerged was a picture of the India of his dre ams.] 
A picture of a casteless and classless society, in which there are no vertical 
divisions but only horizontal; no high, no low; all  service has equal status and 
carries equal wages; those who have more use their advantage not for 
themselves but as a trust to serve others who have less; the motivating factor 
in the choice of vocations is not personal advancem ent but self-expression and 
self-realization through the service of society. 
Since all service here ranks the same and carries e qual wages, hereditary skills 
are conserved and developed from generation to gene ration instead of being 
sacrificed to the lure of personal gain. The princi ple of community service 
replaces unrestricted, soulless competition. Everyb ody is a toiler with ample 
leisure, opportunity, and facilities for education and culture. It is a fascinating 
world of cottage crafts and intensive, small-scale farming co-operatives, a 
world in which there is no room for communalism or caste. Finally, it is the 
world of Swadeshi in which the economic frontiers a re drawn closer but the 
bounds of individual freedom are enlarged to the ma ximum limit; everybody is 
responsible for his immediate environment and all a re responsible for society. 
Rights and duties are regulated by the principle of  interdependence, and 
reciprocity; there is no conflict between the part and the whole; no danger of 
nationalism becoming narrow, selfish or aggressive or internationalism 
becoming an abstraction where the concrete is lost in a nebulous haze of vague 
generalities.  
Mahatma Gandhi – The Last Phase, 1956, Vol. I, p. 5 39-40 
 
There will be neither paupers nor beggars, nor high  nor low, neither millionaire 
employers nor half- starved employees, nor intoxica ting drinks. or drugs. There 
will be the same respect for women as vouchsafed to  men and the chastity and 
purity of men and women will be jealously guarded. Where every woman 
except one's wife, will be treated by men of all re ligions, as mother, sister or Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  daughter according to her age. Where there will be no untouchability and 
where there will be equal respect for all faiths. T hey will be all proudly, 
joyously and voluntarily bread labourers. I hope ev eryone who listens to me or 
reads these lines will forgive me if stretched on m y bed and basking in the sun, 
inhaling life-giving sunshine, I allow myself to in dulge in this ecstasy.   
H.I., 18-1-’48, p. 526 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25   
CHAPTER 3 
WHICH WAY LIES HOPE? 
Industrialism 
Industrialism is, I am afraid, going to be a curse for mankind. Industrialism 
depends entirely on your capacity to exploit, on fo reign markets being open to 
you, and on the absence of competitors. It is becau se these factors are getting 
less and less every day for England, that its numbe r of unemployed is mounting 
up daily. The Indian boycott was but a flea-bite. A nd if that is the state of 
England, a vast country like India cannot expect to  benefit by industrialization. 
In fact, India, when it begins to exploit other nat ions —as it must do if it 
becomes industrialized—will be a curse for other na tions, a menace to the 
world. And why should I think of industrializing In dia to exploit other nations? 
Don't you see the tragedy of the situation viz.. th at we can find work for our 
300 million unemployed, but England can find none f or its three millions and is 
faced with a problem that baffles the greatest inte llects of England? The future 
of industrialism is dark. England has got successfu l competitors in America, 
Japan, France, Germany. It has competitors in the h andful of mills in India, and 
as there has been an awakening in India, even so th ere will be an awakening in 
South Africa with its vastly richer resources—natur al, mineral and human. The 
mighty English look quite pigmies before the mighty  races of Africa. They are 
noble savages after all, you will say. They are cer tainly noble, but no savages; 
and in the course of a few years the Western nation s may cease to find in Africa 
a dumping ground for their wares. And if the future  of industrialism is dark for 
the West, would it not be darker still for India ? 
Y.I., 12-11-’31, p. 355 
 
'What is the cause of the present chaos?' It is exp loitation, I will not say, of the 
weaker nations by the stronger, but of sister natio ns by sister nations. And my 
fundamental objection to machinery rests on the fac t that it is machinery that Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26  has enabled these nations to exploit others. In its elf it is wooden thing and can 
be turned to good purpose or bad. But it is easily turned to a bad purpose as we 
know.  
Y.I., 22-10-’31, p. 318 
 
Indeed, the West has had a surfeit of industrialism  and exploitation. The fact is 
that this industrial civilization is a disease beca use it is all evil. Let us not be 
deceived by catchwords and phrases. I have no quarr el with steamships and 
telegraphs. They may stay, if they can, without the  support of industrialism and 
all it connotes. They are not an end. They are in n o way indispensable for the 
permanent welfare of the human race. Now that we kn ow the use of steam and 
electricity, we should be able to use them on due o ccasion and after we have 
learnt to avoid industrialism. Our concern is there fore to destroy industrialism 
at any cost.   
Y.I., 7-10-’26, p. 348 
 
There is a growing body of enlightened opinion whic h distrusts this civilization 
which has insatiable material ambition at one end a nd consequent war at the 
other. But whether good or bad, why must India beco me industrial in the 
Western sense ? The Western civilization is urban. Small countries like England 
or Italy may afford to urbanize their systems. A bi g country like America with a 
very sparse population, perhaps, cannot do otherwis e. But one would think that 
a big country, with a teeming population with an an cient rural tradition which 
has hitherto answered its purpose, need not, must n ot copy the Western model. 
What is good for one nation situated in one conditi on is not necessarily good 
enough for another differently situated. One man's food is often another man's 
poison. Physical geography of a country has a predo minant share in determining 
its culture. A fur coat may be a necessity for the dweller in the polar regions, it 
will smother those living in the equatorial regions .  
Y.I., 25-7-’29, p. 244 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27  The present distress is undoubtedly insufferable. P auperism must go. But 
industrialism is no remedy. The evil does not lie i n the use of bullock- carts. It 
lies in our selfishness and want of consideration f or our neighbours. If we have 
no love for our neighbours, no change, however revo lutionary, can do us any 
good. 
Y.I., 7-10-’26, p. 348 
 
I would destroy that system today, if I had the pow er. I would use the most 
deadly weapons, if I believed that they would destr oy it. I refrain only because 
the use of such weapons would only perpetuate the s ystem though it may 
destroy its present administrators. Those who seek to destroy men rather than 
manners, adopt the latter and become worse than tho se whom they destroy 
under the mistaken belief that the manners will die  with the men. They do not 
know the root of the evil.  
Y.I., 17-3-’27, p. 85 
 
Industrialism on a mass scale will necessarily lead  to passive or active 
exploitation of the villagers as the problems of co mpetition and marketing 
come in. Therefore, we have to concentrate on the v illage being self-
contained, manufacturing mainly for use. Provided t his character of the 
industry is maintained, there would be no objection  to villagers using even the 
modern machines and tools that they can make and ca n afford to use. Only 
they should not be used as a means of exploitation of others. 
H., 29-8-’36, p. 226 
 
I do not believe that industrialization is necessar y in any case for any country. 
It is much less so for India. Indeed, I believe tha t Independent India can only 
discharge her duty towards a groaning world by adop ting a simple but ennobled 
life by developing her thousands of cottages and li ving at peace with the world. 
High thinking is inconsistent with complicated mate rial life based on high speed Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  imposed on us by Mammon worship. All the graces of life are possible only when 
we learn the art of living nobly. 
Whether such plain living is possible for an isolat ed nation, however large 
geographically and numerically in the face of a wor ld, armed to the teeth, and 
in the midst of pomp and circumstance, is a questio n open to the doubt of a 
sceptic. The answer is straight and simple. If plai n life is worth living, then the 
attempt is worth making, even though only an indivi dual or a group makes the 
effort.  
H., 29-8-’36, p. 226 
 
European civilization is no doubt suited for the Eu ropeans but it will mean ruin 
for India, if we endeavour to copy it. This is not to say that we may not adopt 
and assimilate whatever may be good and capable of assimilation by us as it 
does not also mean that even the Europeans will not  have to part with 
whatever evil might have crept into it. The incessa nt search for material 
comforts and their multiplication is such an evil, and I make bold to say that 
the Europeans themselves will have to remodel their  outlook, if they are not to 
perish under the weight of the comforts to which th ey are becoming slaves. It 
may be that my reading is wrong, but I know that fo r India to run after the 
Golden Fleece is to court certain death. Let us eng rave on our hearts the motto 
of a Western philosopher, 'plain living and high th inking'. Today it is certain 
that the millions cannot have high living and we th e few who profess to do the 
thinking for the masses run the risk, in a vain sea rch after high living, of missing 
high thinking.  
Y.I., 30-4-’31, p. 88 
 
I have heard many of our countrymen say, that we wi ll gain American wealth 
but avoid its methods. I venture to suggest that su ch an attempt, if it is made, 
is foredoomed to failure. We cannot be 'wise, tempe rate and furious' in a 
moment. . . . It is not possible to conceive gods i nhabiting a land which is made 
hideous by the smoke and the din of mill chimneys a nd factories and whose Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29  roadways are traversed by rushing engines, dragging  numerous cars crowded 
with men who know not for the most part what they a re after, who are often 
absent- minded, and whose tempers do not improve by  being uncomfortably 
packed like sardines in boxes and finding themselve s in the midst of utter 
strangers, who would oust them if they could and wh om they would, in their 
turn, oust similarly. I refer to these things becau se they are held to be 
symbolical of material progress. But they add not a n atom to our happiness.  
Natesan, p. 353-54 
 
Pandit Nehru wants industrialization, because he th inks that if it is socialized, 
it would be free from the evils of capitalism. My o wn view is that the evils are 
inherent in industrialism, and no amount of sociali zation can eradicate them.  
11  
As I look at Russia where the apotheosis of industr ialization has been reached, 
the life there does not appeal to me. To use the la nguage of the Bible, ''What 
shall it avail a man if he gain the whole world and  lose his soul?" In modern 
terms, it is beneath human dignity to lose one's in dividuality and become a 
mere cog in the machine. I want every individual to  become a full-blooded, 
fully developed member of society. The villages mus t become self-sufficient. I 
see no other solution if one has to work in terms o f Ahimsa. Now I have that 
conviction.  
H., 28-1-’39, p. 438 
 
God forbid that India should ever take to industria lism after the manner of the 
West. The economic imperialism of a single tiny isl and kingdom (England) is 
today keeping the world in chains. If an entire nat ion of 300 millions took to 
similar economic exploitation, it would strip the w orld bare like locusts.  
H., 20-12-’28, p. 422 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  India's destiny lies not along the bloody way of th e West, of which she shows 
signs of tiredness, but along the bloodless way of peace that comes from a 
simple and godly life. India is in danger of losing  her soul. She cannot lose it 
and live. She must not therefore lazily and helples sly say, 'I cannot escape the 
onrush from the West.' She must be strong enough to  resist it for her own sake 
and that of the world.  
Y.I., 7-10-’26, p. 348 
 
Machinery 
'Ideally would you not rule out all machinery?' 
Ideally, however, I would rule out all machinery, e ven as I would reject this 
very body, which is not helpful to salvation, and s eek the absolute liberation of 
the soul. From that point of view, I would reject a ll machinery, but machines 
will remain, because like the body, they are inevit able. The body itself, as I 
told you, is the purest piece of mechanism; but if it is a hindrance to the 
highest flights of the soul, it has to be rejected.  
Y.I., 20-11-’24, p. 386 
 
Machinery has its place; it has come to stay. But i t must not be allowed to 
displace necessary human labour. An improved plough  is a good thing. But if by 
some chances, one man could plough up by some mecha nical invention of his 
the whole of the land of India, and control all the  agricultural produce and if 
the millions had no other occupation, they would st arve, and being idle, they 
would become dunces, as many have already become. T here is hourly danger of 
many more being reduced to that unenviable state. 
I would welcome every improvement in the cottage ma chine, but I know that it 
is criminal to displace hand-labour by the introduc tion of power-driven spindles 
unless one is at the same time ready to give millio ns of farmers some other 
occupation in their homes.  
Y.I., 5-11-’25, p. 377 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31   
That use of machinery is lawful which subserves the  interest of all.  
Y.I., 15-4-’26, p. 142 
 
I would favour the use of the most elaborate machin ery if thereby India's 
pauperism and resulting idleness be avoided. I have  suggested hand- spinning as 
the only ready means of driving away penury and mak ing famine of work and 
wealth impossible. The spinning wheel itself is a p iece of valuable machinery, 
and in my own humble way I have tried to secure imp rovements in it in keeping 
with the special conditions of India.  
Y.I., 3-11-’21, p. 350 
 
'Are you against all machinery?' 
My answer is emphatically, 'No'. But, I am against its indiscriminate 
multiplication. I refuse to be dazzled by the seemi ng triumph of machinery. I 
am uncompromisingly against all destructive machine ry. But simple tools and 
instruments and such machinery as saves individual labour and lightens the 
burden of the millions of cottages, I should welcom e.  
Y.I., 17-6-’26, p. 218 
 
What I object to, is the  craze  for machinery, not machinery as such. The  craze  
is for what they call labour-saving machinery. Men go on 'saving labour', till 
thousands are without work and thrown on the open s treets to die of 
starvation. I want to save time and labour, not for  a fraction of mankind, but 
for all; I want the concentration of wealth, not in  the hands of few, but in the 
hands of all. Today machinery merely helps a few to  ride on the back of 
millions. The impetus behind it all is not the phil anthropy to save labour, but 
greed. It is against this constitution of things th at I am fighting with all my 
might. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32  'Then you are fighting not against machinery as suc h, but against its abuses 
which are so much in evidence today.' 
I would unhesitatingly say 'yes'; but I would add t hat scientific truths and 
discoveries should first of all cease to be mere in struments of greed. Then 
labourers will not be over-worked and machinery, in stead of becoming a 
hindrance, will be a help. I am aiming, not at erad ication of all machinery, but 
limitation. 
'When logically argued out, that would seem to impl y that all complicated 
power-driven machinery should go.' 
It might have to go but I must make one thing clear . The supreme consideration 
is man. The machine should not tend to make atrophi ed the limbs of man. For 
instance, I would make intelligent exceptions. Take  the case of the Singer Sew-
ing Machine. It is one of the few useful things eve r invented, and there is a 
romance about the device itself. Singer saw his wif e labouring over the tedious 
process of sewing and seaming with her own hands, a nd simply out of his love 
for her he devised the Sewing Machine in order to s ave her from unnecessary 
labour. He, however, saved not only her labour but also the labour of everyone 
who could purchase a sewing machine. 
'But in that case there would have to be a factory for making these Singer 
Sewing Machines, and it would have to contain power -driven machinery of 
ordinary type.' 
Yes, but I am socialist enough to say that such fac tories should be nationalized, 
or State-controlled. They ought only to be working under the most attractive 
and ideal conditions, not for profit, but for the b enefit of humanity, love taking 
the place of greed as the motive. It is an alterati on in the condition of labour 
that I want. This mad rush for wealth must cease, a nd the labourer must be 
assured, not only of a living wage, but a daily tas k that is not a mere drudgery. 
The machine will, under these conditions, be as muc h a help to the man 
working it as to the State, or the man who owns it.  The present mad rush will 
cease, and the labourer will work (as I have said) under attractive and ideal 
conditions. This is but one of the exceptions I hav e in mind. The Sewing Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  Machine had love at its back. The individual is the  one supreme consideration. 
The saving of labour of the individual should be th e object, and honest 
humanitarian consideration, and not greed, the moti ve. Replace greed by love 
and everything will come right.  
Y.I., 13-11-’24, p. 378 
 
'You are against this machine age, I see.' 
To say that is to •caricature my views. I am not ag ainst machinery as such, but 
I am totally opposed to it when it masters us. 
'You would not industrialize India?' 
I would indeed, in my sense of the term. The villag e communities should be 
revived. Indian villages produced and supplied to t he Indian towns and cities all 
their wants. India became impoverished when our cit ies became foreign 
markets and began to drain the villages dry by dump ing cheap and shoddy 
goods from foreign lands. 
'You would then go back to the natural economy?' 
Yes. Otherwise I should go back to the city. I am q uite capable of running a big 
enterprise, but I deliberately sacrifice the ambiti on, not as a sacrifice, but 
because my heart rebelled against it. For I should have no share in the 
spoliation of the nation which is going on from day  to day. But I am 
industrializing the village in a different way.  
H., 27-2-’37, p. 18 
 
Granting for the moment that machinery may supply a ll the needs of humanity, 
still, it would concentrate production in particula r areas, so that you would 
have to go about in a round-about way to regulate d istribution, whereas, if 
there is production and distribution both in the re spective areas where things 
are required, it is automatically regulated, and th ere is less chance for fraud, 
none for speculation. . . . When production and con sumption both become Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  localized, the temptation to speed up production, i ndefinitely and at any price, 
disappears. All the endless difficulties and proble ms that our present-day 
economic system presents, too, would then come to a n end... Oh yes, mass- 
production certainly... but mass-production (on ind ividual basis) in people's 
own homes. If you multiply individual production mi llions of times, would it not 
give you mass-production on a tremendous scale?... Your 'mass-production' is... 
production by the fewest possible number through th e aid of highly 
complicated machinery... My machinery must be of th e most elementary type 
which I can put in the homes of the millions.  
H., 2-11-’34, p. 301-02 
 
I know that man cannot live without industry. There fore, I cannot be opposed 
to industrialization. 
But I have a great concern about introducing machin e industry. The machine 
produces much too fast, and brings with it a sort o f economic system which I 
cannot grasp. I do not want to accept something whe n I see its evil effects 
which outweigh whatever good it brings with it. I w ant the dumb millions of our 
land to be healthy and happy and I want them to gro w spiritually. As yet for 
this purpose we do not need the machine. There are many, too many idle 
hands. But as we grow in understanding, if we feel the need of machines, we 
certainly will have them. We want industry, let us become industrious. Let us 
become more self-dependent, then we will not follow  the other people's lead 
so much. We shall introduce machines if and when we  need them. Once we 
shall have shaped our life on Ahimsa, we shall know  how to control the 
machine.  
Towards New Horizons, 1959, p. 45-46 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35   
CHAPTER 4 
CITIES AND VILLAGES 
There are two schools of thought current in the wor ld. One wants to divide the 
world into cities and the other into villages. The village civilization and the city 
civilization are totally different things. One depe nds on machinery and 
industrialization, and the other on handicrafts. We  have given preference to 
the latter. 
After all, this industrialization and large-scale p roduction are only of 
comparatively recent growth. We don't know how far it has contributed to the 
development of our happiness, but we know this much  that it has brought in its 
wake the recent world wars. This second world war i s not still over, and even if 
it comes to an end, we are hearing of a third world  war. Our country was never 
so unhappy and miserable as it is at present. City people may be getting big 
profits and good wages, but all that has become pos sible by sucking the blood 
of villages. We don't want to collect lakhs and cro res. We don't always want to 
depend on money for our work. If we are prepared to  sacrifice our lives for the 
cause, money is nothing. We must have faith and we must be true to ourselves. 
If we have these, we shall be able by decentralizin g our capital of Rs. 30 lakhs 
in villages to create national wealth amounting to Rs. 300 crores. To do that 
main thing, what is necessary is to make the villag es self- sufficient and self-
reliant. But mind you, my idea of self-sufficiency is not a narrow one. There is 
no scope for selfishness and arrogance in my self- sufficiency. 
Hindustan Standard, 6-12-’44 
 
We may not be deceived by the wealth to be seen in the cities of India. It does 
not come from England or America. It comes from the  blood of the poorest. 
There are said to be seven lakhs of villages in Ind ia. Some of them have simply 
been wiped out. No one has any record of those thou sands who have died of 
starvation and disease in Bengal, Karnataka and els ewhere. The Government Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36  registers can give no idea of what the village folk  are going through. But being 
a villager myself, I know the condition in the vill ages. I know village economics. 
I tell you that the pressure from the top crushes t hose at the bottom. 
All that is necessary is to get off their backs.  
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 30-6-’44 
 
The workers in the mills of Bombay have become slav es. The condition of the 
women working in the mills is shocking. When there were no mills, these -
women were not starving. If the machinery craze gro ws in our country, it will 
become an unhappy land. It may be considered a here sy, but I am bound to say 
that it were better for us to send money to Manches ter and to use flimsy 
Manchester cloth than to multiply mills in India. B y using Manchester cloth we 
only waste our money; but by reproducing Manchester  in India, we shall keep 
our money at the price of our blood, because our ve ry moral being will be 
sapped, and I call in support of my statement the v ery mill- hands as witnesses. 
And those who have amassed wealth out of factories are not likely to be better 
than other rich men. It would be folly to assume th at an Indian Rockfeller 
would be better than the American Rockfeller. Impov erished India can become 
free, but it will be hard for any India made rich t hrough immorality to regain its 
freedom. I fear we shall have to admit that moneyed  men support British rule; 
their interest is bound up with its stability. Mone y renders a man helpless. The 
other thing which is equally harmful is sexual vice . Both are poison. A snake-
bite is a lesser poison than these two, because the  former merely destroys the 
body but the latter destroy body, mind and soul. We  need not, therefore, be 
pleased with the prospect of the growth of the mill -industry.  
Hind Swaraj, 1962, p. 94 
 
The poor villagers are exploited by the foreign gov ernment and also by their 
own countrymen— the city-dwellers. They produce the  food and go hungry. 
They produce milk and their children have to go wit hout it. It is disgraceful. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37  Everyone must have a balanced diet, a decent house to live in, facilities for the 
education of one's children and adequate medical re lief.  
H., 31-3-’46, p. 63 
 
The half a dozen modern cities are an excrescence a nd serve at the present 
moment the evil purpose of draining the life-blood of the villages. . . . The 
cities with their insolent torts are a constant men ace to the life and liberty of 
the villagers.  
Y.I., 17-3-’27, p. 86 
 
It is the city man who is responsible for war all o ver the world, never the 
villager.  
Gleanings, 1949, p. 17 
 
I regard the growth of cities as an evil thing, unf ortunate for mankind and the 
world, unfortunate for England and certainly unfort unate for India. The British 
have exploited India through its cities. The latter  have exploited the villages. 
The blood of the villages is the cement with which the edifice of the cities is 
built. I want the blood that is today inflating the  arteries of the cities to run 
once again in the blood vessels of the villages. 
H., 23-6-’46, p. 198 
 
'You have called cities boils or abscesses on the b ody politic. What should be 
done with these boils?' 
If you ask a doctor he will tell you what to do wit h a boil. It has to be cured 
either by lancing or by the application of plasters  and poultices. Edward 
Carpenter called civilization a malady which needed  a cure. The growth of big 
cities is only a symptom of that malady. Being a na ture curist, I am naturally in 
favour of nature's way of cure by a general purific ation of the system. If the Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  hearts of the city- dwellers remain rooted in the v illages, if they become truly 
village-minded, all other things will automatically  follow and the boil will 
quickly heal.  
H., 25-8-’46, p. 282 
 
I have believed and repeated times without number t hat India is to be found 
not in its few cities but in its 7,00,000 villages.  But we town-dwellers have 
believed that India is to be found in its towns and  the villages were created to 
minister to our needs. We have hardly ever paused t o inquire if those poor folk 
get sufficient to eat and clothe themselves with an d whether they have a roof 
to shelter themselves from sun and rain.  
H., 4-4-’36, p. 63 
 
I have found that the town-dweller has generally ex ploited the villager, in fact 
he has lived on the poor villager's subsistence. Ma ny a British official has 
written about the conditions of the people of India . No one has, to my 
knowledge, said that the Indian villager has enough  to keep body and soul 
together. On the contrary they have admitted that t he bulk of the population 
lives on the verge of starvation and ten per cent a re semi-starved, and that 
millions have to rest content with a pinch of dirty  salt and chilies and polished 
rice or parched grain. 
You may be sure that if any of us were to be asked to live on that diet, we 
should not expect to survive it longer than a month  or should be afraid of losing 
our mental faculties. And yet our villagers go thro ugh that state from day to 
day.  
H., 4-4-’36, p. 63-64 
 
Over 75 per cent of the population is agriculturist s. But there cannot be much 
spirit of self- government about us if we take away  or allow others to take away 
from them almost the whole of the result of their l abour.  Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39  Natesan, p. 323 
 
The cities are capable of taking care of themselves . It is the village we have to 
turn to. We have to disabuse them of their prejudic e, their superstitions, their 
narrow outlook and we can do so in no other manner than that of staying 
amongst them and sharing their joys and sorrows and  spreading education and 
intelligent information among them.  
Y.I., 30-4-’31, p. 94 
 
We have got to be ideal villagers, not the villager s with their queer ideas about 
sanitation and giving no thought to how they eat an d what they eat. Let us not, 
like most of them, cook anyhow, eat anyhow, live an yhow. Let us show them 
the ideal diet. Let us not go by mere likes and dis likes, but get at the root of 
those likes and dislikes.  
H., 1-3-’35, p. 21 
 
We must identify ourselves with the villagers who t oil under the hot sun beating 
on their bent backs and see how we would like to dr ink water from the pool in 
which the villagers bathe, wash their clothes and p ots, in which their cattle 
drink and roll. Then and not till then shall we tru ly represent the masses and 
they will, as surely as I am writing this, respond to every call.  
Y.I., 11-9-’24, p. 300 
 
We have got to show them that they can grow their v egetables, their greens, 
without much expense, and keep good health. We have  also to show that most 
of the vitamins are lost when they cook the leaves.  
H., 1-3-’35, p. 21 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40  We have to teach them how to economize time, health  and money. Lionel 
Curtis described our villages as dung-heaps. We hav e to turn them into model 
villages. Our village-folk do not get fresh air tho ugh they are surrounded by 
fresh air; they don't get fresh food though they ar e surrounded by the freshest 
foods. I am talking like a missionary in this matte r of food, because my mission 
is to make villages a thing of beauty. 
H., 1-3-’35, p. 21 
 
It is profitless to find out whether the villages o f India were always what they 
are today. If they were never better it is a reflec tion upon the ancient culture 
in which we take so much pride. But if they were ne ver better, how is it that 
they have survived centuries of decay which we see going on around us. . . . 
The task before every lover of the country is how t o prevent this decay or, 
which is the same thing, how to reconstruct the vil lages of India so that it may 
be as easy for anyone to live in them as it is supp osed to be in the cities. 
Indeed, it is the task before every patriot. It may  be that the villagers are 
beyond redemption, that rural civilization has had its day and that the seven 
hundred thousand villages have to give place to sev en hundred well- ordered 
cities supporting a population not of three hundred  millions but thirty. If such is 
to be India's fate, even that won't come in a day. It must take time to wipe out 
a number of villages and villagers and transform th e remainder into cities and 
citizens.  
H., 1-3-’36, p. 30 
 
The village movement is as much an education of the  city people as of the 
villagers. Workers drawn from cities have to develo p village mentality and learn 
the art of living after the manner of villagers. Th is does not mean that they 
have to starve like the villagers. But it does mean  that there must be a radical 
change in the old style of life.  
H., 18-4-’36, p. 68 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41  The only way is to sit down in their midst and work  away in steadfast faith, as 
their scavengers, their nurses, their servants, not  as their patrons, and to 
forget all our prejudices and prepossessions. Let u s for a moment forget even 
Swaraj, and certainly forget the 'haves' whose pres ence oppresses us at every 
step. They are there. There are many who are dealin g with these big problems. 
Let us tackle the humbler work of the village which  is necessary now and would 
be even after we have reached our goal. Indeed, the  village work when it 
becomes successful will itself bring us nearer the goal.  
H., 16-5-’36, p. 112 
 
The village communities should be revived. Indian v illages produced and 
supplied to the Indian towns and cities all their w ants. India became im-
poverished when our cities became foreign markets a nd began to drain the 
villages dry by dumping cheap and shoddy goods from  foreign lands.  
H., 27-2-’37, p. 18 
 
It is only when the cities realize the duty of maki ng an adequate return to the 
villages for the strength and sustenance which they  derive from them, instead 
of selfishly exploiting them, that a healthy and mo ral relationship between the 
two will spring up. And if the city children are to  play their part in this great 
and noble work of social reconstruction, the vocati ons through which they are 
to receive their education ought to be directly rel ated to the requirements of 
the villages.  
H., 9-10-’37, p. 293 
 
We are inheritors of a rural civilization. The vast ness of our country, the 
vastness of the population, the situation and the c limate of the country have in 
my opinion, destined it for a rural civilization. I ts defects are well known, but 
not one of them is irremediable. To uproot it and s ubstitute for it an urban 
civilization seems to me an impossibility, unless w e are prepared by some Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42  drastic means to reduce the population from three h undred million to three or 
say even thirty. I can therefore suggest remedies o n the assumption that we 
must perpetuate the present rural civilization and endeavour to rid it of its 
acknowledged defects.  
Y. I., 9-11-’29, p. 364 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43   
CHAPTER 5 
VILLAGE SWARAJ 
The Place of Villages 
To serve our villages is to establish Swaraj. Every thing else is but an idle 
dream. 
Y.I., 26-12-’29, p. 420 
 
If the village perishes India will perish too. It w ill be no more India. Her own 
mission in the world will get lost.  
H., 29-8-’36, p. 226 
 
We have to make a choice between India of the villa ges that are as ancient as 
herself and India of the cities which are a creatio n of foreign domination. 
Today the cities dominate and drain the villages so  that they are crumbling to 
ruin. My Khadi mentality tells me that cities must subserve villages when that 
domination goes. Exploiting of villages is itself o rganized violence. If we want 
Swaraj to be built on non-violence, we will have to  give the villages their 
proper place.  
H., 20-1-’40, p. 423 
 
I am convinced that if India is to attain true free dom and through India the 
world also, then sooner or later the fact must be r ecognized that people will 
have to live in villages, not in towns, in huts, no t in palaces. Crores of people 
will never be able to live at peace with each other  in towns and palaces. They 
will then have no recourse but to resort to both vi olence and untruth. 
I hold that without truth and non-violence there ca n be nothing but destruction 
for humanity. We can realize truth and non-violence  only in the simplicity of 
village life and this simplicity can best be found in the  charkha  and all that the  Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44  charkha connotes. I must not fear if the world today is goi ng the wrong way. It 
may be that India too will go that way and like the  proverbial moth burn itself 
eventually in the flame round which it dances more and more fiercely. But it is 
my bounden duty up to my last breath to try to prot ect India and through India 
the entire world from such a doom.  
Bunch of old letters, 1958, p. 506-07 (5-10-’45) 
 
Village Swaraj 
My idea of Village Swaraj is that it is a complete republic, independent of its 
neighbours for its own vital wants, and yet interde pendent for many others in 
which dependence is a necessity. Thus every village 's first concern will be to 
grow its own food crops and cotton for its cloth. I t should have a reserve for its 
cattle, recreation and playground for adults and ch ildren. Then if there is more 
land available, it will grow  useful  money crops, thus excluding  ganja, tobacco, 
opium and the like. The village will maintain a vil lage theatre, school and 
public hall. It will have its own waterworks ensuri ng clean water supply. This 
can be done through controlled wells or tanks. Educ ation will be compulsory up 
to the final basic course. As far as possible every  activity will be conducted on 
the co-operative basis. There will be no castes suc h as we have today with their 
graded untouchability. Non-violence with its techni que of Satyagraha and non-
co-operation will be the sanction of the village co mmunity. There will be a 
compulsory service of village guards who will be se lected by rotation from the 
register maintained by the village. The government of the village will be 
conducted by the Panchayat of five persons annually  elected by the adult 
villagers, male and female, possessing minimum pres cribed qualifications. 
These will have all the authority and jurisdiction required. Since there will be 
no system of punishments in the accepted sense, thi s Panchayat will be the 
legislature, judiciary and executive combined to op erate for its year of office. 
Any village can become such a republic today withou t much interference, even 
from the present Government whose sole effective co nnection with the villages 
is the exaction of the village revenue. I have not examined here the question of Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45  relations with the neighbouring villages and the ce ntre if any. My purpose is to 
present an outline of village government. Here ther e is perfect democracy 
based upon individual freedom. The individual is th e architect of his own 
government. The law of non-violence rules him and h is government. He and his 
village are able to defy the might of a world. For the law governing every 
villager is that he will suffer death in the defenc e of his and his village's 
honour. 
There is nothing inherently impossible in the pictu re drawn here. To model 
such a village may be the work of a life time. Any lover of true democracy and 
village life can take up a village, treat it as his  world and sole work, and he will 
find good result. He begins by being the village sc avenger, spinner, watchman, 
medicine man and school-master all at once. If nobo dy comes near him, he will 
be satisfied with scavenging and spinning.  
H., 26-7-’42, p. 238 
 
An Ideal Village 
An ideal Indian village will be so constructed as t o lend itself to perfect 
sanitation. It will have cottages with sufficient l ight and ventilation built of a 
material obtainable within a radius of five miles o f it. The cottages will have 
courtyards enabling householders to plant vegetable s for domestic use and to 
house their cattle. The village lanes and streets w ill be free of all avoidable 
dust. It will have wells according to its needs and  accessible to all. It will have 
houses of worship for all, also a common meeting pl ace, a village common for 
grazing its cattle, a co-operative dairy, primary a nd secondary schools in which 
industrial education will be the central fact, and it will have Panchayats for 
settling disputes. It will produce its own grains, vegetables and fruit, and its 
own Khadi. This is roughly my idea of a model villa ge...I am convinced that the 
villagers can, under intelligent guidance, double t he village income as 
distinguished from individual income. There are in our villages inexhaustible 
resources not for commercial purposes in every case  but certainly for local Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46  purposes in almost every case. The greatest tragedy  is the hopeless un-
willingness of the villagers to better their lot. 
The very first problem the village worker will solv e is its sanitation. It is the 
most neglected of all the problems that baffle work ers and that undermine 
physical well-being and breed disease. If the worke r became a voluntary  
bhangi , he would begin by collecting night-soil and turni ng it into manure and 
sweeping village streets. He will tell people how a nd where they should 
perform daily functions and speak to them on the va lue of sanitation and the 
great injury caused by its neglect. The worker will  continue to do the work 
whether the villagers listen to him or no.  
H., 9-1-’37, p. 383 
 
My ideal village will contain intelligent human bei ngs. They will not live in dirt 
and darkness as animals. Men and women will be free  and able to hold their 
own against anyone in the world. There will be neit her plague, nor cholera, nor 
smallpox; no one will be idle, no one will wallow i n luxury. Everyone will have 
to contribute his quota of manual labour.... It is possible to envisage railways, 
post and telegraph...and the like... 
Bunch of Old Letters, 1958, p. 506-507 (5-10-’45) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47   
CHAPTER 6 
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF VILLAGE SWARAJ  
1. Supremacy of Man —Full Employment 
The supreme consideration is man. 
Y. I., 13-11-’24, p. 378 
 
The end to be sought is human happiness combined wi th full mental and moral 
growth. I use the adjective moral as synonymous wit h spiritual. This end can be 
achieved under decentralization. Centralization as a system is inconsistent with 
a non-violent structure of society.  
H., 18-1-’42, p. 5 
 
According to me the economic constitution of India and for the matter of that 
of the world, should be such that no one under it s hould suffer from want of 
food and clothing. In other words everybody should be able to get sufficient 
work to enable him to make the two ends meet. And t his ideal can be 
universally realized only if the means of productio n of the elementary 
necessaries of life remain in the control of the ma sses. These should be freely 
available to all as God's air and water are or ough t to be; they should not be 
made a vehicle of traffic for the exploitation of o thers. Their monopolization by 
any country, nation or group of persons would be un just. The neglect of this 
simple principle is the cause of the destitution th at we witness today not only 
in this unhappy land but in other parts of the worl d too.  
Y. I., 15-11-’28, p. 381 
 
That economics is untrue which ignores or disregard s moral values. The 
extension of the law of non-violence in the domain of economics means nothing Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48  less than the introduction of moral values as a fac tor to be considered in 
regulating international commerce.  
Y. I., 26-12-’24, p. 421 
 
Every human being has a right to live, and therefor e to find the wherewithal to 
feed himself and where necessary, to clothe and hou se himself. 
Natesan, p. 350 
 
'Take no thought for the morrow' is an injunction w hich finds an echo in almost 
all the religious scriptures of the world. In well- ordered society the securing of 
one's livelihood should be and is found to be the e asiest thing in the world. 
Indeed, the test of orderliness in a country is not  the number of millionaires it 
owns, but the absence of starvation among its masse s.  
Natesan, p. 350 
 
Any plan which exploited the raw materials of a cou ntry and neglected the 
pontentially more powerful man-power was lop-sided and could never tend to 
establish human equality. 
Real planning consisted in the best utilization of the whole man-power of India. 
H., 23-3’47, p. 198 
 
We should be ashamed of resting or having a square meal so long as there is 
one able-bodied man or woman without work or food.  
Y.I., 6-10’21, p. 314 
 
Every man has an equal right to the necessaries of life even as birds and beasts 
have. And since every right carries with it a corre sponding duty and the 
corresponding remedy for resisting any attack upon it, it is merely a matter of 
finding out the corresponding duties and remedies t o vindicate the elementary Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49  fundamental equality. The corresponding duty is to labour with my limbs and 
the corresponding remedy is to non-co-operate with him who deprives me of 
the fruit of my labour.  
Y.I., 26-3’31, p. 49 
 
2. Body-labour 
How can a man who does not do body labour, have the  right to eat  ? 
From Yeravda Mandir, 1957, p. 34 
 
'Earn thy bread by the sweat of thy brow,' says the  Bible. Sacrifices may be of 
many kinds. One of them may well be Bread labour. I f all laboured for their 
bread and no more, then there would be enough food and enough leisure for 
all. Then there would be no cry of over-population,  no disease and no such 
misery as we see around. Such labour will be the hi ghest form of sacrifice. Men 
will no doubt do many other things either through t heir bodies or through their 
minds, but all this will be labour of love for the common good. There will then 
be no rich and no poor, none high and none low, no touchable and no 
untouchable.  
H., 29-6-’35, p. 156 
 
The hungry millions ask for one poem—invigorating f ood. They cannot be given 
it. They must earn it. And they can earn only by th e sweat of their brow.  
Y.I., 13-10’21, p. 326 
 
Return to the villages means a definite voluntary r ecognition of the duty of 
Bread labour and all it connotes.  
H., 29-6-’35, p. 156 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50  Intellectual work is important and has an undoubted  place in the scheme of 
life. But what I insist on is the necessity of phys ical labour. No man, I claim, 
ought to be free from that obligation.  
H., 23-2-’47, p. 36 
 
God created man to work for his food and said that those who ate without work 
were thieves.  
Y.I., 13-10’21, p. 325 
 
3. Equality 
True economics never militates against the highest ethical standard, just as all 
true ethics to be worth its name must at the same t ime be also good 
economics. An economics that inculcates Mammon wors hip, and enables the 
strong to amass wealth at the expense of the weak, is a false and dismal 
science. It spells death. True economics, on the ot her hand, stands for social 
justice, it promotes the good of all equally includ ing the weakest, and is 
indispensable for decent life.  
H., 9-10-’37, p. 292 
 
I want to bring about an equalization of status.  
H., 15-1-’38, p. 416 
 
My ideal is equal distribution, but so far as I can  see, it is not to be realized. I 
therefore work for equitable distribution.  
Y.I., 17-3-’27, p. 86 
 
Economic equality is the master key to non-violent independence. Working for 
economic equality means abolishing the eternal conf lict between capital and 
labour. It means the levelling down of the few rich  in whose hands is Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51  concentrated the bulk of the nation's wealth on the  one hand, and a levelling 
up of the semi- starved naked millions on the other . A non-violent system of 
government is clearly an impossibility so long as t he wide gulf between the rich 
and the hungry millions persists. The contrast betw een ' the palaces of New 
Delhi and the miserable hovels of the poor, labouri ng class cannot last one day 
in a free India in which the poor will enjoy the sa me power as the richest in the 
land. A violent and bloody revolution is a certaint y one day unless there is a 
voluntary abdication of riches and the power that r iches give and sharing them 
for the common good. I adhere to my doctrine of tru steeship in spite of the 
ridicule that has been poured upon it. It is true t hat it is difficult to reach. So is 
non-violence difficult to attain. But we made up ou r minds in 1920 to negotiate 
that steep ascent.  
Constructive Programme, 1961, p. 18 
 
The real implication of equal distribution is that each man shall have the 
wherewithal to supply all his natural wants and no more. For example, if one 
man has a weak digestion and requires only a quarte r of a pound of flour for his 
bread and another needs a pound, both should be in a position to satisfy their 
wants. To bring this ideal into being the entire so cial order has got to be 
reconstructed. A society based on non-violence cann ot nurture any other ideal. 
We may not perhaps be able to realize the goal, but  we must bear it in mind 
and work unceasingly to near it. To the same extent  as we progress towards our 
goal we shall find contentment and happiness, and t o that extent too, shall we 
have contributed towards the bringing into being of  a non-violent society. 
 
4. Trusteeship 
Indeed at the root of this doctrine of equal distri bution must lie that of the 
trusteeship of the wealthy for superfluous wealth p ossessed by them. For 
according to the doctrine they may not possess a ru pee more than their 
neighbours. How is this to be brought about? Non-vi olently? Or should the 
wealthy be dispossessed of their possessions? To do  this we would naturally Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52  have to resort to violence. This violent action can not benefit society. Society 
will be the poorer, for it will lose the gifts of a  man who knows how to 
accumulate wealth. Therefore non-violent way is evi dently superior. The rich 
man will be left in possession of his wealth, of wh ich he will use what he 
reasonably requires for his personal needs and will  act as a trustee for the 
remainder to be used for the society. In this argum ent, honesty on the part of 
the trustee is assumed. 
If however, in spite of the utmost effort, the rich  do not become guardians of 
the poor in the true sense of the term and the latt er are more and more 
crushed and die of hunger, what is to be done? In t rying to find out the solution 
of this riddle I have lighted on non-violent non-co -operation and civil 
disobedience as the right and infallible means. The  rich cannot accumulate 
wealth without the co-operation of the poor in soci ety. If this knowledge were 
to penetrate to and spread amongst the poor, they w ould become strong and 
would learn how to free themselves by means of non- violence from the crushing 
inequalities which have brought them to the verge o f starvation.  
H., 25-8’40, p. 260 
 
5. Decentralization 
I suggest that, if India is to evolve along nonviol ent lines, it will have to 
decentralize many things. Centralization cannot be sustained and defended 
without adequate force. Simple homes from which the re is nothing to take 
away require no policing; the palaces of the rich m ust have strong guards to 
protect them against dacoits. So must huge factorie s. Rurally organized India 
will run less risk of foreign invasion than urbaniz ed India, well equipped with 
military, naval and air forces.  
H., 30-12-’39, p. 391 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53  You cannot build non-violence on a factory civiliza tion, but it can be built on 
self-contained villages. Rural economy as I have co nceived it, eschews 
exploitation altogether, and exploitation is the es sence of violence. 
H., 4-11-’39, p. 331 
 
6. Swadeshi 
Swadeshi is that spirit in us which restricts us to  the use and service of our 
immediate surroundings to the exclusion of the more  remote. 
If we follow the Swadeshi doctrine, it would be you r duty and mine to find out 
neighbours who can supply our wants and to teach th em to supply them where 
they do not know how to proceed, assuming that ther e are neighbours who are 
in want of healthy occupation. Then every village o f India will almost be a self-
supporting and self-contained unit, exchanging only  such necessary 
commodities with other villages as are not locally producible. This may all 
sound nonsensical. Well, India is a country of nons ense. It is nonsensical to 
parch one's throat with thirst when a kindly Mohamm edan is ready to offer pure 
water to drink. And yet thousands of Hindus would r ather die of thirst than 
drink water from a Mohammedan household. These nons ensical men can also, 
once they are convinced that their religion demands  that they should wear 
garments manufactured in India only and eat food on ly grown in India, decline 
to wear any other clothing or eat any other food.  
Natesan, p. 336-42 
 
A true votary of Swadeshi will not harbour ill- wil l towards a foreigner and not 
be actuated by antagonism towards anybody on the ea rth. Swadeshi is not a 
cult of hatred. It is a doctrine of selfless servic e that has its roots in the purest 
Ahimsa, i.e., love.  
From Yeravda Mandir, 1957, Chap. XVI, p. 64-67 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54  7. Self-sufficiency 
The unit of society should be a village or call it a manageable small group of 
people who would, in the ideal, be self-sufficient (in the matter of their vital 
requirements) as a unit.  
Towards New Horizons, 1959, p. 8 
 
Every village's first concern will be to grow its o wn food crops, and cotton for 
its cloth.  
H., 26-7-’42, p. 238 
 
The central fact of Khaddar is to make every villag e self-supporting for its food 
and clothing. 
Self-sufficient Khadi will never succeed without co tton being grown by spinners 
themselves or practically in every village. It mean s decentralization of cotton 
cultivation so far at least as self-sufficient Khad i is concerned.  
H., 27-7-’35, p. 188 
 
Every village has to be self-sustained and capable of managing its affairs even 
to the extent of defending itself against the whole  world.  
H., 28-7-’46, p. 236 
 
8. Co-operation 
As far as possible every activity will be conducted  on the co-operative basis.  
H., 26-7-’42, p. 238 
 
The system of co-operation was far more necessary f or the agriculturists than 
for the mat-weavers. The land belonged to the State ; therefore, it yielded the 
largest return when it was worked co-operatively. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55  Let it be remembered that co-operation should be ba sed on strict non-violence.  
H., 9-3-’47, p. 58-59 
 
9. Satyagraha 
Non-violence with its technique of Satyagraha and n on-co-operation will be the 
sanction of the village community.  
H., 26-7-’42, p. 238 
 
10. Equality of Religions 
Every religion has its full and equal place. We are  all leaves of a majestic tree 
whose trunk cannot be shaken off its roots which ar e deep down in the bowels 
of the earth. The mightiest of winds cannot move it .  
H., 28-7-’46, p. 236 
 
11. Panchayat Raj 
The government of the village will be conducted by the Panchayat of five 
persons, annually elected by the adult villagers, m ale and female, possessing 
minimum prescribed qualifications.  
H., 26-7-’42, p. 238 
 
Since there will be no system of punishments in the  accepted sense, this 
Panchayat will be the legislature, judiciary and ex ecutive combined to operate 
for its year of office.  
H., 26-7-’42, p. 238 
 
Every Panchayat of five adult men or women being vi llagers or village-minded 
shall form a unit. 
Two such contiguous Panchayats shall form a working  party under a leader 
elected from among themselves. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56  When there are one hundred such Panchayats, the fif ty first grade leaders shall 
elect from among themselves a second grade leader a nd so on, the first grade 
leaders meanwhile working under the second grade le ader. Parallel groups of 
two hundred Panchayats shall continue to be formed till they cover the whole 
of India, each succeeding group of Panchayats elect ing second grade leader 
after the manner of the first. All second grade lea ders shall serve jointly for 
the whole of India and severally for their respecti ve areas. The second grade 
leaders may elect, whenever they deem necessary, fr om among themselves a 
chief who will, during pleasure, regulate and comma nd all the groups.  
Towards New Horizons, p. 194 
 
12. Nai Talim 
By education I mean an all-round drawing out of the  best in child and man—
body, mind and spirit. Literacy is not the end of e ducation nor even the 
beginning. It is only one of the means whereby man and woman can be 
educated. Literacy in itself is no education. I wou ld therefore begin the child's 
education by teaching it a useful handicraft and en abling it to produce from the 
moment it begins its training. Thus every school ca n be made self-supporting, 
the condition being that the State takes over the m anufactures of these 
schools.  
H., 31-7-’37, p. 197 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57   
CHAPTER 7 
BREAD LABOUR 
The great Nature has intended us to earn our bread in the sweat of our brow. 
Everyone, therefore, who idles away a single minute  becomes to that extent a 
burden upon his neighbours, and to do so is to comm it a breach of the very first 
lesson of Ahimsa... Ahimsa is nothing if not a well -balanced exquisite 
consideration for one's neighbour, and an idle man is wanting in that 
elementary consideration.  
Y.I., 11-4-’29, p. 114-15 
 
The divine law, that man must earn his bread by lab ouring with his own hands, 
was first stressed by a Russian writer named T. M. Bondaref. Tolstoy advertised 
it and gave it wide publicity. In my view the same principle has been set forth 
in the third chapter of the Gita, where we are told , that he who eats without 
offering sacrifice eats stolen food. Sacrifice here  can only mean bread labour. 
Reason too leads to an identical conclusion. How ca n a man, who does not do 
body labour, have the right to eat? 'In the sweat o f thy brow shalt thou eat thy 
bread', says the Bible. A millionaire cannot carry on for long, and will soon get 
tired of his life, if he rolls in his bed all day l ong, and is even helped to his 
food. He, therefore, induces hunger by exercise and  helps himself to the food 
he eats. If everyone, whether rich or poor, has thu s to take exercise in some 
shape or form, why should it not assume the form of  productive, i.e. bread 
labour ? No one asks the cultivator to take breathi ng exercise or to work his 
muscles. And more than nine-tenths of humanity live s by tilling the soil. How 
much happier, healthier and more peaceful would the  world become, if the re-
maining tenth followed the example of the overwhelm ing majority, at least to 
the extent of labouring enough for their food! 
There is a world-wide conflict between capital and labour, and the poor envy 
the rich. If all worked for their bread, distinctio ns of rank would be Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58  obliterated; the rich would still be there, but the y would deem themselves only 
trustees of their property, and would use it mainly  in the public interest. 
Bread labour is a veritable blessing to one who wou ld observe non-violence, 
worship Truth and make the observance of Brahmachar ya a natural act. This 
labour can truly be related to agriculture alone. B ut at present at any rate, 
everybody is not in a position to take to it. A per son can therefore spin or 
weave, or take up carpentry or smithery, instead of  tilling the soil, always 
regarding agriculture, however, to be the ideal. Ev eryone must be his own 
scavenger. Evacuation is as necessary as eating: an d the best thing would be for 
everyone to dispose of his own waste. If this is im possible, each family should 
see to its own scavenging. 
I have felt for years, that there must be something  radically wrong, where 
scavenging has been made the concern of a separate class in society. We have 
no historical record of the man who first assigned the lowest status to this 
essential sanitary service. Whoever he was, he by n o means did us a good. We 
should, from our very childhood, have the idea impr essed upon our minds that 
we are all scavengers, and the easiest way of doing  so is, for everyone who has 
realized this, to commence bread-labour as a scaven ger. Scavenging, thus 
intelligently taken up, will help to a true appreci ation of the equality of man.  
From Yeravda Mandir, 1957, Chap.IX, p.35-37 
 
The true source of rights is duty. If we all discha rge our duties, rights will not 
be far to seek. If leaving duties unperformed we ru n after rights, they escape 
us like a will-o'-the-wisp. The more we pursue them , the farther they fly. The 
same teaching has been embodied by Krishna in the i mmortal words: 'Action 
alone is thine. Leave thou the fruit severely alone .' Action is duty: fruit is the 
right.   
Y.I., 8-1-’25, p.15-16 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59  Every man has an equal right to the necessaries of life even as birds and beasts 
have. And since every right carries with it a corre sponding duty and the 
corresponding remedy for resisting any attack upon it, it is merely a matter of 
finding out the corresponding duties and remedies t o vindicate the elementary 
fundamental equality. The corresponding duty is to labour with my limbs and 
the corresponding remedy is to non-co-operate with him who deprives me of 
the fruit of my labour.   
Y.I., 26-3-’31, p.49  
 
If all laboured for their bread and no more, then t here would be enough food 
and enough leisure for all. Then there would be no cry of over-population; no 
disease and no such misery as we see around. Such l abour will be' the highest 
form of sacrifice. Men will no doubt do many other things either through their 
bodies or through their minds, but all this will be  labour of love for the common 
good. There will- then be no rich and no poor, none  high and none low, no 
touchable and no untouchable. 
This may be an unattainable ideal. But we need not,  therefore, cease to strive 
for it. Even if, without fulfilling the whole law o f sacrifice, that is, the law of 
our being, we performed physical labour enough for our daily bread, we should 
go a long way towards the ideal. 
If we did so, our wants would be minimized, our foo d would be simple. We 
should then eat to live, not live to eat. Let anyon e who doubts the accuracy of 
this proposition try to sweat for his bread, he wil l derive the greatest relish 
from the productions of his labour, improve his hea lth, and discover that many 
things he took were superfluities.   
H., 29-6-’35, p. 156 
 
Intelligent bread labour is any day the highest for m of social service. 
The adjective 'intelligent' has been prefixed to la bour in order to show that 
labour to be social service must have that definite  purpose behind it. Otherwise 
every labourer can be said to render social service . He does in a way, but what Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60  is meant here is something much more than that. A p erson who labours for the 
general good of all serves society and is worthy of  his hire. Therefore, such 
bread labour is not different from social service. 
H., 1-6-’35, p. 125 
 
May not men earn their bread by intellectual labour ? No. The needs of the body 
must be supplied by the body. "Render unto Caesar t hat which is Caesar's" 
perhaps applies here well. Mere mental, that is, in tellectual labour is for the 
soul and is its own satisfaction. It should never d emand payment. In the ideal 
state, doctors, lawyers and the like will work sole ly for the benefit of society, 
not for self. Obedience to the law of bread labour will bring about a silent 
revolution in the structure of society. Man's trium ph will consist in substituting 
the struggle for existence by the struggle for mutu al service. The law of the 
brute will be replaced by the law of man. 
Return to the villages means a definite, voluntary recognition of the duty of 
bread labour and all it connotes. But says the crit ic, "Millions of India's children 
are today living in the villages and yet they are l iving a life of semi-starvation." 
This, alas, is but too true. Fortunately we know th at theirs is not voluntary 
obedience. They would perhaps shirk body labour if they could, and even rush 
to the nearest city if they could be accommodated i n it. Compulsory obedience 
to a master is a state of slavery, willing obedienc e to one's father is the glory of 
sonship. Similarly compulsory obedience to the law of bread labour breeds 
poverty, disease and discontent. It is a state of s lavery. Willing obedience to it 
must bring contentment and health. And it is health  which is real wealth, not 
pieces of silver and gold.  
H., 29-6-’35, p. 156 
 
Beggary 
My Ahimsa would not tolerate the idea of giving a f ree meal to a healthy person 
who has not worked for it in some honest way, and i f I had the power, I would 
stop every  sadavrata  where free meals are given. It has degraded the na tion Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61  and it has encouraged laziness, idleness, hypocrisy  and even crime. Such 
misplaced charity adds nothing to the wealth of the  country, whether material 
or spiritual, and gives a false sense of meritoriou sness to the donor. How nice 
and wise it would be if the donor were to open inst itutions where they would 
give meals under healthy, clean surroundings to men  and women who would 
work for them. I personally think that the spinning  wheel or any of the 
processes that cotton has to go through will be an ideal occupation. But if they 
will not have that, they may choose any other work;  only the rule should be "No 
labour, no meal". Every city has -its own difficult  problem of beggars, a 
problem for which the moneyed men are responsible. I know that it is easier to 
fling free meals in the faces of idlers, but much m ore difficult to organize an 
institution where honest work has to be done before  meals are served. From a 
pecuniary standpoint, in the initial stages at any rate, the cost of feeding 
people after taking work from them will be more tha n the cost of the present 
free kitchens. But I am convinced that it will be c heaper in the long run, if we 
do not want to increase in geometrical progression the race of loafers which is 
fast over-running this land.   
Y.I., 13-8’25, p.282 
 
I do feel that whilst it is bad to encourage beggin g, I will not send away a 
beggar without offering him work and food. If he do es not work, I shall let him 
go without food. Those who are physically disabled like the halt and the 
maimed have got to be supported by the State. There  is, however, a lot of 
fraud going on under cover of pretended blindness o r even genuine blindness. 
So many blind have become rich because of ill-gotte n gains. It would be a good 
thing if they were taken to an asylum, rather than be exposed to this 
temptation.   
H., 11-5-’35, p. 99 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62   
CHAPTER 8 
EQUALITY 
My idea of society is that while we are born equal meaning that we have a right 
to equal opportunity, all have not the same capacit y. It is, in the nature of 
things, impossible. For instance, all cannot have t he same height, or colour or 
degree of intelligence, etc.; therefore in the natu re of things, some will have 
ability to earn more and others less. People with t alents will have more, and 
they will utilize their talents for this purpose. I f they utilize their talents 
kindly, they will be performing the work of the Sta te. Such people exist as 
trustees, on no other terms. I would allow a man of  intellect to earn more, I 
would not cramp his talent. But the bulk of his gre ater earnings must be used 
for the good of the State, just as the incomes of a ll earning sons of the father 
go to the common family fund.  
Y.I., 26-11-’31, p. 368 
 
The real implication of equal distribution is that each man shall have the 
wherewithal to supply all his natural wants and no more. For example, if one 
man has a weak digestion and requires only a quarte r of a pound of flour for his 
bread and another needs a pound, both should be in a position to satisfy their 
wants. To bring this ideal into being the entire so cial order has got to be 
reconstructed. A society based on non-violence cann ot nurture any other ideal. 
We may not perhaps be able to realize the goal, but  we must bear it in mind 
and work unceasingly to near it. To the same extent  as we progress towards our 
goal we shall find contentment and happiness, and t o that extent too, shall we 
have contributed towards the bringing into being of  a non-violent society.   
H., 25-8-’40, p. 260 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63  Equality of Income 
Put your talents in the service of the country inst ead of converting them into s. 
d. If you are a medical man, there is disease enoug h in India to need all your 
medical skill. If you are a lawyer, there are diffe rences and quarrels enough in 
India. Instead of fomenting more trouble, patch up those quarrels and stop 
litigation. If you are an engineer, build model hou ses suited to the means and 
needs of our people and yet full of health and fres h air. There is nothing that 
you have learnt which cannot be turned to account. (The friend who asked the 
question was a Chartered Accountant and Gandhiji th en said to him:) There is a 
dire need everywhere for accountants to audit the a ccounts of Congress and its 
adjunct associations. Come to India—I will give you  enough work and also your 
hire—4 annas per day which is surely much more than  millions in India get.  
Y.I., 5-11-’31, p.384 
 
Practice of law ought not to mean taking more daily  than, say, a village 
carpenter's wage.   
H., 13-7-’40, p.205 
 
If India was to live an exemplary life of independe nce which would be the envy 
of the world, all the  bhangis,  doctors, lawyers, teachers, merchants and others 
would get the same wages for an honest day's work. Indian society may never 
reach the goal but it was the duty of every Indian to set his sail towards that 
goal and no other if India was to be a happy land. 
H., 16-3-’47, p.67 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64   
CHAPTER 9 
THEORY OF TRUSTEESHIP 
Supposing I have come by a fair amount of wealth ei ther by way of legacy, or 
by means of trade and industry, I must know that al l that wealth does not 
belong to me, what belongs to me is the right to an  honourable livelihood, no 
better than that enjoyed by millions of others. The  rest of my wealth belongs 
to the community and must be used for the welfare o f the community. I 
enunciated this theory when the Socialist theory wa s placed before the country 
in respect to the possessions held by zamindars and  ruling chiefs. They would 
do away with these privileged classes. I want them to outgrow their greed and 
sense of possession, and to come down in spite of t heir wealth to the level of 
those who earn their bread by labour. The labourer has to realize that the 
wealthy man is less owner of his wealth than the la bourer is owner of  his  own, 
viz. the power to work. 
The question how many can be real trustees accordin g to this definition is 
beside the point. If the theory is true, it is imma terial whether many live up to 
it or only one man lives up to it. The question is of conviction. If you accept the 
principle of Ahimsa, you have to strive to live up to it, no matter whether you 
succeed or fail. There is nothing in this theory wh ich can be said to be beyond 
the grasp of intellect, though you may say it is di fficult of practice.  
H., 3-6-’39, p.145 
 
You may say that trusteeship is a legal fiction. Bu t if people meditate over it 
constantly and try to act up to it, then life on ea rth would be governed far 
more by love than it is at present. Absolute truste eship is an abstraction like 
Euclid's definition of a point, and is equally unat tainable. But if we strive for it, 
we shall be able to go further in realizing a state  of equality on earth than by 
any other method. ... It is my firm conviction that  if the State suppressed 
capitalism by violence, it will be caught in the co ils of violence itself, and fail 
to develop non-violence at any time. The State repr esents violence in a Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65  concentrated and organized form. The individual has  a soul, but as the State is 
a soulless machine, it can never be weaned from vio lence to which it owes its 
very existence. Hence I prefer the doctrine of trus teeship. The fear is always 
there that the State may use too much violence agai nst those who differ from 
it. I would be very happy indeed if the people conc erned behaved as trustees; 
but if they fail, I believe we shall have to depriv e them of their possessions 
through the State with the minimum exercise of viol ence... (That is why I said 
at the Round Table Conference that every vested int erest must be subjected to 
scrutiny, and confiscation ordered where necessary. .. with or without 
compensation as the case demanded.) What I would pe rsonally prefer would be 
not a centralization of power in the hands of the S tate, but an extension of the 
sense of trusteeship; as in my opinion the violence  of private ownership is less 
injurious than the violence of the State. However, if it is unavoidable, I would 
support a minimum of State- ownership.   
Modern Review, 1935, p.412 
 
It has become the fashion these days to say that so ciety cannot be organized or 
run on non-violent lines. I join issue on that poin t. In a family, when the father 
slaps his delinquent child, the latter does not thi nk of retaliating. He obeys his 
father not because of the deterrent effect of the s lap but because of the 
offended love which he senses behind it. That in my  opinion is an epitome of 
the way in which society is or should be governed. What is true of the family 
must be true of society which is but a larger famil y.   
H., 3-12-’38, p.358 
 
I hold that non-violence is not merely a personal v irtue. It is also a social virtue 
to be cultivated like the other virtues. Surely soc iety is largely regulated by the 
expression of non-violence in its mutual dealings. What I ask for is an extension 
of it on a larger, national and international scale .   
H., 7-1-’39, p.417 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66  My theory of 'trusteeship' is no make-shift, certai nly no camouflage. I am 
confident that it will survive all other theories. It has the sanction of philosophy 
and religion behind it. That possessors of wealth h ave not acted up to the 
theory does not prove its falsity; it proves the we akness of the wealthy. No 
other theory is compatible with nonviolence. In the  non-violent method the 
wrongdoer compasses his own end, if he does not und o the wrong. For, either 
through non-violent non-co- operation he is made to  see the error, or he finds 
himself completely isolated.   
H., 16-12-’39, p.376 
 
I have no hesitation in endorsing the opinion that generally rich men and for 
that matter most men are not particular as to the w ay they make money. In the 
application of the method of non-violence, one must  believe in the possibility 
of every person, however, depraved, being reformed under humane and skilled 
treatment. We must appeal to the good in human bein gs and expect response. 
Is it not conducive to the wellbeing of society tha t every member uses all his 
talents, only not for personal aggrandizement but f or the good of all? We do not 
want to produce a dead equality where every person becomes or is rendered 
incapable of using his ability to the utmost possib le extent. Such a society must 
ultimately perish. I therefore suggest that my advi ce that moneyed men may 
earn their crores (honestly only, of course) but so  as to dedicate them to the 
service of ail is perfectly sound. “ तेन  ᭜यᲦ े न  भुंजीथाः ” is a mantra based on 
uncommon knowledge. It is the surest method to evol ve a new order of life of 
universal benefit in the place of the present one w here each one lives for 
himself without regard to what happens to his neigh bour.   
H., 22-2-’42, p.49 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67   
CHAPTER 10 
SWADESHI 
Swadeshi is that spirit in us which restricts us to  the use and service of our 
immediate surroundings to the exclusion of the more  remote. Thus, as for reli-
gion, in order to satisfy the requirements of the d efinition, I must restrict 
myself to my ancestral religion. That is, the use o f my immediate religious 
surrounding. If I find it defective, I should serve  it by purging it of its defects. 
In the domain of politics I should make use of the indigenous institutions and 
serve them by curing them of their proved defects. In that of economics I 
should use only things that are produced by my imme diate neighbours and serve 
those industries by making them efficient and compl ete where they might be 
found wanting. It is suggested that such Swadeshi, if reduced to practice, will 
lead to the millennium. . . . 
Let us briefly examine the three branches of Swades hi as sketched above. 
Hinduism has become a conservative religion and, th erefore, a mighty force 
because of the Swadeshi spirit underlying it. It is  the most tolerant because it is 
non-proselytizing, and it is as capable of expansio n today as it has been found 
to be in the past. It has succeeded not in driving out, as I think it has been 
erroneously held, but in absorbing Buddhism. By rea son of the Swadeshi spirit, 
a Hindu refuses to change his religion, not necessa rily because he considers it 
to be the best, but because he knows that he can co mplement it by introducing 
reforms. And what I have said about Hinduism is, I suppose, true of the other 
great faiths of the world, only it is held that it is specially so in the case of 
Hinduism. But here comes the point I am labouring t o reach. If there is any 
substance in what I have said, will not the great m issionary bodies of India, to 
whom she owes a deep debt of gratitude for what the y have done and are 
doing, do still better and serve the spirit of Chri stianity better by dropping the 
goal of proselytizing while continuing their philan thropic work? 
Following out the Swadeshi spirit, I observe the in digenous institutions, and the 
village Panchayats hold me. India is really a repub lican country, and it is Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68  because it is that, that it has survived every shoc k hitherto delivered. Princes 
and potentates, whether they were Indian born or fo reigners, have hardly 
touched the vast masses except for collecting reven ue. The latter in their turn 
seem to have rendered unto Caesar what was Caesar's  and for the rest have 
done much as they have liked. The vast organization  of caste answered not only 
to the religious wants of the community but it answ ered to its political needs. 
The villagers managed their internal affairs throug h the caste system and 
through it they dealt with any oppression from the ruling power or powers. It is 
not possible to deny the organizing ability of a na tion that was capable of 
producing from the caste system its wonderful power  of organization. One has 
but to attend the great Kumbha Mela at Hardwar ... to know how skilful that 
organization must have been which, without any seem ing effort, was able 
effectively to cater for more than a million pilgri ms. Yet it is the fashion to say 
that we lack organizing ability. This is true, I fe ar, to a certain extent, of those 
who have been nurtured in the new traditions. 
We have laboured under a terrible handicap owing to  an almost fatal departure 
from the Swadeshi spirit. We, the educated classes,  have received our 
education through a foreign tongue. We have, theref ore, not reacted upon the 
masses. We want to represent the masses, but we fai l. They recognize us not 
much more than they recognize the English officers.  Their hearts are an open 
book to neither. Their aspirations are not ours. He nce there is a break. And you 
witness not in reality failure to organize but want  of correspondence between 
the representatives and the represented. If during the last fifty years we had 
been educated through the vernaculars, our elders a nd our servants and our 
neighbours would have partaken of our knowledge; th e discoveries of a Bose or 
a Ray would have been household treasures as are th e Ramayana and the 
Mahabharata. As it is, so far as the masses are con cerned, those great dis-
coveries might as well have been made by foreigners . Had instruction in all the 
branches of learning been given through the vernacu lars, I make bold to say 
that they would have been enriched wonderfully. The  question of village 
sanitation etc. would have been solved long ago. Th e village Panchayats would 
be now a living force in a special way, and India w ould almost be enjoying self-Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69  government suited to her requirements, and would ha ve been spared the 
humiliating spectacle of organized assassination on  her sacred soil. It is not too 
late to mend. 
And now for the last division of Swadeshi. Much of the deep poverty of the 
masses is due to the ruinous departure from Swadesh i in the economic and 
industrial life. If not one article of commerce had  been brought from outside 
India, she would be today a land flowing with milk and honey. But that was not 
to be. We were greedy and so was England. The conne ction between England 
and India was based clearly upon an error. But she does not remain in India in 
error. It is her declared policy that India is to b e held in trust for her people. If 
this be true, Lancashire must stand aside. And if t he Swadeshi doctrine is a 
sound doctrine, Lancashire can stand aside without hurt, though it may sustain 
a shock for the time being. I think of Swadeshi not  as a boycott movement 
undertaken by way of revenge. I conceive it as a re ligious principle to be 
followed by all. I am no economist, but I have read  some treatises which show 
that England could easily become a self- sustained country, growing all the 
produce she needs. This may be an utterly ridiculou s proposition, and perhaps 
the best proof that it cannot be true, is that Engl and is one of the largest 
importers in the world. But India cannot live for L ancashire or any other 
country before she is able to live for herself. And  she can live for herself only if 
she produces and is helped to produce everything fo r her requirements within 
her own borders. She need not be, she ought not be,  drawn into the vortex of 
mad and ruinous competition which breeds fratricide , jealousy and many other 
evils. But who is to stop her great millionaires fr om entering into the world 
competition? Certainly not legislation. Force of pu blic opinion and proper 
education, however, can do a great deal in the desi red direction. The handloom 
industry is in a dying condition. I took special ca re during my wanderings. . . to 
see as many weavers as possible, and my heart ached  to find how they had lost, 
how families had retired from this once flourishing  and honourable occupation. 
If we follow the Swadeshi doctrine, it would be you r duty and mine to find out 
neighbours who can supply our wants and to teach th em to supply them where Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70  they do not know how to proceed, assuming that ther e are neighbours who are 
in want of healthy occupation. Then every village o f India will almost be a self-
supporting and self-contained unit, exchanging only  such necessary 
commodities with other villages as are not locally producible. This may all 
sound nonsensical. Well, India is a country of nons ense. It is nonsensical to 
parch one's throat with thirst when a kindly Mohamm edan is ready to offer pure 
water to drink. And yet thousands of Hindus would r ather die of thirst than 
drink water from a Mohammedan household. These nons ensical men can also, 
once they are convinced that their religion demands  that they should wear gar-
ments manufactured in India only and eat food only grown in India, decline to 
wear any other clothing or eat any other food. 
There is a verse in the Bhagavadgita which, freely rendered, means masses 
follow the classes. It is easy to undo the evil if the thinking portion of the 
community were to take the Swadeshi vow, even thoug h it may for a time 
cause considerable inconvenience. I hate legislativ e interference in any 
department of life. At best it is the lesser evil. But I would tolerate, welcome—
indeed, plead for a stiff protective duty upon fore ign goods. Natal, a British 
colony, protected its sugar by taxing the sugar tha t came from another British 
colony, Mauritius. England has sinned against India  by forcing free trade upon 
her. It may have been food for her, but it has been  poison for this country. 
It has often been urged that India cannot adopt Swa deshi in the economic life 
at any rate. Those who advance this objection do no t look upon Swadeshi as a 
rule of life. With them it is a mere patriotic effo rt— not to be made if it 
involved any self-denial. Swadeshi, as defined here , is a religious discipline to 
be undergone in utter disregard of the physical dis comfort it may cause to 
individuals. Under its spell the deprivation of a p in or a needle, because these 
are not manufactured in India, need cause no terror . A Swadeshist will learn to 
do without hundreds of things which today he consid ers necessary. Moreover, 
those who dismiss Swadeshi from their minds by argu ing the impossible, forget 
that Swadeshi, after all, is a goal to be reached b y steady effort. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71  And we would be making for the goal even if we conf ined Swadeshi to a given 
set of articles allowing ourselves as a temporary m easure to use such things as 
might not be procurable in the country. 
There now remains for me to consider one more objec tion that has been raised 
against Swadeshi. The objectors consider it to be a  most selfish doctrine 
without any warrant in the civilized code of morali ty. With them to practise 
Swadeshi is to revert to barbarism. I cannot enter into a detailed analysis of the 
proposition. But I would urge that Swadeshi is the only doctrine consistent with 
the law of humility and love. It is arrogance to th ink of launching out to serve 
the whole of India when I am hardly able to serve e ven my own family. It were 
better to concentrate my effort upon the family and  consider that through 
them I was serving the whole nation and, if you wil l, the whole of humanity. 
This is humility and it is love. The motive will de termine the quality of the act. 
I may serve my family regardless of the sufferings I may cause to others. As, for 
instance, I may accept an employment which enables me to extort money from 
people. I enrich myself thereby and then satisfy ma ny unlawful demands of the 
family. Here I am neither serving the family nor th e State. Or I may recognize 
that God has given me hands and feet only to work w ith for my sustenance and 
for that of those who may be dependent upon me. I w ould then at once simplify 
my life and that of those whom I can directly reach . In this instance I would 
have served the family without causing injury to an yone else. Supposing that 
every one followed this mode of life, we should hav e at once an ideal state. All 
will not reach that state at the same time. But tho se of us who, realizing its 
truth, enforce it in practice, will clearly anticip ate and accelerate the coming 
of that happy day. Under this plan of life, in seem ing to serve India to the 
exclusion of every other country, I do not harm any  other country. My 
patriotism is both exclusive and inclusive. It is e xclusive in the sense that in all 
humility I confine my attention to the land of my b irth, but is inclusive in the 
sense that my service is not of a competitive or an tagonistic nature.  Sic utere 
tuo ut alienum non laedas  is not merely a legal maxim, but it is a grand 
doctrine of life. It is the key to a proper practic e of Ahimsa of love.  Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72  Natesan, p.336-44 
 
Even Swadeshi like any other good thing can be ridd en to death if it is made a 
fetish. That is a danger that must be guarded again st. To reject foreign 
manufactures, merely because they are foreign and t o go on wasting national 
time and money in the promotion in one's country of  manufactures for which it 
is not suited, would be criminal folly and a negati on of the Swadeshi spirit. A 
true votary of Swadeshi will not harbour ill-will t owards a foreigner and not be 
actuated by antagonism towards anybody on the earth . Swadeshi is not a cult of 
hatred. It is a doctrine of selfless service that h as its roots in the purest 
Ahimsa, i. e., love.   
From Yeravda Mandir, 1957, Chap.XVI, p.66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73   
CHAPTER 11 
SELF-SUFFICIENCY AND CO-OPERATION 
Truth and non-violence form the foundation of the o rder of my conception. Our 
first duty is that we should not be a burden on soc iety, i.e., we should be self-
dependent. From this point of view self-sufficiency  itself is a kind of service. 
After becoming self-sufficient we shall use our spa re time for the service of 
others. If all become self-sufficient none will be in trouble. In such a state of 
affairs there would be no need of serving anybody. But we have not yet 
reached that stage and therefore we have to think o f social service. Even if we 
succeed in realizing self-sufficiency completely, m an being a social being, we 
will have to accept service in some form or other. That is, man is as much self-
dependent as inter-dependent. When dependence becom es necessary in order 
to keep society in good order it is no longer depen dence, but becomes co-
operation. There is sweetness in co-operation; ther e is no one weak or strong 
among those who co-operate. Each is equal to the ot her. There is the feeling of 
helplessness in dependency. Members of a family are  as much self-dependent 
as inter-dependent. There is no feeling of either m ine or thine. They are all co- 
operators. So also when we take a society, a nation  or the whole of mankind as 
a family all men become co-operators. If we can con ceive a picture of such co-
operation we shall find that there would be no need  of support from the lifeless 
machine. Instead of making the greatest use of mach inery we shall be able to 
do with the least use thereof and therein lies the real security and self-
protection of society.  
The Ideology of the Chakha, 1951, p.86-88 
 
My idea of self-sufficiency is that villages must b e self-sufficient in regard to 
food, cloth and other basic necessities. But even t his can be overdone. There-
fore you must grasp my idea properly. Self-suffi- c iency does not mean 
narrowness. To be self-sufficient is not to be alto gether self-contained. In no 
circumstances would we be able to produce all the t hings we need. So though Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74  our aim is complete self-sufficiency, we shall have  to get from outside the 
village what we cannot produce in the village; we s hall have to produce more 
of what we can in order thereby to obtain in exchan ge what we are unable to 
produce.   
H., 30-11-’35, p.333 
 
The ideal no doubt is for every family to grow, spi n, weave and wear its own 
cotton, just as it is for every family to own land and grow its own corn, cook 
and eat it.  
Khadi-Why and How, 1959, p.166 
 
As for food, India has plenty of fertile land, ther e is enough water and no 
dearth of man power. . . . The public should be edu cated to become self-
reliant. Once they know that they have got to stand  on their own legs, it would 
electrify the atmosphere. 
India produces more cotton than she requires for he r wants. People should spin 
and weave themselves. People should produce their o wn Khadi. Once the 
people begin to produce their own food and cloth, i t would change their entire 
outlook.   
H., 19-10-’47, p.379 
 
Self-sufficiency is a big word. . . . Villages will  be swept away, if they are not 
self-sufficient as to their primary wants and self- reliant as to their protection 
against internal disruption by dissensions and dise ase and external danger from 
thieves and dacoits. Self-sufficiency, therefore, m eans all the cotton processes 
and growing of seasonal food crops and fodder for c attle. Unless this is done 
there will be starvation. And self-reliance means c orporate organization 
ensuring adjustment of internal differences through  arbitration by the wise 
men of villages and cleanliness by corporate attent ion to sanitation and 
common diseases. No mere individual effort is going  to suffice. And above all, Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75  villagers must be taught to feel their own strength  by combined effort to make 
their villages proof against thieves and dacoits. T his is best done by corporate 
nonviolence. But if the way to non-violence does no t seem clear to workers, 
they will not hesitate to organize corporate defenc e through violence.   
H., 5-4-’42, p.107 
 
Self-sufficient Khadi will never succeed without co tton being grown by spinners 
themselves or practically in every village. It mean s decentralization of cotton 
cultivation so far at least as self- sufficient Kha di is concerned. For this we 
shall need a census of the villages served. For not  every spinner or weaver has 
a plot (ever so tiny) of land, where he or she can grow cotton. Self-sufficient 
Khadi is a proposition for which alone can the exis tence of the A.I.S.A. be 
justified. It is a field as yet untouched by it on any scale worth mentioning.   
H., 27-7-’35, p.188 
 
We can but serve that part of God's creation which is nearest and best known to 
us. We can start with our next-door neighbour. We s hould not be content with 
keeping our courtyard clean,, we should see that ou r neighbour's courtyard is 
also clean. We may serve our family, but may not sa crifice the village for the 
sake of the family. Our own honour lies in the pres ervation of that of our own 
village. But we must each of us understand our own limitations. Our capacity 
for service is automatically limited by our knowled ge of the world in which we 
live. But let me put it in the simplest possible la nguage. Let us think less of 
ourselves than of our next- door neighbour. Dumping  the refuse of our court-
yard into that of our neighbour is no service of hu manity, but disservice. Let us 
start with the service of our neighbour.  
H., 22-8-’36, p.217 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76  In regard to agriculture, we must do our utmost to prevent further 
fragmentation of land, and to encourage people to t ake to co-operative 
farming.   
Khadi- Why and How, 1959, p.162 
 
A village may grow cotton for itself in co-operatio n. If this is done, it is simple 
enough to see that no imported cloth can beat cloth  thus produced locally, 
either in cost or durability. The process induces t he greatest conservation of 
energy.   
H., 20-4-’35, p.80 
 
Let us not also forget that it is man's social natu re which distinguishes him from 
the brute creation. If it is his privilege to be in dependent it is equally his duty 
to be interdependent. Only an arrogant man will cla im to be independent of 
everybody else and be self-contained. ... It will b e possible to reconstruct our 
villages so that the villages collectively, not the  villagers individually, will 
become self-contained, so far as their clothing req uirements are concerned.   
Y.I., 25-4-’29, p.135 
 
In speaking to a co-operative society in Madras las t year, I said that through 
hand-spinning I was trying to found the largest co- operative society known to 
the world. This is not an untrue claim. It may be a mbitious. It is not untrue 
because hand-spinning cannot serve the purpose for which it is intended unless 
millions actually co-operate in it. 
Take the working of any typical centre. At the cent ral office is collected seed 
cotton for spinners. The cotton is ginned by ginner s perhaps at the centres. It is 
distributed then among carders who redeliver it in the shape of slivers. These 
are now ready to be distributed among the spinners who bring their yarn from 
week to week and take away fresh slivers and their wages in return. The yarn 
thus received is given to weavers to weave and rece ived back for sale in the Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77  shape of khaddar. This latter must now be sold to t he weavers—the general 
public. Thus the central office has to be in consta nt living human touch with a 
very large number of people irrespective of caste, cplour or creed. For the 
centre has no dividends to make, has no exclusive c are but the care of the most 
needy. The centre to be useful must keep itself cle an in every sense of the 
term. The bond between it and the component parts o f the vast organization is 
purely spiritual or moral. A spinning centre, there fore, is a co-operative society 
whose members are ginners, carders, spinners, weave rs and buyers—all tied 
together by a common bond, mutual good-will and ser vice.   
Y.I., 10-6-’26, p.214 
 
The secret of successful co-operative effort is tha t the members must be 
honest and know the great merit of co-operation and  it must have a definite 
progressive goal. Thus holding a certain sum of mon ey in co-operation for the 
sake of making more money by charging exorbitant ra tes of interest is a bad 
goal. But co-operative farming or dairying is undou btedly a good goal promoting 
national interests. Such instances can be multiplie d. I wonder what these 
numerous . . . societies are. Have they honest insp ectors who know their work? 
It may be mentioned that such movements have often proved disastrous when 
management has been dishonest and the goal question able.   
H., 6-10-’46, p.344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78   
CHAPTER 12 
PANCHAYAT RAJ 
Panchayats in Pre-independence Days 
Panchayat has an ancient flavour; it is a good word . It literally means an 
assembly of five elected by villagers. It represent s the system, by which the 
innumerable village republics of India were governe d. But the British 
Government, by its ruthlessly thorough method of re venue collection, almost 
destroyed these ancient republics, which could not stand the shock of this 
revenue collection. Congressmen are now making a cr ude attempt to revive the 
system by giving village elders civil and criminal jurisdiction. The attempt was 
first made in 1921. It failed. It is being made aga in, and it will fail if it is not 
systematically and decently, I will not say, scient ifically, tried. 
It was reported to me in Nainital, that in certain places in the L.P., even 
criminal cases like rape were tried by the so-calle d Panchayats. I heard of some 
fantastic judgments pronounced by ignorant or inter ested Panchayats. This is 
all bad if it is true. Irregular Panchayats are bou nd to fall to pieces under their 
own unsupportable weight, I suggest, therefore, the  following rules for the 
guidance of village workers:  
1.  No Panchayat should be set up without the written s anction of a Provincial 
Congress Committee; 
2.  A Panchayat should in the first instance be elected  by a public meeting 
called for the purpose by beat of drums; 
3.  It should be recommended by the Tahsil Committee; 
4.  Such Panchayat should have no criminal jurisdiction ; 
5.  It may try civil suits if the parties to them refer  their disputes to the 
Panchayat; 
6.  No one should be compelled to refer any matter to t he Panchayat; Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 79  7.  No Panchayat should have any authority to impose fi nes, the only sanction 
behind its civil decrees being its moral authority,  strict impartiality and 
the willing obedience of the parties concerned; 
8.  There should be no social or other boycott for the time being; 
9.  Every Panchayat will be expected to attend to: 
a.  The education of boys and girls in its village; 
b.  Its sanitation; 
c.  Its medical needs; 
d.  The upkeep and cleanliness of village wells or pond s; 
e.  The uplift of and the daily wants of the so-called untouchables. 
A Panchayat that fails without just cause to attend  to the requirements 
mentioned in clause 9 within six months of its elec tion, or fails otherwise to 
retain the goodwill of the villagers, or stands sel f-condemned for any other 
cause, appearing sufficient to the Provincial Congr ess Committee, may be dis-
banded and another elected in its place. 
The disability to impose fines or social boycott is  a necessity of the case in the 
initial stages; social boycott in villages has been  found to be a dangerous 
weapon in the hands of ignorant or unscrupulous men . Imposition of fines too 
may lead to mischief and defeat the very end in vie w. Where a Panchayat is 
really popular and increases its popularity by the constructive work of the kind 
suggested in clause 9, it will find its judgments a nd authority respected by 
reason of its moral prestige. And that surely is th e greatest sanction anyone can 
possess and of which one cannot be deprived.  
Y.I., 28-5-’31, p.123 
 
Panchayats in Independent India 
Independence must mean that of the people of India,  not of those who are 
today ruling over them. The rulers should depend on  the will of those who are Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 80  under their heels. Thus, they have to be servants o f the people, ready to do 
their will. 
Independence must begin at the bottom. Thus, every village will be a republic 
or Panchayat having full powers. It follows, theref ore, that every village has to 
be self-sustained and capable of managing its affai rs even to the extent of 
defending itself against the whole world. It will b e trained and prepared to 
perish in the attempt to defend itself against any onslaught from without. Thus, 
ultimately, it is the individual who is the unit. T his does not exclude 
dependence on and willing help from neighbours or f rom the world. It will be 
free and voluntary play of mutual forces. Such a so ciety is necessarily highly 
cultured in which every man and woman knows what he  or she wants and, what 
is more, knows that no one should want anything tha t others cannot have with 
equal labour. 
This society must naturally be based on truth and n on-violence which, in my 
opinion, are not possible without a living belief i n God meaning a Self-existent, 
All-knowing Living Force which inheres every other force known to the world 
and which depends on none and which will live when all other forces may con-
ceivably perish or cease to act. I am unable to acc ount for my life without 
belief in this All-embracing Living Force. 
In this structure composed of innumerable villages there will be ever-widening, 
never ascending circles. Life will not be a pyramid  with the apex sustained by 
the bottom. But it will be an oceanic circle whose centre will be the individual 
always ready to perish for the village, the latter ready to perish for the circle 
of villages, till at last the whole becomes one lif e composed of individuals, 
never aggressive in their arrogance but ever humble , sharing the majesty of the 
oceanic circle of which they are integral units. 
Therefore, the outermost circumference will not wie M power to crush the inner 
circle but give strength to all within and derive i ts own from the centre. I may 
be taunted with the retort that this is all Utopian  and therefore not worth a 
single thought. If Euclid's point, though incapable  of being drawn by human 
agency, has an imperishable value, my picture has i ts own for mankind to live. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 81  Let India live for this true picture, though never realizable in its completeness. 
We must have a proper picture of what we want befor e we can have something 
approaching it. If there ever is to be a republic o f every village in India, then I 
claim verity for my picture in which the last is eq ual to the first, or in other 
words, none is to be the first and none the last. 
In this picture every religion has its full and equ al place. We are all leaves of a 
majestic tree whose trunk cannot be shaken off its roots which are deep down 
in the bowels of the earth. The mightiest of winds cannot move it. 
In this there is no room for machines that would di splace human labour and 
that would concentrate power in a few hands. Labour  has its unique place in a 
cultural human family. Every machine that helps eve ry individual has a place. 
But I must confess that I have never sat down to th ink out what that machine 
can be. I have thought of Singer's sewing machine. But even that is perfunctory. 
I do not need it to fill in my picture.   
H., 28-7-’46, p.236 
 
What should we do then? If we would see our dream o f Panchayat Raj, i.e. true 
democracy realized, we would regard the humblest an d lowest Indian as being 
equally the ruler of India with the tallest in the land. This presupposes that all 
are pure or will become pure if they are not. And p urity must go hand-in-hand 
with wisdom. No one would then harbour any distinct ion between community 
and community, caste and out-caste. Everybody would  regard all as equal with 
oneself and hold them together in the silken net of  love. No one would regard 
another as untouchable. We would hold as equal the toiling labourer and the 
rich capitalist. Everybody would know how to earn a n honest living by the 
sweat of one's brow and make no distinction between  intellectual and physical 
labour. To hasten this consummation, we would volun tarily turn ourselves into 
scavengers. No one who has wisdom will ever touch o pium, liquor or any 
intoxicants. Everybody would observe Swadeshi as th e rule of life and regard 
every woman, not being his wife, as his mother, sis ter or daughter according to 
her age, never lust after her in his heart. He woul d be ready to lay down his life Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 82  when occasion demands it, never want to take anothe r's life. If he is a Sikh in 
terms of the commandment of the Gurus he would have  the heroic courage to 
stand single- handed and alone, without yielding an  inch of ground against the 
"one lakh and a quarter" enjoined by them. Needless  to say, such a son of India 
will not want to be told what his duty in the prese nt hour is.   
H., 18-1-’48, p.517 
 
Duties of the Panchayat 
Distinguished travellers from the world came to Ind ia in the days of yore from 
China and other countries. They came in quest of kn owledge and put up with 
great hardships in travelling. They had reported th at in India there was no 
theft, people were honest and industrious. They nee ded no locks for their 
doors. In those days there was no multiplicity of c astes as at present. It is the 
function of Panchayats to revive honesty and indust ry. It is the function of the 
Panchayats to teach the villagers to avoid disputes , if they have to settle them. 
That would ensure speedy justice without any expend iture. They would need 
neither the police nor the military. 
Then the Panchayat should see to cattle improvement . They should show 
steady increase in the milk yield. Our cattle have become a burden on the land 
for want of care. It is gross ignorance to blame th e Muslims for cow slaughter. 
It is the Hindus who kill the cattle by inches thro ugh ill-treatment. Slow death 
by torture is far worse than outright killing. 
The Panchayat should also see to an increase in the  quantity of foodstuff grown 
in their village. That is to be accomplished by pro perly manuring the soil. The 
Compost Conference recently held in Delhi under the  inspiration of Shrimati 
Mirabehn has told them how the excreta of animals a nd human beings mixed 
with rubbish can be turned into valuable manure. Th is manure increases the 
fertility of the soil. Then they must see to the cl eanliness of their village and 
its inhabitants. They must be clean and healthy in body and mind. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 83  There should be no cinema house. People say that th e cinema can be a potent 
means of education. That might come true some day, but at the moment I see 
how much harm the cinema is doing. They have their indigenous games. They 
should banish intoxicating drinks and drugs from th eir midst. They should 
eradicate untouchability if there is any trace of i t still left in their village. The 
Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Parsis and Christians shoul d all live as brothers and 
sisters. If they achieve all I have mentioned, they  would demonstrate real 
independence and people from all over India would c ome to.-see their model 
village and take inspiration from it.   
H., 4-1-’48, p.499-500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 84   
CHAPTER 13 
NAI TALIM 
I 
Nai Talim was popularly and correctly described as education through 
handicrafts. This was part of the truth. The root o f this new education went 
much deeper. It lay in the application of truth and  love in every variety of 
human activity, whether in individual life or a cor porate one. The notion of 
education through handicraft rose from the contempl ation of truth and love 
permeating life's activities. Love required that tr ue education should -be easily 
accessible to all and should be of use to every vil lager in his daily life. Such 
education was not derived from nor did it depend up on books. It had no 
relation to sectional religion. If it could be call ed religious, it was universal 
religion from which all sectional religions were de rived. Therefore, it was 
learnt from the Book of Life which cost nothing and  which could not be taken 
away from one by any force on earth.  
H., 21-12-’47, p.480 
 
I hold that true education of the intellect can onl y come through a proper 
exercise and training of the bodily organs, e.g. ha nds, feet, eyes, ears, nose, 
etc. In other words an intelligent use of the bodil y organs in a child provides 
the best and quickest way of developing his intelle ct. But unless the 
development of the mind and body goes hand in hand with a corresponding 
awakening of the soul, the former alone would prove  to be a poor lop-sided 
affair. By spiritual training I mean education of t he heart. A proper and all-
round development of the mind, therefore, can take place only when it 
proceeds  pari passu  with the education of the physical and spiritual f aculties of 
the child. They constitute an indivisible whole. Ac cording to this theory, 
therefore, it would be a gross fallacy to suppose t hat they can be developed 
piecemeal or independently of one another. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 85  The baneful effects of absence of proper coordinati on and harmony among the 
various faculties of body, mind and soul respective ly are obvious. They are all 
around us; only we have lost perception of them owi ng to our present perverse 
associations. Take the case of our village folk. Fr om their childhood upward 
they toil and labour in their fields from morning t ill night like their cattle in the 
midst of whom they live. Their existence is a weary  endless round of 
mechanical drudgery unrelieved by a spark of intell igence or higher graces of 
life. Deprived of all scope for developing their mi nd and soul, they have sunk to 
the level of the beast. Life to them is a sorry bun gle which they muddle 
through anyhow. On the other hand what goes by the name of education in our 
schools and colleges in the cities today is in real ity only intellectual dissipation. 
Intellectual training is there looked upon as somet hing altogether unrelated to 
manual or physical work. But since the body must ha ve some sort of physical 
exercise to keep it in health, they vainly try to a ttain that end by means of 
artificial and otherwise barren system of physical culture which would be 
ridiculous beyond words if the result was not so tr agic. The young man who 
emerges from this system can in no way compete in p hysical endurance with an 
ordinary labourer. The slightest physical exertion gives him a headache; a mild 
exposure to the sun is enough to cause him giddines s. And what is more, all this 
is looked upon as quite 'natural'. As for the facul ties of the heart, they are 
simply allowed to run to seed or to grow anyhow in a wild undisciplined 
manner. The result is moral and spiritual anarchy. And it is regarded as 
something laudable! 
As against this, take the case of a child in whom t he education of the heart is 
attended to from the very beginning. Supposing he i s set to some useful occu-
pation like spinning, carpentry, agriculture, etc.,  for his education and in that 
connection is given a thorough comprehensive knowle dge relating to the theory 
of the various operations that he is to perform and  the use and construction of 
the tools that he would be wielding. He would not o nly develop a fine healthy 
body but also a sound, vigorous intellect that is n ot merely academic but is 
firmly rooted in and is tested from day to day by e xperience. His intellectual 
education would include a knowledge of mathematics and the various sciences Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 86  that are useful for an intelligent and efficient ex ercise of his avocation. If to 
this is added literature by way of recreation, it w ould give him a perfect well-
balanced, all-round education in which the intellec t, the body and the spirit 
have all full play and develop together into a natu ral, harmonious whole. Man is 
neither mere intellect, nor the gross animal body, nor the heart or soul alone. 
A proper and harmonious combination of all the thre e is required for the 
making of the whole man and constitutes the true ec onomics of education.   
H., 8-5-’37, p.104 
 
If we want to impart education best suited to the n eeds of villagers, we should 
take the Vidyapith to the villages. We should conve rt it into a training school in 
order that we might be able to give practical train ing to teachers in terms of 
the needs of villagers. You cannot instruct the tea chers in the needs of villagers 
through a training school in a city. Nor can you so  interest them in the 
condition of villages. To interest city-dwellers in  villages and make them live in 
them is no easy task. I am finding daily confirmati on of this in Segaon. I cannot 
give you the assurance that our year's stay in Sega on has made of us villagers or 
that we have become one with them for the common go od. 
Then as to primary education, my confirmed opinion is that the commencement 
of training by teaching the alphabet and reading an d writing hampers their 
intellectual growth. I would not teach them the alp habet till they have had an 
elementary knowledge of history, geography, mental arithmetic and the art 
(say) of spinning. Through these three I should dev elop their intelligence. 
Question may be asked how intelligence can be devel oped through the  takli  or 
the spinning wheel. It can to a marvellous degree i f it is not taught merely 
mechanically. When you tell a child the reason for each process, when you 
explain the mechanism of the  takli  or the wheel, when you give him the history 
of cotton and its connection with civilization itse lf and take him to the village 
field where it is grown, and teach him to count the  rounds he spins and the 
method of finding the evenness and strength of his yarn, you hold his interest 
and simultaneously train his hands, his eyes and hi s mind. I should give six Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 87  months to this preliminary training. The child is p robably now ready for 
learning how to read the alphabet, and when he is a ble to do so rapidly, he is 
ready to learn simple drawing, and when he has lear nt to draw geometrical 
figures and the figures of the birds etc., he will draw, not scrawl, the figures of 
the alphabet. I can recall the days of my childhood  when I was being taught the 
alphabet. I know what a drag it was. Nobody cared w hy my intellect was 
rusting. I consider writing as a fine art. We kill it by imposing the alphabet on 
little children and making it the beginning of lear ning. Thus we do violence to 
the art of writing and stunt the growth of the chil d when we seek to teach him 
the alphabet before its time.   
H., 5-6-’37, p.130 
 
As to the necessity and value of regarding the teac hing of village handicrafts as 
the pivot and centre of education I have no manner of doubt. The method 
adopted in the institutions in India I do not call education, i.e. drawing out the 
best in man, but a debauchery of the mind. It infor ms the mind anyhow, 
whereas the method of training the mind through vil lage handicrafts from the 
beginning as the central fact would promote the rea l, disciplined development 
of the mind resulting in conservation of the intell ectual energy and indirectly 
also the spiritual.   
H., 5-6-’37, p.131 
 
In my scheme of things the hand will handle tools b efore it draws or traces the 
writing. The eyes will read the pictures of letters  and words as they will know 
other things in life, the ears will catch the names  and meanings of things and 
sentences. The whole training will be natural, resp onsive, and therefore the 
quickest and the cheapest in the land. The children  of my school will therefore 
read much more quickly than they will write. And wh en they write they will not 
produce daubs as I do even now (thanks to my teache rs) but they will trace 
correct letters even as they will trace correct fig ures of the objects –they may 
see. If the schools of my conception ever come into  being, I make bold to say Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 88  that they will vie with the most advanced schools i n quickness, so far as reading 
is concerned, and even writing if it is common grou nd that the writing must be 
correct and not incorrect as now is in the vast maj ority of cases.   
H., 28-8-’37, p.225 
 
The course of primary education should be extended at least to seven years and 
should include the general knowledge gained up to t he matriculation standard 
less English and plus a substantial vocation. 
For the all-round development of boys and girls all  training should so far as 
possible be given through a profit-yielding vocatio n. In other words vocations 
should serve a double purpose—to enable the pupils to pay for his tuition 
through the products of his labour and at the same time to develop the whole 
man or woman in him or her through the vocation lea rnt at school. 
Land, buildings and equipment are not intended to b e covered by the proceeds 
of the pupil's labour. 
All the processes of cotton, wool and silk, commenc ing from gathering, 
cleaning, ginning (in the case of cotton), carding,  spinning, dyeing, sizing, 
warp- making, double-twisting, designing and weavin g, embroidery, tailoring, 
paper-making, cutting, bookbinding, cabinet-making,  toy-making, gar-making 
are undoubted occupations that can easily be.learnt  and handled without much 
capital outlay. 
This primary education should equip boys and girls to earn their bread by the 
State guaranteeing employment in the vocations lear nt or by buying their 
manufactures at prices fixed by the State.   
H., 2-10-’37, p.282 
 
But as a nation we are so backward in education tha t we cannot hope to fulfill 
our obligations to the nation in this respect in th e given time during this 
generation, if the programme is to depend on money.  I have therefore made 
bold, even at the risk of losing ail reputation for  constructive ability, to suggest Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 89  that education should be self-supporting. By educat ion I mean an all-round 
drawing out of the best in child and man—body, mind  and spirit. Literacy is not 
the end of education nor even the beginning. It is only one of the means 
whereby man and woman can be educated. Literacy in itself is no education. I 
would therefore begin the child's education by teac hing it a useful handicraft 
and enabling it to produce from the moment it begin s its training. Thus every 
school can be made self-supporting, the condition b eing that the State takes 
over the manufactures of these schools. 
I hold that the highest development of the mind and  the soul is possible under 
such a system of education. Only every handicraft h as to be taught not merely 
mechanically as is done today but scientifically, i .e. the child should know the 
why and the wherefore of every process. I am not wr iting this without some 
confidence, because it has the backing of experienc e. This method is being 
adopted more or less completely wherever spinning i s being taught to workers. 
I have myself taught sandal-making and even spinnin g on these lines with good 
results. This method does not exclude a knowledge o f history and geography. 
But I find that this is best taught by transmitting  such general information by 
word of mouth. One imparts ten times as much in thi s manner as by reading 
and writing. The signs of the alphabet may be taugh t later when the pupil has 
learnt to distinguish the wheat from the chaff and when he has somewhat 
developed his or her tastes. This is a revolutionar y proposal but it saves 
immense labour and enables a student to acquire in one year what he may take 
much longer to learn. This means all-round economy.  Of course the pupil learns 
mathematics whilst he is learning his handicraft. 
I attach the greatest importance to primary educati on which according to my 
conception should be equal to the present matricula tion less English. If all the 
collegians were all of a sudden to forget their kno wledge, the loss sustained by 
the sudden lapse of the memory of say a few lakhs o f collegians would be as 
nothing compared to the loss that the nation has su stained and is sustaining 
through the ocean of darkness that surrounds three hundred millions. The Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 90  measure of illiteracy is 110 adequate measure of th e prevailing ignorance 
among the millions of villagers. 
I would revolutionize college education and relate it to national necessities. 
There would be degrees for mechanical and other eng ineers. They would be 
attached to the different industries which should p ay for the training of the 
graduates they need. Thus the Tatas would be expect ed to run a college for 
training engineers under the supervision of the Sta te, the mill associations 
would run among them a college for training graduat es whom they need. 
Similarly for the other industries that may be name d. Commerce will have its 
college. There remain arts, medicine and agricultur e. Several private arts 
colleges are today self-supporting. The State would , therefore, cease to run its 
own. Medical colleges would be attached to certifie d hospitals. As they are 
popular among moneyed men they may be expected by v oluntary contributions 
to support medical colleges. And agricultural colle ges to be worthy of the name 
must be self-supporting. I have a painful experienc e of some agricultural gra-
duates. Their knowledge is superficial. They lack p ractical experience. But if 
they had their apprenticeship on farms which are se lf-sustained and answer the 
requirements of the country, they would not have to  gain experience after 
getting their degrees and at the expense of their e mployers.  
H., 31-7-’37, p.197 
 
Given the right kind of teachers, our children will  be taught the dignity of 
labour and learn to regard it as an integral part a nd a means of their 
intellectual growth, and to realize that it is patr iotic to pay for their training 
through their labour. The core of my suggestion is that handicrafts are to be 
taught, not merely for productive works, but for de veloping the intellect of the 
pupils. Surely, if the State takes charge of the ch ildren between seven and 
fourteen, and trains their bodies and minds through  productive labour, the 
public schools must be frauds and teachers idiots, if they cannot become self-
supporting.   
H., 11-9-’37, p.256 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 91   
We have up to now concentrated on stuffing children 's minds with all kinds of 
information, without ever thinking of stimulating a nd developing them. Let us 
now cry a halt and concentrate on educating the chi ld properly through manual 
work, not as a side activity, but as the prime mean s of intellectual training.   
H., 18-9-’37, p.261 
 
In the schools I advocate, boys have all that boys learn in high schools less 
English but plus drill, music, drawing, and, of cou rse, a vocation.   
H., 18-9-’37, p.42 
 
I am a firm believer in the principle of free and c ompulsory primary education 
for India. I also hold that we shall realize this o nly by teaching the children a 
useful vocation and utilizing it as a means for cul tivating their mental, physical 
and spiritual faculties. Let no one consider these economic calculations in 
connection with education as sordid, or out of plac e. There is nothing 
essentially sordid about economic calculations. Tru e economics never militates 
against the highest ethical standard, just as all t rue ethics to be worth its name 
must at the same time be also good economics.   
H., 9-10-’37, p.292 
 
What kind of vocations are the fittest for being ta ught to children in urban 
schools? There is no hard and fast rule about it. B ut my reply is clear. I want to 
resuscitate the villages of India. Today our villag es have become a mere 
appendage to the cities. They exist, as it were, to  be exploited by the latter 
and depend on the latter's sufferance. This is unna tural. It is only when the 
cities realize the duty of making an adequate retur n to the villages for the 
strength and sustenance which they derive from them , instead of selfishly 
exploiting them, that a healthy and moral relations hip between the two will 
spring up. And if the city children are to play the ir part in this great and noble Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 92  work of social reconstruction, the vocations throug h which they are to receive 
their education ought to be directly related to the  requirements of the villages. 
So far as I can see the various processes of cotton  manufacture from ginning 
and cleaning of cotton to the spinning of yarn, ans wer this test as nothing else 
does. Even today cotton is grown in the villages an d is ginned and spun and 
converted into cloth in the cities. But the chain o f processes which cotton 
undergoes in the mills from the beginning to the en d constitutes a huge tragedy 
of waste in men, materials and mechanical power. 
My plan to impart primary education through the med ium of village handicrafts 
like spinning and carding etc. is thus conceived as  the spear-head of a silent 
social revolution fraught with the most far- reachi ng consequences. It will 
provide a healthy and moral basis of relationship b etween the city and the 
village and thus go a long way toward eradicating s ome of the worst evils of the 
present social insecurity and poisoned relationship  between the classes. It will 
check the progressive decay of our villages and lay  the foundation of a juster 
social order in which there is no unnatural divisio n between the 'haves' and 
'have-nots' and everybody is assured of a living wa ge and the right to freedom. 
And all this would be accomplished without the horr ors of a bloody class war or 
a colossal capital expenditure such as would be inv olved in the mechanization 
of a vast continent like India. Nor would it entail  a helpless dependence on 
foreign imported machinery or technical skill. Last ly, by obviating the necessity 
for highly specialized talent, it would place the d estiny of the masses, as it 
were, in their own hands. But who will bell the cat ? Will the city-folk listen to 
me at all? Or, will mine remain a mere cry in the w ilderness? Replies to these 
and similar questions will depend more on lovers of  education living in cities 
than on me.   
H., 9-10-’37, p.293 
 
If such education is given, the direct result will be that it will be self-
supporting. But the test of success is not its self -supporting character, but that 
the whole man has been drawn out through the teachi ng of the handicraft in a Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 93  scientific manner. In fact I would reject a teacher  who would promise to make 
it self-supporting under any circumstances. The sel f-supporting part will be the 
logical corollary of the fact that the pupil has le arnt the use of every one of his 
faculties. If a boy who works at a handicraft for t hree hours a day will surely 
earn his keep, how much more a boy who adds to the work a development of 
his mind and soul! 
H., 11-6-’38, p.143 
 
This basic education has grown out of the atmospher e surrounding us in the 
country and is in response to it. It is, therefore,  designed to cope with that 
atmosphere. This atmosphere pervades India's seven hundred thousand villages 
and its millions of inhabitants. Forget them and yo u forget India. India is not to 
be found in her cities. It is in her innumerable vi llages. 
The following are the fundamentals of basic educati on: 
1.  All education to be true must be self- supporting, that is to say, in the 
end it will pay its expenses excepting the capital which will remain 
intact. 
2.  In it the cunning of the hand will be utilized even  up to the final stage, 
that is to say, hands of the pupils will be skilful ly working at some 
industry for some period during the day. 
3.  All education must be imparted through the medium o f the provincial 
language. 
4.  In this there is no room for giving sectional relig ious training. 
Fundamental universal ethics will have full scope. 
5.  This education, whether it is confined to children or adults, male or 
female, will find its way to the homes of the pupil s. 
6.  Since millions of students receiving this education  will consider 
themselves as of the whole of India, they must lear n an inter-provincial 
language. This common inter-provincial speech can o nly be Hindustani 
written in Nagari or Urdu script. Therefore, pupils  have to master both 
the scripts.   Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 94  H., 2-11-’47, p.393 
 
II 
All instruction must be linked with some basic craf t. When you are imparting 
knowledge to a child of 7 or 10 through the medium of an industry, you should, 
to begin with, exclude all those subjects which can not be linked with the craft. 
By doing so from day to day you will discover ways and means of linking with 
the craft many things which you had excluded in the  beginning. You will save 
your own energy and the pupil's if you follow this process of exclusion to begin 
with. We have today no books to go by, no precedent s to guide us. Therefore 
we have to go slow. The main thing is that the teac her should retain his 
freshness of mind. If you come across something tha t you cannot correlate with 
the craft, do not fret over it and get disheartened . Leave it, and go ahead with 
the subjects that you can correlate. May be another  teacher will hit upon the 
right way and show how it can be correlated. And wh en you have pooled the 
experience of many, you will have books to guide yo u, so that the work of those 
who follow you will become easier. 
How long, you will ask, are we to go on with this p rocess of exclusion. My reply 
is, for the whole life-time. At the end you will fi nd that you have included 
many things that you have excluded at first, that p ractically all that was worth 
including has been included, and whatever you have been obliged to exclude 
till the end was something very superficial that de served exclusion. This has 
been my experience of life. I would not have been a ble to do many things that I 
have done if I had not excluded an equal number. 
Our education has got to be revolutionized. The bra in must be educated 
through the hand. If I were a poet, I could write p oetry on the possibilities of 
the five fingers. Why should you think that the min d is everything and the 
hands and feet nothing? Those who do not train thei r hands, who go through the 
ordinary rut of education, lack 'music' in their li fe. All their faculties are not 
trained. Mere book knowledge does not interest the child so as to hold his 
attention fully. The brain gets weary of mere words , and the child's mind Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 95  begins to wander. The hand does the things it ought  not to do, the eye sees the 
things it ought not to see, the ear hears the thing s it ought not to hear, and 
they do not do, see, or hear, respectively, what th ey ought to. They are not 
taught to make the right choice and so their educat ion often proves their ruin. 
An education which does not teach us to discriminat e between good and bad, 
to assimilate the one and eschew the other is a mis nomer. 
The old idea Was to add a handicraft to the ordinar y curriculum of education 
followed in the schools. That is to say, the craft was to be taken in hand wholly 
separately from education. To me that seems a fatal  mistake. The teacher must 
learn the craft and correlate his knowledge to the craft, so that he will impart 
all that knowledge to his pupils through the medium  of the particular craft that 
he chooses. 
Take the instance of spinning. Unless I know arithm etic I cannot report how 
many yards of yarn I have produced on the  takli , or how many standard rounds 
it will make or what is the count of the yarn that I have spun. I must learn 
figures to be able to do so, and I also must learn addition and subtraction and 
multiplication and division. In dealing with compli cated sums I shall have to use 
symbols and so get my algebra. Even here, I would i nsist on the use of 
Hindustani letters instead of Roman. 
Take geometry next. What can be a better demonstrat ion of a circle than the 
disc of the  takli ? I can teach all about the circle in this way, witho ut- even 
mentioning the name of Euclid. 
Again, you may ask how I can teach my child geograp hy and history through 
spinning. Some time ago I came across a book called  Cotton—The Story of 
Mankind.  It thrilled me. It read like a romance. It began w ith the history of 
ancient times, how and when cotton was first grown,  the stages of its develop-
ment, the cotton trade between the different countr ies and so on. As I mention 
the different countries to the child, I shall natur ally tell him something about 
the history and geography of these countries. Under  whose reign the different 
commercial treaties were signed during the differen t periods? Why has cotton 
to be imported by some countries and cloth by other s? Why can every country Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 96  not grow the cotton it requires? That will lead me into economics and elements 
of agriculture. I shall teach him to know the diffe rent varieties of cotton, in 
what kind of soil they grow, how to grow them, from  where to get them, and so 
on. Thus  takli  spinning leads me into the whole history of the Ea st India 
Company, what brought them here, how they destroyed  our spinning industry, 
how the economic motive that brought them to India led them later to 
entertain political aspirations, how it became a ca usative factor in the downfall 
of the Moghuls and the Marathas, in the establishme nt of the English Raj 5 and 
then again in the awakening of the masses in our ti mes. There is thus no end to 
the educative possibilities of this new scheme. And  how much quicker the child 
will learn all that, without putting an unnecessary  tax on his mind and memory. 
Let me further elaborate the idea. Just as a biolog ist, in order to become a 
good biologist must learn many other sciences besid es biology, basic education, 
if it is treated as a science, takes us into interm inable channels of learning. To 
extend the example of the  takli , a pupil teacher, who rivets his attention not 
merely on the mechanical process of spinning, which  of course he must master, 
but on the spirit of the thing, will concentrate on  the  takli and its various 
aspects. He will ask himself why the takli  is made out of a brass disc and has a 
steel spindle. The original  takli  had its disc made anyhow. The still more 
primitive  takli  consisted of a wooden spindle with a disc of slate  or clay. The  
takli  has been developed scientifically, and there is a reason for making the 
disc out of brass and the spindle out of steel. He must find out that reason. 
Then, the teacher must ask himself why the disc has  that particular diameter, 
no more and no less. When he has solved these quest ions satisfactorily and has 
gone into the mathematics of the thing, your pupil becomes a good engineer. 
The  takli  becomes his Kamadhenu—the 'cow of plenty'. There i s no limit to the 
possibilities of knowledge that can be imparted thr ough this medium. It will be 
limited only by the energy and conviction with whic h you work. You have been 
here for three weeks. You will have spent them usef ully if it has enabled you to 
take to this scheme seriously, so that you will say  to yourself, 'I shall either do 
or die'. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 97  I am elaborating the instance of spinning because I  know it. If I were a 
carpenter, I would teach my child all these things through carpentry, or 
through cardboard work if I were a worker in cardbo ard. 
What we need is educationists with originality, fir ed with true zeal, who will 
think out from day to day what they are going to te ach their pupils. The 
teacher cannot get this knowledge through musty vol umes. He has to use his 
own faculties of observation and thinking and impar t his knowledge to the 
children through his lips, with the help of a craft . This means a revolution in 
the method of teaching, a revolution in the teacher 's outlook. Up till now you 
have been guided by inspectors' reports. You wanted  to do what the inspector 
might like so that you might get more money yet for  your institutions or higher 
salaries for yourselves. But the new teacher will n ot care for all that. He will 
say, 'I have done my duty by my pupil if I have mad e him a better man and in 
doing so I have used all my resources. That is enou gh for me.'   
H., 18-2-’39, p.14-15 
 
III 
This education is meant to transform village childr en into model villagers. It is 
principally designed for them. The inspiration for it -has come from the 
villages. Congressmen who want to build up the stru cture of Swaraj from its 
very foundation dare not neglect the children. Fore ign rule has unconsciously, 
though none the less surely, begun with the childre n in the field of education. 
Primary education is a farce designed without regar d to the wants of the India 
of the villages and for that matter even of the cit ies. Basic education links the 
children, whether of the cities or the villages, to  all that is best and lasting in 
India. It develops both the body and the mind, and keeps the child rooted to 
the soil with a glorious vision of the future in th e realization of which he or she 
begins to take his or her share from the very comme ncement of his or her 
career in school.   
Constructive Programmes, 1961, p.18 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 98   
CHAPTER 14 
AGRICULTURE AND CATTLE WELFARE — I 
Kisan 
Our villagers depend on agriculture and cattle for ploughing. I am rather 
ignorant in this respect for I have no personal exp erience. But there is not a 
single village where we have no agriculture or catt le. There is the buffalo, but 
except in Konkan and a few other places it is not m uch used for agriculture. 
Our worker will have to keep a careful eye on the c attle wealth of his village. If 
we cannot use this wealth properly India is doomed to disaster and we also 
shall perish. For these animals will then, as in th e West, become an economic 
burden to us and we shall have no option before us save killing them.  
Khadi - Why and How, 1959,p.162 
 
From the very beginning it has been my firm convict ion that agriculture 
provides the only unfailing and perennial support t o the people of this country. 
We should take it up and see how far we can go with  it as basis. I would not at 
all mind if some of our young men serve the country  by training themselves as 
experts in agriculture in the place of Khadi. The t ime has now come for us to 
pay attention to agriculture. Till now I believed t hat improvement in 
agriculture was impossible unless we had the admini stration of the State in our 
own hands. My views on this are now undergoing modi fication. I feel that we 
can bring about improvements even under the present  conditions, so that the 
cultivator may be able to make some income for hims elf from the land even 
after paying his taxes. Jawaharlal says that any ex tra income to the peasant 
through the improvement of agriculture - will be sw allowed up under one 
pretext or the other by the alien Government. But I  feel that even if it were so, 
it should not hinder us from acquiring and spreadin g as much knowledge about 
agriculture as possible. It may be that the Governm ent will take away any 
additional income that may come to the villagers th rough improvements in Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 99  agriculture. If they do, we can protest and teach t he people to resist and make 
it clear to the Government that it cannot loot us i n this manner. I therefore 
hold that we must hereafter find workers who will i nterest themselves in 
agriculture. 
I am, therefore, thinking of ways and means of impr oving the condition of the 
people through a rehabilitation of agriculture, cat tle-breeding and all other 
village industries. My problem will be solved, if I  succeed even in half a dozen 
villages, for as is the part so is the whole.   
Khadi- Why and How, 1959, p.181 
 
Bread labour is a veritable blessing to one who wou ld observe non-violence, 
worship truth, and make the observance of Brahmacha rya a natural act. This 
labour can truly be related to agriculture alone. B ut at present at any rate, 
everybody is not in a position to take to it. A per son can therefore spin or 
weave, or take up carpentry or smithery, instead of  tilling the soil always 
regarding agriculture however to be the ideal.   
From Yeravda Mandir,1957, p.35-37 
 
Years ago I read a poem in which the peasant is des cribed as the father of the 
world. If God is the Provider, the cultivator is Hi s hand. What are we going to 
do to discharge the debt we owe to him? So long we have only lived on the 
sweat of his brow. We should have begun with the so il but we could not do so. 
The fault is partly mine. 
There were people, who said that no basic reform in  agriculture was possible, 
without political power. They dreamt in terms of in dustrialization of agriculture 
by large-scale application of steam and electricity . Trading in soil fertility for 
the sake of quick returns would prove to be a disas trous, shortsighted policy. It 
would result in virtual depletion of the soil. Good  earth called for the sweat of 
one's brow to yield the bread of life. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 100  People might criticize that approach as being slow and unprogressive. I did not 
hold out promise of dramatic results. Nevertheless,  it held the key to the 
prosperity of both the soil and the inhabitants liv ing on it. Healthy, nourishing 
food was the  alpha and  omega  of rural economy. The bulk of a peasant's family 
budget goes to feed him and his family. All other t hings come afterwards. Let 
the tiller of the soil be well fed. Let him have a sufficiency of fresh, pure milk 
and ghee and oil, fish, eggs, and meat if he is a n on-vegetarian. What would 
fine clothes, for instance, avail him, if he is ill  nourished and underfed? The 
question of drinking-water supply and other things would come next. A 
consideration of these questions would naturally in volve such issues, as the 
place of plough cattle in the economy of agricultur e as against the tractor 
plough and power irrigation etc. and thus, bit by b it, the whole picture of rural 
economy would emerge before them. In this picture c ities would take their 
natural place and not appear as unnatural, congeste d spots or boils on the body 
politic as they were today. We stand today in dange r of forgetting the use of 
our hands. To forget how to dig the earth and tend the soil is to forget 
ourselves. To think that your occupation of the min isterial chair will be 
vindicated if you serve the cities only, would be t o forget that India really 
resides in her 7,00,000 village units. What would i t profit a man if he gained 
the world but lost his soul into the bargain?   
H., 25-8-’46, p.281-82 
 
The moment you talk to them [the Indian peasants] a nd they begin to speak, 
you will find wisdom drops from their lips. Behind the crude exterior you will 
find a deep reservoir of spirituality. I call this culture—you will not find such a 
thing in the West. You try to engage a European pea sant in conversation and 
you will find that he is uninterested in things spi ritual.   
H., 28-1-’39, p.439 
 
In the case of the Indian villager, an age-old cult ure is hidden under an 
encrustment of crudeness. Take away the encrustatio n, remove his chronic Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 101  poverty and his illiteracy and you have the finest specimen of what a cultured, 
cultivated, free citizen should be.   
H., 28-1-’39, p.439 
 
We have to teach them how to economize time, health  and money. Lionel 
Curtis described our villages as dung-heaps. We hav e to turn them into model 
villages. Our village-folk do not get fresh air tho ugh they are surrounded by 
fresh air; they don't get fresh food though they ar e surrounded by the freshest 
foods. I am talking like a missionary in this matte r of food, because my mission 
is to make villages a thing of beauty.  
H., 1-3-’35, p.21 
 
We have to tackle the triple malady which holds our  villages fast in its grip: (i) 
want of corporate sanitation; (ii) deficient diet; (iii) inertia... They are not 
interested in their own welfare. They don't appreci ate modern sanitary 
methods. They don't want to exert themselves beyond  scratching their farms or 
doing such labour as they are used to. These diffic ulties are real and serious. 
But they must not baffle us. We must have an unquen chable faith in our 
mission. We must be patient with the people. We are  ourselves novices in 
village work. We have to deal with a chronic diseas e. Patience and 
perseverance, if we have them, overcome mountains o f difficulties. We are like 
nurses who may not leave their patients because the y are reported to have an 
incurable disease.   
H., 16-5-’36, p.111 
 
The greatest education in the villages consists in the villagers being taught or 
induced to work methodically and profitably all the  year round whether it be on 
the land or at industries connected with the villag es.   
H., 6-3-’37, p.29 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 102  I make bold to say that in spite of the crudeness w hich one sees among the 
villagers, class considered, in all that is good in  human nature they compare 
favourably with any villagers in the world. This te stimony is borne out by the 
majority of travellers who from the time of Huen Ts ang down to the present 
times have recorded their impressions. The innate c ulture that the villages of 
India show, the art which one sees in the homes of the poor, the restraint with 
which the villagers conduct themselves, are surely due to the religion that has 
bound them together from time immemorial.   
H., 6-3-’37, p.29 
 
The Kisan or the peasant, whether as a landless lab ourer or a labouring 
proprietor, comes first. He is the salt of the eart h which rightly belongs or 
should belong to him, not to the absentee landlord or Zamindar. But in the non-
violent way the labourer cannot forcibly eject the absentee landlord. He has so 
to work as to make it impossible for the landlord t o exploit him. Closest co-
operation amongst the peasants is absolutely necess ary. To this end, special 
organizing bodies or committees should be formed wh ere there are none and 
those already in existence should be reformed where  necessary. The Kisans are 
for the most part illiterate. Both adults and young  persons of school-going age 
should be educated. This applies to men and women. Where they are landless 
labourers their wages should be brought to a level that would ensure a decent 
living which should mean balanced food, dwelling ho uses and clothing, which 
should satisfy health requirements.   
The Bombay Chronicle,28-10-’44 
 
If I have my say, our Governor-General and our Prem ier would be drawn from 
the Kisans. In my childhood I had learnt in the sch ool books that the Kisans are 
heirs to the kingdom of the earth. This applies to those who labour on the land 
and eat from what they produce. Such Kisans to be w orthy of high offices might 
be illiterate, provided they have robust common sen se, great personal bravery, 
unimpeachable integrity and patriotism above suspic ion. As real producers of Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 103  wealth, they are verily the masters while we have e nslaved them. It has been 
suggested to me that the higher secretariat, posts should also be manned by 
Kisans. I would endorse this suggestion provided th ey are suitable and have 
knowledge of the work expected of them. When Kisans  of this type are 
forthcoming I would publicly ask ministers and othe rs to make room for them.   
H., 8-2-’48, p.21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 104   
CHAPTER 15 
AGRICULTURE AND CATTLE WELFARE — II 
Land problem ownership of land 
The Kisan is the salt of the earth which rightly be longs or should belong to him, 
not to the absentee landlord or zamindar.  
The Bombay Chronicle,28-10-44’ 
 
Land and all property is his who will work it. Unfo rtunately the workers are or 
have been kept ignorant of this simple fact.   
H., 2-1-’37, p.375 
 
I believe that the land you cultivate should belong  to you, but it cannot be your 
own all at once, you cannot force it from the zamin dars. Non-violence is the 
only way, consciousness of your own power is the on ly way. 
H., 20-5-’39, p.133 
  
No man should have more land than he needs for dign ified sustenance. Who can 
dispute the fact that the grinding poverty of the m asses is due to their having 
no land that they can call their own? 
But it must be realized that the reform cannot be r ushed. If it is to be brought 
about by non-violent means, it can only be done by education, both of the 
haves and the have-nots. The former should be assur ed that there never will be 
force used against them. The have-nots must be educ ated to know that no one 
can really compel them to do anything against their  will, and that they can 
secure their freedom by learning the art of non-vio lence, i.e. self- suffering.   
H., 20-4-’40, p.97 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 105   
Landlord and Tenant 
I would tell you that ownership of your land belong s as much to the ryots as to 
you.   
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 2-8-’34 
 
I do not believe that the capitalists and the landl ords are all exploiters by an 
inherent necessity, or that there is a basic or irr econcilable antagonism 
between their interests and those of the masses. . . . What is needed is not the 
extinction of landlords and capitalists, but a tran sformation of the existing 
relationship between them and the masses into somet hing healthier and purer.   
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 3-8-’34 
 
My objective is to reach your heart and convert you  so that you may hold all 
your private property in trust for your tenants and  use it primarily for their 
welfare. I am aware of the fact that within the ran ks of the Congress a new 
party, called the Socialist Party is coming into be ing, and I cannot say what 
would happen if that party succeeds in carrying the  Congress with it. But I am 
quite clear that if strictly honest and unchallenge able referendum of our 
millions were to be taken, they would not vote for the wholesale expropriation 
of the propertied classes. I am working for the co- operation and coordination of 
capital and labour, of landlord and tenant.  
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 2-8-’34 
 
But I must utter a note of warning. I have always t old mill-owners that they are 
not exclusive owners of mills and workmen are equal  sharers in ownership. In 
the same way, I would tell you that ownership of yo ur land belongs as much to 
the ryots as to you, and you may not squander your gains in luxurious or 
extravagant living, but must use them for the well- being of ryots. Once you 
make your ryots experience a sense of kinship with you and a sense of security Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 106  that their interests as members of a family will ne ver suffer at your hands, you 
may be sure that there cannot be a clash between yo u and them and no class 
war.   
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 2-8-’34 
 
I do not want to destroy the zamindar, but neither do I feel that the zamindar 
is inevitable. I expect to convert the zamindars an d other capitalists by the 
non-violent method, and therefore there is for me n othing like an inevitability 
of class conflict. For it is an essential part of n on-violence to go along the line 
of least resistance. The moment the cultivators of the soil realize their power, 
the zamindari evil will be sterilized. What can the  poor zamindar do when they 
say that they will simply not work the land unless they are paid enough to feed 
and clothe and educate themselves and their childre n in a decent manner. In 
reality the toiler is the owner of what he produces . If the toilers intelligently 
combine, they will become an irresistible power. Th at is how I do not see the 
necessity of class conflict. If I thought it inevit able, I should not hesitate to 
preach it and teach it.   
H., 5-12-’36, p.338 
 
A model zamindar would at once reduce much of the b urden the ryot is now 
bearing. He would come in intimate touch with the r yots and know their wants 
and inject hope into them in the place of despair w hich is killing the very life 
out of them. He will not be satisfied with the ryot s' ignorance of the laws of 
sanitation and hygiene. He will reduce himself to p overty in order that the ryot 
may have the necessaries of life. He will study the  economic condition of the 
ryots under his care, establish schools in which he  will educate his own children 
side by side with those of the ryots. He will purif y the village well and the 
village tank. He will teach the ryot to sweep his r oads and clean his latrines by 
himself doing this necessary labour. He will throw open without reserve his own 
gardens for the unrestricted use of the ryot. He wi ll use as hospital, school, or 
the like most of the unnecessary buildings which he  keeps for his pleasure. If Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 107  only the capitalist class will read the signs of th e times, revise their notions of 
God-given right to all they possess, in an incredib ly short space of time the 
seven hundred thousand dung-heaps which today pass muster as villages can be 
turned into abodes of peace, health and comfort. I am convinced that the 
capitalist, if he follows the Samurai of Japan, has  nothing really to lose and 
everything to gain. There is no other choice than b etween voluntary surrender 
on the part of the capitalist of superfluities and consequent acquisition of the 
real happiness of all on the one hand, and on the o ther, the impending chaos 
into which, if the capitalist does not wake up beti mes, awakened but ignorant, 
famishing millions will plunge the country and whic h not even the armed force 
that a powerful government can bring into play can avert.   
Y.I., 5-12-’29, p.396 
 
The zamindars would do well to take the time by the  forelock. Let them cease 
to be mere rent collectors. They should become trus tees and trusted friends of 
their tenants. They should limit their privy purse.  Let them forgo the 
questionable perquisites they take from the tenants  in the shape of forced gifts 
on marriage, and other occasions, or  nazrana on transfer of holdings from one 
Kisan to another or on restoration to the same Kisa n after eviction for non-
payment of rent. They should give them fixity of te nure, take a lively interest 
in their welfare, provide well-managed schools for their children, night-schools 
for adults, hospitals and dispensaries for the sick , look after the sanitation of 
villages and in a variety of ways make them feel th at they, the zamindars, are 
their true friends taking only a fixed commission f or their manifold services. In 
short they must justify their position. They should  trust Congressmen. They may 
themselves become Congressmen and know that the Con gress is a bridge bet-
ween the people and the Government. All who have th e true welfare of the 
people at heart can harness the services of the Con gress. Congressmen will on 
their part see to it that Kisans scrupulously fulfi ll their obligations to the 
zamindars. I mean not necessarily the statutory, bu t the obligations which they 
have themselves admitted to be just. They must reje ct the doctrine that their Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 108  holdings are absolutely theirs to the exclusion of the zamindars. They are or 
should be members of a joint family in which the za mindar is the head guarding 
their rights against encroachment. Whatever the law  may be, the zamindari to 
be defensible must approach the conditions of a joi nt family. 
I like the ideal of Rama and Janaka. They owned not hing against the people. 
Everything including themselves belonged to the peo ple. They lived in their 
midst a life not above theirs, but in correspondenc e with theirs. But these may 
not be regarded as historical personages. Then let us take the example of the 
great Caliph Omar. Though he was monarch of a vast realm created by his great 
genius and amazing industry, he lived the life of a  pauper and never considered 
himself owner of the vast treasures that lay at his  feet. He was a terror to 
those officials who squandered people's money in lu xuries.   
Y.I., 28-5-’31, p.120 
 
To the landlords I say that if what is said against  them is true, I would warn 
them that their days are numbered. They could no lo nger continue as lords and 
masters. They have a bright future if they become t he trustees of the poor 
Kisans. He has in mind not trustees in name but in reality. Such trustees WDuld 
take nothing for themselves that their labour and c are did not entitle them to. 
Then they would find that no law would be able to t ouch them. The Kisans 
would be their friends.   
H., 4-5-’47, p.134 
 
It can be asked whether the present Rajas and other s can be expected to 
become trustees of the poor. If they do not become trustees of their own 
accord, force of circumstances will compel the refo rm unless they court utter 
destruction. When Panchayat Raj is established, pub lic opinion will do what 
violence can never do. The present power of the zam indars, the capitalists and 
the Rajas can hold sway only so long as the common people do not realize their 
own strength. If the people non-co- operate with th e evil of zamindari or Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 109  capitalism, it must die of inanition. In Panchayat Raj only the Panchayat will be 
obeyed and the Panchayat can only work through the laws of their making.   
H., 1-6-’47, p.172 
 
Real socialism has been handed down to us by our an cestors who taught: 'All 
land belongs to Gopal, where then is the boundary l ine? Man is the maker of 
that line and he can therefore unmake it.' Gopal li terally means shepherd; it 
also means God. In modern language it means the Sta te, i. e. the People. That 
the land today does not belong to the people is too  true. But the fault is not in 
the teaching. It is in us who have not lived up to it. 
I have no doubt that we can make as good an approac h to it as is possible for 
any nation, not excluding Russia, and that without violence. The most effective 
substitute for violent dispossession is the wheel w ith all its implications. Land 
and all property is his who will work it. Unfortuna tely the workers are or have 
been kept ignorant of this simple fact.   
H., 2-1-’37, p.375 
 
In the non-violent order of the future, the land wo uld belong to the State, for 
had it not been said 'sabhi bhumi Gopalki '? Under such dispensation, there 
would be no waste of talents and labour. This would  be impossible through 
violent means. It was therefore a truism to say tha t the utter ruin of the 
landowner brought about through violence would also  involve the ruin of the 
labourers in the end. If the landowners, therefore,  acted wisely, no party 
would lose.   
H., 9-3-’47, p.58 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 110   
CHAPTER 16 
AGRICULTURE AND CATTLE WELFARE — III  
Co-operation 
The most important question for consideration... wa s whether cow farming 
should be in the hands of individuals or done colle ctively. I myself had no 
hesitation in saying that she could never be saved by individual farming. Her 
salvation, and with her that of buffalo, could only  be brought about by 
collective endeavour. It is quite impossible for an  individual farmer to look 
after the welfare of his cattle in his own home in a proper and scientific man-
ner. Amongst other causes lack of collective effort  has been a principal cause 
of the deterioration of the cow and hence of cattle  in general. 
The world today is moving towards the ideal of coll ective or co-operative effort 
in every department of life. Much in this line has been and is being ac-
complished. It has come into our country also, but in such a distorted form that 
our poor have not been able to reap its benefits.  Pari Passu  with the increase in 
our population land holdings of the average farmer are daily decreasing. 
Moreover what the individual possesses is often fra gmentary. For such farmers 
to keep cattle in their homes is a suicidal policy;  and yet this is their condition 
today. Those who give the first place to economics and pay scant attention to 
religious, ethical or humanitarian considerations p roclaim from the housetops 
that the farmer is being devoured by his cattle due  to the cost of their feed 
which is out of all proportion to what they yield. They say it is folly not to 
slaughter wholesale all useless animals. 
What then should be done by humanitarians is the qu estion. The answer 
obviously is to find a way whereby we may not only save the lives of our cattle 
but also see that they do not become a burden. I am  sure that co-operative 
effort can help us in a large measure. 
The following comparison may be helpful: Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 111  1.  Under the collective system no farmer can keep catt le in his house as he 
does today. They foul the air, and dirty the surrou ndings. There is neither 
intelligence nor humanitarianism in living with ani mals. Man was not 
meant to do so. The space taken up by the cattle to day would be spared to 
the farmer and his family, if the collective system  were adopted. 
2.  As the number of cattle increases, life becomes imp ossible for the farmer 
in his home. Hence he is obliged to sell the calves  and kill the male 
buffaloes or else turn them out to starve and die. This inhumanity would 
be averted, if the care of cattle were undertaken o n a co-operative basis. 
3.  Collective cattle farming would ensure the supply o f veterinary treatment 
to animals when they are ill. No ordinary farmer ca n afford this on his 
own. 
4.  Similarly one selected bull can be easily kept for the need of several cows 
under the collective system. This is impossible oth erwise except for 
charity.  
5.  Common grazing ground or land for exercising the an imals will be easily 
available under the co-operative system, whereas to day generally there is 
nothing of the kind for individual farmers. 
6.  The expense on fodder will be comparatively far les s under the collective 
system. 
7.  The sale of milk at good prices will be greatly fac ilitated, and there will be 
no need or temptation for the farmer to adulterate it as he does as an 
individual. 
8.  It is impossible to carry out tests of the fitness of every head of cattle 
individually, but this could easily be done for the  cattle of a whole village 
and would thus make it easier to improve the breed.  
9.  The foregoing advantages should be sufficient argum ent in favour of co-
operative farming. The strongest argument in its fa vour is that the indi-
vidualistic system has been the means of making our  own conditions as 
well as that of our cattle pitiable. We can only sa ve ourselves and them by 
making this essential change. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 112  I firmly believe too that we shall not derive the f ull benefits of agriculture until 
we take to co-operative farming. Does it not stand to reason that it is far 
better for a hundred families in a village to culti vate their lands collectively 
and divide the income therefrom than to divide the land anyhow into a hundred 
portions? And what applied to land applies equally to cattle. 
It is quite another matter that it may be difficult  to convert people to adopt 
this way of life straightaway. The straight and nar row road is always hard to 
traverse. Every step in the programme of cow servic e is strewn with thorny 
problems. But only by surmounting difficulties can we hope to make the path 
easier. My purpose for the time being is to show th e great superiority of 
collective cattle farming over the individual effor t. I hold further that the 
latter is wrong and the former only is right. In re ality even the individual can 
only safeguard his independence through co-operatio n. In cattle farming the 
individual effort has led to selfishness and inhuma nity, whereas the collective 
effort can abate both the evils, if it does not rem ove them altogether.  
H., 15-2-’42, p.39 
 
'Should peasants pool together their land and divid e the crop in proportion to 
the area of the fields they hold?' 
My notion of co-operation is that the land would be  held in co-operation by the 
owners and tilled and cultivated also in co-operati on. This would cause a saving 
of labour, capital, tools, etc. The owners would wo rk in co-operation and own 
capital, tools, animals, seeds etc. in co-operation . Co- operative farming of my 
conception would change the face of the land and ba nish poverty and idleness 
from their midst. All this is only possible if peop le become friends of one 
another and as one family. When that happy event ta kes place there would be 
no ugly sore in the form of a communal problem.   
H., 9-3-’47, p.59 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 113  The system of co-operation is far more necessary fo r the agriculturists. The 
land belongs to the State; therefore, it yields the  largest return when it is 
worked co-operatively. 
Let it be remembered that co-operation should be ba sed on strict non-violence. 
There is no such thing as success of violent co-ope ration. Hitler was a forcible 
example of the latter. He also talked vainly of co- operation which was forced 
upon the people and everyone knew where Germany had  been led as a result. 
It would be a sad thing if India also tries to buil d up the new society based on 
co-operation by means of violence. Good brought abo ut through force des-
troyed individuality. Only when the change is effec ted through the persuasive 
power of non-violent non-co-operation, i.e. love, c ould the foundation of 
individuality be preserved, and real, abiding progr ess be assured for the world.   
H., 9-3-’47, p.59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 114   
CHAPTER 17 
AGRICULTURE AND CATTLE WELFARE—IV 
MANURE 
Compost Manure 
An All India Compost Conference was held in New Del hi during the month (of 
December 1947) to consider the question of compost development on the 
widest scale possible. It was the conception of Shr imati Mirabehn and was 
presided over by Dr. Rajendraprasad. Sardar Datar S ingh, Dr. Acharya and other 
eminent men in the line took part in it. Several im portant resolutions were 
passed by it on schemes for towns and villages. A s ub-committee consisting of 
Shrimati Mirabehn, Shri Shivakumar Sharma, Dr. B. N . Lai and Dr. K. G. Joshi 
(with Dr. B. N. Lai as convener) was appointed to p repare a skeleton scheme 
for the provinces. The resolutions emphasized the n ecessity of "the agricultural 
utilization of town sewage, sullage and sludge, the  utilization of the by-
products of the slaughter house and other trade was tes (for example, wool 
waste, mill waste, leather waste, etc.) and for the  composting of other 
materials like water-hyacinth, cane-trasb, press-mu d, forest leaves etc." 
These resolutions are good and useful if they do no t remain merely on paper. 
The chief thing is whether they would be reduced to  practice throughout India. 
To do so would tax the resources of many Mirabehns.  Given the willing co-
operation of the masses of India, this country can not only drive out the 
shortage of food, but can provide India with more t han enough. This organic 
manure ever enriches, never impoverishes the soil. The daily waste, judiciously 
composted, returns to the soil in the form of golde n manure causing a saving of 
millions of rupees and increasing manifold, the tot al yield of grains and pulses. 
In addition, the judicious use of waste keeps the s urroundings clean. And 
cleanliness is not only next to godliness, it promo tes health.  
H., 28-12-’47, p.484 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 115  One potent way of increasing production is proper m anuring. Artificial manures, 
I am told, are harmful to the soil. The compost man ure emit no bad odour. It 
would save lakhs of rupees and also increase the fe rtility of the soil without 
exhausting it.   
H., 28-12-’47, p.488 
 
Manure Pits 
[Generally agreeing with Mr. Bravne's suggestions r egarding the need for pulverizing 
manure pits in villages, but at the same time diffe ring from him in his view that the pits 
should be six feet wide and six feet deep, Gandhiji  wrote as under:] 
I know that the pits such as Mr. Brayne suggests ar e generally recommended. In 
my opinion, however, superficial burial recommended  by Poore is more 
scientific and more remunerative. The cost of diggi ng is lessened and that of 
removal avoided altogether or certainly lessened. A dd to this the fact that the 
excreta are turned into manure in almost a week's t ime, for the reason that the 
bacteria, which live within six or nine inches of t he surface of the earth, and 
the air and the rays of the sun, act upon the excre ta and turn them into sweet 
manure much more quickly than when the refuse is bu ried deep. 
But the chief thing to remember is not the various methods of disposing of 
refuse, so much as the necessity of burying all the  refuse for the double 
purpose of promoting the villagers' health and thei r material condition, through 
the better yield of their crops which the manure mu st produce. It should be 
remembered that organic rubbish other than excreta must be separately 
buried.   
H., 1-3-’35, p.20 
 
Night-soil as Manure 
G. I. Fowler states, in his  Wealth and Waste  that a proper disposal of human 
excreta would realize Rs. 2 per head per year. In t he vast majority of cases, all 
this rich manure is being wasted and disease invite d. He quotes Prof. Brultini, Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 116  from his volume The Use of Waste Materials , who says that "nitrogen derived 
from the 282,000 residents of Delhi is sufficient t o fertilize a minimum of 
10,000 and a maximum of 95,000 acres." Because we d o not know how to treat 
our scavengers, Delhi of ancient fame has pestilent ial spots of which we have 
to feel ashamed. If we all become scavengers, we wo uld know how to treat 
ourselves and how to turn what today is poison into  rich food for plant life. 30 
crores of the population of India should mean, acco rding to Dr. Fowler, an 
annual gain of 60 crores of rupees to the country, if we would but make a wise 
use of human excreta.   
H., 15-3-’35, p.36 
 
Preparation of Compost Manure 
[There is in Indore an Institute of Plant Industry.  It issues from time to time leaflets for 
those whom it is designed to serve. The first one o f these describes the utility and the 
method of preparing compost manure from farm wastes . As it is valuable for Harijans and 
village workers who handle cattle-dung and night-so il, I copy below practically the whole 
of the leaflet incorporating footnotes into the run ning description of the process. 
—M. K. G.] 
It has long been recognized that adequate and syste matic recuperation of 
organic matter in Indian soils must be part of any successful scheme for 
intensive agriculture. It is also equally understoo d that the available sources of 
farm yard manure cannot supply the quantities neede d, apart from the fact 
that during the making a large portion of the nitro gen is lost and the final 
product takes a very long time to attain the most e fficient physical condition. 
Green manuring is perhaps a possible substitute, bu t under monsoon conditions 
it is uncertain in most parts of India. The decompo sition of green manure in the 
soil also interferes for the time being with the na tural processes of 
recuperation of available plant food in the soil wh ich 'lay a very substantial part 
in the maintenance of soil fertility in tropical re gions. It is clearly the best 
course to relieve the soil of the burden of manufac turing humus and enable it 
to concentrate solely upon the work of recuperation  and crop growth. The Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 117  simplest way of doing this is to prepare humus as a  by-product during the 
routine of farm work, utilizing all agricultural wa stes which are not needed as 
fuel or fodder. 
It should be emphasized at this stage that any subs titute for farm yard manure 
must closely resemble humus in composition, and the  Indore method aims at 
and achieves this. The object of the Indore method thus differs radically from 
that of processes where the aim is to produce a hig hly nitrogenous active 
manure whose special utility is similar to that of artificials. 
The work carried out at the Institute of Plant Indu stry at Indore, which was the 
final outcome of twenty years' attempts by Mr. Albe rt Howard in this direction, 
has now proved definitely that these principles can  very easily be put into 
actual practice. The Indore method of compost makin g supplies a practical 
technique and opens new avenues for development. Th e unlimited resources of 
natural wastes both from the farm and the towns can  thus be tapped for use in 
agriculture. A copious supply of manure is made pos sible without having 
recourse to any unnatural measures such as encroach ing upon the use of dung 
as fuel and the export of oil-cakes, at the same ti me securing economy in the 
use of artificials which give their best results wh en reinforced with organic 
matter. 
The problems and underlying principles involved hav e been discussed and the 
elaboration of the Indore method described in the  Utilization of Agricultural 
Waste  (Howard and Wad, Oxford University Press, 1931). T his article gives only 
a brief working outline of the process as applicabl e to the Indian cultivator's 
conditions. 
The value of farm yard manure is appreciated in the  case of irrigated crops in 
India, but periodic moderate dressings to fields un der dry cultivation are 
equally essential. The Indore compost method quickl y produces larger amounts 
of richer manure, which is moreover, actively usefu l to crops immediately on 
application, which is not always the case with farm  yard manure. Indore 
compost is ready for use after three months, when p roperly prepared, and is 
then a dark-brown or coffee-coloured amorphous subs tance, containing about Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 118  20 per cent of partially decomposed coarse material  readily crushed between 
the fingers, the rest being fine enough when wet (a nd the colloidal particles 
therefore swollen) to pass through a sieve of 6 mes hes per linear inch. The 
nitrogen content varies from .8 per cent to 1.0 per  cent or more according to 
the nature of the wastes used. About fifty cartload s of compost per pair of 
bullocks can easily be made each year by the use of  only one-fourth of the 
fresh dung along with 100 to 125 cartloads of farm wastes of all kinds and half 
of the quantity of urine-soaked earth which is avai lable from the cattle-shed. 
The remaining half is also a good manure and can be  added directly to fields. If 
more residues are available, all the dung and urine  earth can be utilized to 
make about 150 cartloads of compost. The cost of ma king is annas per cartload 
of ripe compost at Indore rates of wages (men 7 ann as, women 5 annas per day 
of eight hours).  
 
Outline of Indore Method 
The main feature of the process is to decompose rap idly a mixture of otherwise 
useless farm wastes with fresh dung, wood ash and u rine earth in pits. The pits 
should not be deeper than 2 feet and should be 14 f eet in breadth. A 
convenient length is 30 feet. This suits both large  and small scale work; for 
instance a portion 3 feet in length can be filled i n 6 days with bedding from 
under 2 pairs of bullocks. The adjacent portion is next filled, each being subse-
quently treated as a separate unit. The material is  uniformly moistened with a 
slurry of water containing small quantities of dung , wood ash, urine earth, and 
fungus starter from an active pit. Actively decompo sing compost soon becomes 
white with fungus growth. This material is then use d to start vigorous 
decomposition in a fresh charge. For the first time  when no starter is available 
fungus growth is stimulated by the addition of a sm all quantity of green leaves 
to the bedding when made. Full activity is attained  in the starter after 3 to 4 
generations. The activity is then kept up by regula ting moisture and air by 
means of surface waterings and turnings assisted by  a second addition of 
starter, this time taken from a pit more than 30 da ys old. The mass soon Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 119  becomes very hot and remains so for a long time. Th e systematic handling 
secures a good mixture (as shown by its uniform app earance) and a copious air 
supply at every stage. Moderate watering begins dec omposition at once, which 
continues without a break to the end, producing a v ery uniform final product. 
 
The Making of Pits 
Select a well-drained area near the cattle-shed and  if possible near a source of 
water supply. Dig out one foot of earth and spread it on all sides to make a pit, 
30feet by 14 feet by 2 feet; such pits should be ar ranged in pairs, the long side 
being east to west. The distance between two pits i n a pair should be six feet 
and the pairs themselves should be twelve feet apar t. The final heaps and 
monsoon heaps are made on these broad spaces which are also useful for 
removal of manure by carts directly from each heap.  
 
Earth and Urine 
The urine passed by cattle is rich in valuable manu rial matter and this is mostly 
wasted in the usual method of making farm yard manu re. A pakka- floor in the 
cattle-shed is both costly and unsuitable for the b ullocks. A soft, warm and dry 
bed on which cattle may rest and sleep can be made cheaply of loose earth. 
Convenient sources are threshing-floor sweepings, s ilt from choked drains and 
earth from silage pits. A flat 6 inches layer is su fficient to absorb all urine 
without nuisance, if wet patches are scrapped daily  and thinly covered by a 
little fresh earth and with uneaten fodder from the  manger over it. This urine 
earth should be removed and replaced every four mon ths by a fresh layer. The 
finer portion should be reserved for compost making  and the bigger lumps 
directly added to fields. It is a rapidly acting ma nure specially suitable as a top-
dressing for any irrigated crop. 
H., 17-8-’35, p.213-15 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 120   
Cow-dung and Ash 
Only a quarter of the daily supply of fresh dung is  needed; this is applied as 
liquid 'slurry', being mixed with water; the rest c an be made into fuel if 
required. Wood ashes from the kitchen and other pla ces should be carefully 
collected and stored under cover.  
 
Farm Wastes or Kuchra 
Every type of vegetable waste not otherwise needed on the farm can be made 
into compost, e.g. weeds, stalks of cotton, pigeon pea, sesamum, safflower, 
niger, linseed, rape, black and green gram, sugarca ne trash, stools of juar, and 
sugarcane, fallen leaves of trees and uneaten resid ues of grass, straw, juar and 
other fodders. Hard materials require cracking. Thi s has been successfully 
done, even on soft unmetalled roads in Sind, by sim ply spreading such- material 
on a cart track and periodically removing crushed p ortions and replacing them 
by unbroken stuff. Very hard residues like stumps a nd roots require (in addition 
to cracking) soaking in water for at least two days , or burial with moist earth 
for two to three months before they can be successf ully utilized. The latter can 
be done easily during the monsoon period. Green mat erials must be partially 
dried and then stacked. Small amounts of various ki nds of residues should be 
stacked together, while separate ganjisy  i.e. stacks, must be made for larger 
quantities of any single material. At the time of r emoving to the compost pit 
care must be taken to get a mixture of all types, n o single material ever 
exceeding ⅓ of the total amount thus removed. The very hard so aked or 
softened residues should be used only in very small  quantities at a time. This is 
really automatically achieved by the proportions of  different residues normally 
available if they are stored and used in quantities  which will ensure a steady 
supply all round the year. The quality of the compo st can be further improved 
by using for it a kharif-sown catch-crop of  sarin  or other legume harvested 
green, and stacked after withering. The land will b e clear in time to sow a  rabi  Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 121  crop which will also benefit by the  sann  having been grown.  
 
Water 
It is a saving of labour and an advantage if househ old waste water is led to a 
small pit or sunk tub near the compost area and uti lized every day. Any kind of 
water which has long been lying stagnant is harmful . Additional water required 
must be secured by other means. Between 50 to 60 fo ur-gallon kerosene tins of 
water are necessary to prepare one cartload of comp ost according to season.  
 
The Process in Detail 
Filling the pits with bedding:  Take a  pal  or a stretcher made of a piece of 
gunny sacking 4 feet by 3 feet, the longer edges be ing fastened to two bamboos 
each 7 feet 6 inches long. Up to one  palful  of farm wastes for each bullock and 
one and a half  pals  for each buffalo should be spread every day on the  floor of 
the cattle-shed on which the cattle rest and sleep.  The material thus gets 
impregnated with urine as well as mixed and crushed  by .the animals. The 
bedding in the rainy season is made by sand- witchi ng a layer of green withered 
stuff between two of dry wastes specially reserved for the purpose. Fresh dung 
left over after making the slurry can either be mad e into  kurdas , i.e. dried 
dung cakes, or spread over the bedding in lumps not  bigger than a small 
orange. The portion of the urine earth and fungus s tarter also left over after 
making the slurry is then scattered over the beddin g next morning when it is 
removed by spades and  pals  from end to end of the floor to be directly droppe d 
in pits and spread in thin layers by rakes. Every s uch layer is then moistened 
uniformly by the slurry containing ash, dung, earth  and fungus starter in small 
amounts. After the removal of all bedding the floor  is swept of all finer portions 
which are then added to the pit as a surface layer.  The top layer is wetted by 
sprinkled water and soaking is completed by further  sprinklings in the evening 
and next morning. A pit, or a portion of it accordi ng to the quantity of waste 
material available, must be filled to the top in si x days. A fresh charge in Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 122  another portion or pit should then be begun. Trampl ing while charging is  
harmful  as air is excluded. 
During the monsoon rains the pits get full of water . When the rains begin the 
contents should be removed and heaped on ground lev el taking advantage of 
the routine turnings. During the rains fresh compos t should be made on the 
ground in heaps 8 feet by 8 feet by 2 feet with ver tical sides, and closely 
grouped together on the broad spaces so that they a re protected from cold 
winds.  
 
Turning and Watering of Compost 
The surface of the decomposing compost is kept mois t by weekly sprinkling of 
water. It is necessary to restore moisture and air in the interior at intervals and 
hence 3 turns have to be given, accompanied by wate ring to make up for lost 
moisture. In wet weather the quantity of these wate rings may be lessened or 
no water may be added, but the water during the fir st filling or stacking must 
be added in all seasons.  
 
First Turn after about 15 Days 
Remove the undecomposed surface layer from the whol e pit and use it as part 
filling for a fresh pit. Scatter compost about 30 d ays old over the exposed 
surface and sprinkle water over the top till well m oistened for about six inches. 
During this first turning the pit is divided length wise and the half on the 
windward side is left undisturbed. The other half i s then thrown over it (a 
wooden rake is convenient for this). The material s hould not be taken off layer 
after layer but as far as possible from the top to the bottom of the pit by a 
vertical or slanting stroke. Every layer of the tur ned material, about six inches 
thick, must be soaked with sprinkled water. In the monsoon the whole heap 
may be turned to avoid too much height.  
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 123   
Second Turn after One Month 
The material in one half of the pit is simply raked  as above on to the other 
vacant side of the pit with adequate watering, the same care to mix it from top 
to bottom being taken.  
 
Third Turn at the End of Two Months 
The compost is similarly transferred by shovels to the surface on the broad 
spaces and watered. The material from two pits can be conveniently shovelled 
on to the space between to make one heap 10 feet br oad and 3½ feet high; the 
length is immaterial and several pits or heaps can thus be stored together. If 
convenient the manure after moistening well may be directly carted from pits 
to the field. The heap should be made on the spot w here the product is to be 
used, thus saving valuable time at the sowing seaso n. All heaps should be 
dressed to vertical sides and flat tops to prevent excessive drying which stops 
decomposition. 
Good compost gives no smell at any stage and the ap pearance is uniform 
throughout. If smell or flies appear it is a sign t hat more air is wanted and the 
pit should therefore be turned and a little ash and  dung added. 
The quantities required in individual cases can eas ily be found out by simple 
calculations with the help of the following data:   
Quantities Required for 40 Animals 
Filling into pits every day for six days:  
Bedding and sweepings  removed to the pit in one day; 40 to 50  pals  after 
scattering on it 4  tagaris,  i.e. sheet iron basins being 18 inches diameter by  6 
inches depth, of fungus starter, 15 of urine earth and excess of dung if not used 
as fuel. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 124  Slurry:  For one day's output from cattle-shed 20 kerosene tins (4 gallons) of 
water, 5  tagaris  of dung, 1  tagari  of ash, 1  tagari  of urine earth, and 2  tagaris 
of fungus starter. 
Water : For one day's output from cattle-shed 6 tins imme diately after filling, 10 
tins in the evening and 6 next morning. 
Surface waterings:  25 tins each time. 
Water at turning time:  1st turn 60 to 100 tins, 2nd turn 40. to 60 tins, 3rd turn 
40 to 80 tins according to season. 
Fungus starter at the time of 1st turn: 12 tagaris 
TABLE  
Volume (in double handfuls) and weights (in lb.) of  the contents of a  tagari  or 
basket. 
 
Material    Volume in    Weight 
double-handfuls   in lb. 
Fresh dung 6 to 7 40 
Urine earth 20 to 21  22 
Wood ashes 15 20 
Fungus starter 5 20 
For 1st turn starter 6 20 
 TIME TABLE OF OPERATIONS  
Days  Events  
1 Filling begins  
6 Filling ends  
10  Fungus established  
12  First watering  Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 125  15}  
16 First turn and addition of  
old compost 
24  Second watering  
30}  
32 Second turn  
38  Third watering  
45  Fourth wate ring  
60  Third turn  
67  Fifth watering  
75  Sixth watering  
90  Compost ready for use  
When circumstances do not permit the adoption of th e Indore process in full 
detail its advantages may be partially secured in t he following way: The mixed 
waste is used as bedding for cattle and the requisi te amounts of dung, urine 
earth and ash scattered over it next morning before  removal as already 
described. The material is then carried to the marg in of a field where the 
manure is to be used, or to some other suitable wel l-drained place, and stored 
in heaps not more than 3 inches high and 8 inches b road, and of any convenient 
length. After the rains have set in the fungus will  establish itself in about a 
month. One full turn is then given choosing a cloud y or moderately rainy day. 
Another turn or two after an interval of a month wi ll cause the material to rot 
by the end of the season, given a favourable distri bution of rainfall. 
A year of waiting is, of course, necessary before t he manure is ready and 
possibly longer if the rains fails seriously. 
The resulting manure, though probably rather inferi or to compost made in the 
standard way, will be undoubtedly better than ordin ary farm yard manure, for 
even by this modified process hard, woody waste can  be rotted easily, thus Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 126  giving a far larger quantity of manure than is prod uced in existing village 
practice.   
H., 24-8-’35, p.218-19,224 
 
Village Crops 
Every village's first concern will be to grow its o wn food crops and cotton for its 
cloth. It should have a reserve for its cattle, rec reation and playground for 
adults and children. Then if there is more land ava ilable, it will grow  useful  
money crops, thus excluding  ganja,  tobacco, opium and the like.   
H., 26-7-’42, p.238 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 127   
CHAPTER 18 
AGRICULTURE AND CATTLE WELFARE—V 
THE PROBLEM OF SCARCITY OF FOOD 
Food Shortage 
India is not unfamiliar with starvation and death o f tens of thousands, if not 
millions, due to famine, natural or man-made. I cla im that in a well-ordered 
society there should be always prearranged methods of successful treatment of 
scarcity of water and food crops. This is, however,  not the occasion for 
describing a well-ordered society and for showing h ow it would deal with the 
matter. Our concern, for the present, is to see whe ther we can, with fair hope 
of success, deal with the present food crisis. 
I think we can. The first lesson we must learn is o f self-help and self-reliance. If 
we assimilate this lesson, we shall at once free ou rselves from disastrous 
dependence upon foreign countries and ultimate bank ruptcy. This is not said in 
arrogance but as a matter of fact. We are not a sma ll place, dependent for its 
food supply upon outside help. We are a subcontinen t, a nation of nearly 400 
millions. We are a country of mighty rivers and a r ich variety of agricultural 
land, with inexhaustible cattle-wealth. That our ca ttle give much less, milk 
than we need is entirely our own fault. Our cattle- wealth is any day capable of 
giving us all milk we need. Our country, if it had not been neglected during the 
past few centuries, should today not only be provid ing herself with sufficient 
food, but also be playing a useful role in supplyin g the outside world with 
much-needed foodstuffs of which the late war has un fortunately left practically 
the whole world in want. This does not exclude Indi a. The distress is growing 
instead of showing signs of decreasing. My suggesti on does not include 
ungrateful rejection of free supply that any foreig n country may wish to offer 
us. All I say is that we must not go a-begging. It demoralizes. Add to this the 
difficulty of internal transport of foodstuffs from  one place to another. We 
have not the requisite facility for rapid movement of grains and other Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 128  foodstuffs from place to place. Further add not the  remote possibility of 
delivery of uneatable stuff. We dare not lose sight  of the fact that we have to 
deal with human nature. In no part of the world it is to be found perfect or 
even very nearly so. 
Next, let us see what possible foreign aid we can g et. I am told, not more than 
three per cent of our present wants. If this inform ation is correct and I have 
had it checked by several experts who confirm the f igure, I am sure the case 
for reliance on outside help falls to the ground. T he slightest dependence on 
outside help is likely to deflect us from trying to  the fullest extent our immense 
internal possibilities in the shape of utilizing ev ery inch of arable land for 
growing crops for daily food in the place of growin g money crops. We must 
reclaim waste land which is capable of being placed  under immediate 
cultivation. 
Centralization of foodstuffs, I apprehend, is ruino us. Decentralization easily 
deals a blow to black-marketing, saves time and mon ey in transport to and fro. 
Moreover, the villager who grows India's cereals an d pulses knows how to save 
his crops against rodents. The movement of grain fr om station to station makes 
it liable to be eaten by rodents. This costs the co untry many millions and 
deprives it of tons of grain, every ounce of which we badly need. If every Indian 
were to realize the necessity of growing food where ver it can be grown, we 
should most probably forget that there was scarcity  of foodstuffs in the land. I 
have by no means dealt fully with the fascinating a nd absorbing subject of 
growing more food, but I hope I have said enough to  stimulate interest and turn 
the wise towards the thought of how every individua l can help in the laudable 
enterprise. 
Let me now show how to deal with the three per cent  of grains we might 
possibly get from outside. Hindus observe a fast or  a semi-fast every eleventh 
day per fortnight. Muslims and others are not prohi bited from denying 
themselves especially when it is for the sake of th e starving millions. If the 
whole nation realized the beauty of this partial se lf-denial, India would more 
than cover the deficit caused by the voluntary depr ivation of foreign aid. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 129  Personally I hold that rationing has very limited u se if any. If the producers 
were left to themselves, they would bring their pro duce to the market and 
everyone would get good and eatable grain, which to day is not easily 
obtainable. 
I shall close this hurried review of the food crisi s by drawing attention to 
President Truman's reported advice to the American people that they should 
eat less bread, and thus save the much-needed grain  for starving Europe. He 
added that Americans would not lose in health by th e recommended act of self- 
denial. I tender my congratulations to President Tr uman on this philanthropic 
gesture. I must decline to endorse the suggestion t hat at the back of this 
philanthropy there is the sordid motive of deriving  a pecuniary advantage for 
America. A man must be judged by his action, not th e motive prompting it. God 
alone knows men's hearts. If America would deny her self for the sake of hungry 
Europe, should we fail to do this little act of sel f-denial for ourselves? If many 
must die of starvation let us at least earn the cre dit of having done our best in 
the way of self- help which ennobles a nation.  
H., 19-10-’47, p.3767-77 
 
In Times of Scarcity 
He who saves gains as much, that is to say, he prod uces as much. Hence those 
who feel for the poor, those who would be one with them must curtail their 
wants. There are many ways. I shall only mention so me here. There is much, 
too much food eaten and wasted by the well-to-do. 
Use one grain at a time.  Chapati,  rice and pulses, milk, ghee,  gur,  and oil are 
used in ordinary households besides vegetables and fruit. I regard this as an 
unhealthy combination. Those who get animal protein  in the shape of milk, 
cheese, eggs or meat need not use pulses at all. Th e poor people get only 
vegetable protein. If the well-to-do give up pulses  and oils, they set free these 
two essentials for the poor who get neither animal protein nor animal fat. Then 
the grain eaten should not be sloppy. Half the quan tity suffices when it is eaten 
dry and not dipped in any gravy. It is well to eat it with raw salads such as Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 130  onion, carrot, radish, salad leaves, tomatoes. An o unce or two of salads serves 
the purpose of eight ounces of cooked vegetables.  Chapatis  or bread should not 
be eaten with milk. To begin with, one meal may be raw vegetables and  
chapati  or bread, and the other cooked vegetables with mil k or curds. 
Sweet dishes should be eliminated altogether. Inste ad  gur  or sugar in small 
quantities may be taken with milk or bread or by it self. 
Fresh fruit is good to eat, but only a little is ne cessary to give one to the 
system. It is an expensive article, and an over-ind ulgence by the well-to- do has 
deprived the poor and the ailing of an article whic h they need much more than 
the well-to-do. 
Any medical man who has studied the science of diet etics will certify that what 
I have suggested can do no harm to the body, on the  contrary it must conduce 
to better health. 
This is only one way of saving foodstuff. It is obv ious. But by itself it cannot 
produce much visible effect. 
Grain-dealers have to shed their greed and the habi t of making as much profit 
as possible. They must be satisfied with as little as possible. They run the risk 
of being looted, if they do not gain the credit of being keepers of grain for the 
sake of the poor. The y should be in touch with the  people in their neigh-
bourhood. 
By far the most important part of the work consists  in educating the villagers to 
keep what they have and to induce cultivation of fr esh crops wherever water is 
available. This requires widespread and intelligent  propaganda. It is not 
generally known that bananas, potatoes, beetroot, y am and  suran, and in a 
measure pumpkin are a food crop easily grown. They can take the place of 
bread in time of need. 
There is too scarcity of money. There may be grain available but no money to 
buy it with. There is no money because there is no employment. This has to be 
found. Spinning is the readiest and the handiest. B ut local needs may supply 
other sources of labour. Every available source has  to be tapped so that there is Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 131  no want of employment. Only the lazy ones need and must starve. Patient 
handling will induce even this class to shed their laziness.   
H., 25-1-’42, p.12 
 
In the circumstances (of food crisis) the following  things should be attended to 
at once: 
1.  Every person should confine his daily wants regardi ng food to the 
minimum, consistent with his or her health requirem ents; and where, as in 
cities, milk, vegetables, oil and fruit are availab le, grains and pulses 
should be reduced as they easily can be. Starch can  be derived from 
starchy roots such as carrots, parsnips, potatoes, yam, bananas; the idea 
being to exclude from present diet and conserve tho se grains and pulses 
which can be kept and stored. Vegetables too should  not be eaten as an 
indulgence or for pleasure, when millions are denie d the use of these 
things altogether and are now threatened with starv ation due to shortage 
of cereals and pulses. 
2.  Everyone who has access to any water should try him self or herself to grow 
some edible for personal or general use. The easies t way to do so is to 
collect clean earth, mix it with organic manure whe re possible—even a 
little bit of dried cowdung is good organic manure— and put it in any 
earthen or tin pot and throw some seeds of vegetabl es such as mustard 
and cress etc. and daily water the pots. They will be surprised how quickly 
the seeds sprout and give edible leaves which need not even be cooked but 
can be eaten in the form of salad. 
3.  All flower gardens should be utilized for growing e dibles. And in this 
connection I would suggest to the Viceroy, Governor s and high officials to 
take the lead. I would ask the heads of agricultura l departments at the 
Centre and Provinces to flood the country with leaf lets in the provincial 
languages telling laymen how and what to grow easil y.' 
4.  Reduction should be taken up not merely by the civi lian population but 
equally, if not predominantly, by the military. I s ay predominantly, for the Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 132  military ranks being under rigid military disciplin e can easily carry out 
measures of economy. 
5.  All exports of seeds, such as oil seeds, oils, oil cakes, nuts, etc., should be 
stopped, if they have not been already. Oil cakes, if the seeds are sifted of 
earth and foreign matter, are good human food with rich protein content. 
6.  Deep wells should be sunk by the Government whereve r possible and 
required, whether for irrigation or for drinking pu rposes. 
7.  Given hearty co-operation by Government servants an d the general public, 
I have not the slightest doubt that the country can  tide over the difficulty. 
Just as panic is the surest way to defeat, so also will be the case when 
there is widespread distress impending and prompt a ction is not taken. Let 
us not think of the cause of the distress. Whatever  the cause, the fact is 
that if the Government and the public do not approa ch the crisis patiently 
and courageously, disaster is a certainty. 
8.  Above all, black-marketing and dishonesty should di sappear altogether and 
willing co-operation between all parties should be the order of the day in 
so far as this crisis is concerned.   
H., 24-2-’46, p.19 
 
Food Shortage and Over-population 
If it is contended that birth-control is necessary for the nation because of over-
population, I dispute the proposition. It has never  been proved. In my opinion, 
by a proper land-system, better agriculture and a s upplementary industry, this 
country is capable of supporting twice as many peop le as there are today. 
This little globe of ours is not a toy of yesterday . It has not suffered from the 
weight of overpopulation through its age of countle ss millions. How can it be 
that it is in danger of perishing of shortage of fo od unless birth rate is checked 
through the use of contraceptives?   
Y.I., 2-4-’25, p.118 & H.,14-9-’35, p.244 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 133   
CHAPTER 19 
KHADI AND SPINNING 
Khadi connotes the beginning of economic freedom an d equality of all in the 
country. It must be taken with all its implications . It means a wholesale 
Swadeshi mentality, a determination to find all the  necessaries of life in India 
and that too through the labour and intellect of th e villagers. The latter will be 
largely self-contained and will voluntarily serve t he cities of India and even the 
outside world in so far as it benefits both the par ties. 
This needs a revolutionary change in the mentality and tastes of many. Easy 
though the non-violent way is in many respects, it is very difficult in many 
others. It vitally touches the life of every single  Indian, makes him feel aglow 
with the possession of a power that has lain hidden  within himself, and makes 
him proud of his identity with every drop of the oc ean of Indian humanity. 
Khadi to me is the symbol of unity of Indian humani ty, of its economic freedom 
and equality and, therefore, ultimately in the poet ic expression of Jawaharlal 
Nehru, 'the livery of India's freedom'. 
Moreover, Khadi mentality means decentralization of  the production and 
distribution of the necessaries of life. Therefore,  the formula so far evolved is, 
every village to produce all its necessaries and a certain percentage in addition 
for the requirements of the cities. 
Having explained the implications of Khadi, I must indicate what Congressmen 
can and should do towards its promotion. Production  of Khadi includes cotton 
growing, picking, ginning, cleaning, carding, slive ring, spinning, sizing, dyeing, 
preparing the warp and the woof, weaving, and washi ng. These, with the 
exception of dyeing, are essential processes. Every  one of them can be 
effectively handled in the villages and is being so  handled in many villages 
throughout India which the A. I. S. A. is covering.  
If Congressmen will be true to their Congress call in respect of Khadi, they will 
carry out the instructions of the A. I. S. A. issue d from time to time as to the Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 134  part they can play in Khadi planning. Only a few br oad rules can be laid down 
here: 
1.  Every family with a plot of ground can grow cotton at least for family use. 
Cotton growing is an easy process. In Bihar the cul tivators were by law 
compelled to grow indigo one of their cultivable la nd. This was in the 
interest of the foreign indigo planter. Why cannot we grow cotton 
voluntarily for the nation on a certain portion of our land ? The reader will 
note that decentralization commences from the begin ning of the Khadi 
processes. Today cotton crop is centralized and has  to be sent to distant 
parts of India. Before the war it used to be sent p rincipally to Britain and 
Japan. It was and still is a money crop and, theref ore, subject to the 
fluctuations of the market. Under the Khadi scheme cotton growing 
becomes free from this uncertainty and gamble. The grower grows what he 
needs. The farmer needs to know that his first busi ness is to grow for his 
own needs. When he does that, he will reduce the ch ance of a low market 
ruining him. 
2.  Every spinner would buy—if he has not his own—enoug h cotton for ginning, 
which he can easily do without the hand-ginning rol ler frame. He can gin 
his own portion with a board and an iron rolling pi n. Where this is 
considered impracticable, hand-ginned cotton should  be bought and 
carded. Carding for self can be done well on a tiny  bow without much 
effort. The greater the decentralization of labour,  the simpler and cheaper 
the tools. The livers made, the process of spinning  commences. 
Imagine the unifying and educative effect of the wh ole nation simultaneously 
taking part in the processes up to spinning! Consid er the levelling effect of the 
bond of common labour between the rich and the poor ! 
If Congressmen will put their heart into the work, they will make improvements 
in the tools and make many discoveries. In our coun try there has been a divorce 
between labour and intelligence. The result has bee n stagnation. If there is an 
indissoluble marriage between the two, and that in the manner here suggested, 
the resultant good will be inestimable. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 135  In this scheme Of nation-wide spinning as a sacrifi ce, I do not expect the 
average man or woman to give more than one hour dai ly to this work.  
Constructive Programme, 1951, p.11-14 
 
The message of the spinning wheel is much wider tha n its circumference. Its 
message is one of simplicity, service of mankind, l iving so as not to hurt others, 
creating an indissoluble bond between the rich and the poor, capital and 
labour, the prince and the peasant.   
Y.I., 17-9-’25, p.321 
 
I stand by what is implied in the phrase, 'unto thi s last'. We must do even unto 
this last as we would have the world do by us. All must have equal opportunity. 
Given the opportunity, every human being has the sa me possibility for spiritual 
growth. That is what the spinning wheel symbolizes.   
H., 17-11-’46, p.404 
 
I can only think of spinning as the fittest and mos t acceptable sacrificial body 
labour. I cannot imagine anything nobler or more na tional than that for, say 
one hour in the day, we should all do the labour th at the poor must do, and 
thus identify ourselves with them and through them with all mankind. I cannot 
imagine better worship of God than that in His name  I should labour for the 
poor even as they do. The spinning wheel spells a m ore equitable distribution 
of the riches of the earth.   
Y.I., 20-10-’21, p.329 
 
I feel convinced that the revival of hand-spinning and hand-weaving will make 
the largest contribution to the economic and the mo ral regeneration of India. 
The millions must have a simple industry to supplem ent agriculture. Spinning 
was the cottage industry years ago, and if the mill ions are to be saved from Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 136  starvation, they must be enabled to reintroduce spi nning in their homes and 
every village must repossess its own weaver.   
Y.I., 21-7-’20, p.4 
 
If the reader would visualize the picture of the In dian skeleton, he must think 
of the eighty per cent of the population which is w orking its own fields, and 
which has practically no occupation for at least fo ur months in the year, and 
which therefore lives on the borderland of starvati on. This is the normal 
condition. The ever recurring famines make a large addition to this enforced 
idleness. What is the work that these men and women  can easily do in their 
own cottages so as to supplement their very slender  resources? Does anyone 
still doubt that it is only hand-spinning and nothi ng else?  
Y.I., 3-11-’21, p.350 
 
Cottage manufacture of yarn and cloth cannot be exp ensive even as domestic 
cookery is not expensive and cannot be replaced by hotel cookery. Over 
twenty-five crores of the population will be doing their own hand-spinning and 
having yarn thus manufactured woven in neighbouring  localities. This popu-
lation is rooted to the soil, and has at least four  months in the year to remain 
idle. 
If they spin during those hours and have the yarn w oven and wear it, no mill-
made cloth can compete with their Khadi. The cloth thus manufactured will be 
the cheapest possible for them.   
Y.I., 8-12-’21, p.405 
 
What is claimed for spinning is that: 
1.  It supplies the readiest occupation to those who ha ve leisure and are in 
want of a few coppers; 
2.  it is known to the thousands; 
3.  it is easily learnt; Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 137  4.  it requires practically no outlay of capital; 
5.  the wheel can be easily and cheaply made. Most of u s do not yet know that 
spinning can be done even with a piece of tile and splinter; 
6.  the people have no repugnance to it; 
7.  it affords immediate relief in times of famine and scarcity; 
8.  it alone can stop the drain of wealth which goes ou tside India in the 
purchase of foreign cloth; 
9.  it automatically distributes the millions thus save d among the deserving 
poor; 
10.  even the smallest success means so much immediate g ain to the people; 
11.  it is the most potent instrument of securing co-ope ration among the 
people.   
Y.I., 21-8-’24, p.277 
 
The disease of the masses is not want of money so m uch as it is want of work. 
Labour is money. He, who provides dignified labour for the millions in their 
cottages, provides food and clothing, or which is t he same thing, money. The 
Charkha provides such labour. Till a better substit ute is found, it must, 
therefore, hold the field.   
Y.I., 18-6-’25, p.211 
 
Idleness is the great cause, the root of all evil, and if that root can be 
destroyed, most of the evils can be remedied withou t further effort. A nation 
that is starving has little hope or initiative left  in it. It becomes indifferent to 
filth and disease. It says of all reforms, 'to what  good?' That winter of despair 
can only be turned into the 'sun-shine of hope' for  the millions only through the 
life-giving wheel, the Gharkha.   
Y.I., 27-8-’25, p.299 
 
The spinning wheel is an attempt to produce somethi ng out of nothing. If we 
save sixty crores of rupees to the nation through t he spinning wheel, as we Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 138  certainly can, we add that vast amount to the natio nal income. In the process 
we automatically organize our villages. And as almo st the whole of the amount 
must be distributed amongst the poorest of the land , it becomes a scheme of 
just and nearly equal distribution of so much wealt h. Add to this immense 
moral value of such distribution, and the case for the Charkha becomes 
irresistible.   
Y.I., 17-2-’27, p.52 
 
Indeed, in some places, there are to be found weave rs who are classed as 
untouchables on account of their occupation. They a re mostly weavers of 
coarsest Khadi without any pattern. This class was fast dying out when Khadi 
came to the rescue and there was created a demand f or their coarse manufac-
ture. It was then discovered that there were numero us Harijan families that 
even subsisted on spinning. Thus Khadi is doubly th e poor man's staff of life. It 
helps the poorest, including the Harijans, who are the most helpless among the 
poorest. They are so because many occupations which  are available to the 
others are not available to the Harijans.   
H., 27-4-’34, p.85 
 
To those also who aspire to observe Brahmcharya I p resent the spinning wheel. 
It is not a thing to be despised, for it is experie nce here that speaks. A person 
who wants to subdue his passions has need to be cal m. All commotion within 
him ought to cease; and so quiet and gentle is the motion of the spinning wheel 
that it has been known to still the passions of tho se who have turned it in the 
fullness of faith. . . . Human passions are fleeter  even than the wind, and to 
subdue them completely requires no end of patience.  All that I claim is that in 
the spinning wheel they will find a powerful means of cultivating steadiness.   
Y.I., 27-5-’4-26, p.190 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 139  Spinning would spell the organization of crores int o a joint co-operative effort, 
the conservation and utilization of the energy of t he millions, and the dedi-
cation of crores of lives to the service of the mot herland. The carrying out of 
such a gigantic task would, further, give us a real ization of our own strength. It 
would mean our acquiring a thorough mastery of the detail and innumerable 
knotty problems which it presents, e.g. learning to  keep account of every pie, 
learning to live in the villages in sanitary and he althy conditions, removing the 
difficulties that block the way and so on. For, unl ess we learn all this, we 
would not be able to accomplish this task. The spin ning wheel, then, provides 
us with a means for generating this capacity in us.   
Y.I., 27-5-’26, p.190 
 
The only universal industry for the millions is spi nning and ho other. That does 
not mean that other industries do not matter or are  useless. Indeed from the 
individual standpoint any other industry would be m ore remunerative than 
spinning. Watchmaking will be no doubt a most remun erative and fascinating 
industry. But how many can engage in it? Is it of a ny use to the millions of 
villagers? But if the villagers can reconstruct the ir home, begin to live again as 
their forefathers did, if they begin to make good u se of their idle hours, all 
else, all the other industries will revive as a mat ter of course.   
Y.I., 30-9-’26, p.341 
 
 The revival (of Charkha) cannot take place without an army of selfless Indians 
of intelligence and patriotism working with a singl e mind in the villages to 
spread the message of the Charkha and bring a ray o f hope and light into their 
lustreless eyes. This is mighty effort at co-operat ion and adult education of the 
correct type. It brings about a silent and sure rev olution like the silent but sure 
and life-giving revolution of the Charkha. 
Twenty years' experience of Charkha work has convin ced me of the correctness 
of the argument here advanced by me. The Charkha ha s served the poor 
Muslims and Hindus in almost an equal measure. Near ly five crores of rupees Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 140  have been put into the pockets of these lakhs of vi llage artisans without fuss 
and tomtoming. 
Hence I say without hesitation that the Charkha mus t lead us to Swaraj in terms 
of the masses belonging to all faiths. The Charkha restores the villages to their 
rightful place and abolishes distinctions between h igh and low.   
H., 13-4-’40, p.85 
 
The spinning wheel is a symbol not of commercial wa r but of commercial 
peace. It bears not a message of ill-will towards t he nations of the earth but of 
goodwill and self-help. It will not need the protec tion of a navy threatening a 
world's peace and exploiting its resources, but it needs the religious 
determination of millions to spin their yarn in the ir own homes as today they 
cook their food in their own homes. I may deserve t he curses of posterity for 
many mistakes of omission and commission, but I am confident of earning its 
blessings for suggesting a revival of the Charkha. I take my all on it. For every 
revolution of the wheel spins peace, goodwill and l ove.   
Y.I., 8-12-’21, p.406 
 
It is my claim that (by reviving Khadi and other vi llage industries) we shall have 
evolved so far that we shall remodel national life in keeping with the ideal of 
simplicity and domesticity implanted in the bosom o f the masses. We will not 
then be dragged into an imperialism which is built upon exploitation of the 
weaker races of the earth, and the acceptance of a giddy materialistic 
civilization protected by naval and air forces that  have made peaceful living 
almost impossible. On the contrary we shall then re fine that imperialism into a 
commonwealth of nations which will combine, if they  do, for the purpose of 
giving their best to the world and of protecting, n ot by brute force but by self-
suffering, the weaker nations or races of the earth . Such a transformation can 
come only after the complete success of the spinnin g wheel. India can become 
fit for delivering such a message, when she has bec ome proof against tempta-Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 141  tion and therefore attacks from outside, by becomin g self-contained regarding 
two of her chief needs— food and clothing.   
Y.I., 29-6-’21, p.206 
 
When once we have revived the one industry (Khadi),  all the other industries 
will follow. I would make the spinning wheel the fo undation on which to build a 
sound village life; I would make the wheel the cent re round which all other 
activities will revolve.   
Y.I., 21-5-’25, p.177 
 
The ideal of Khadi has always been as a means, par excellence , for the 
resuscitation of villages and therethrough the gene ration of real strength 
among the masses—the strength that will  ipso facto  bring Swaraj.   
Swaraj through Charkha 1945, p.8 
 
My experience tells me that in order to make Khadi universal both in ' the cities 
and villages, it should be made available only in e xchange for yarn. As time 
passes I hope people will themselves insist on buyi ng Khadi through yarn 
currency. If, however, this does not happen and the y produce yarn grudgingly, I 
fear Swaraj through non-violence will be impossible . 
An increase in the number of mills and cities will certainly not contribute to the 
prosperity of India's millions. On the contrary, it  will bring further poverty to 
the unemployed and all the diseases that follow in the wake of starvation. If 
town-dwellers can look upon such a spectacle with e quanimity there is nothing 
more to be said. In such an event it will be the re ign of violence in India, not a 
reign of Truth and Ahimsa. And we shall be forced t o admit that there is 
naturally no room there for Khadi. Military trainin g will then have to be 
compulsory for all. But we must only think in terms  of the starving crores. If 
they are to be restored, if they are to live, then the Charkha must be made the 
central activity and people must spin voluntarily.   Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 142  Swaraj through Charkha 1945, p.5 
 
Our work had a very humble beginning. When I starte d Khadi I had with me, 
apart from Maganlalbhai and others who had elected to live and die with me, 
Vitthaldasbhai and a few sisters. We have travelled  a long way since then and 
today about two crores of people have come under th e influence of the 
Charkha. By its help we have been able to provide t he village people with a 
large amount of money. But can we still hold, as we  have always maintained, 
that Swaraj is impossible without the Charkha? So l ong as we do not 
substantiate this claim the Charkha is really no mo re than a measure of relief, 
to which we turn because we can do nothing else abo ut it. It would not then be 
the means of our salvation. 
Secondly, we have failed to carry our message to th e crores of our people. They 
have neither any knowledge of what the Charkha can do for them nor even the 
necessary curiosity for it. 
The Congress did accept the Charkha. But did it do so willingly? No, it tolerates 
the Charkha simply for my sake. The Socialists ridi cule it outright. They have 
spoken and written much against it. We have no clea r or convincing reply to 
offer to them. How I wish I could convince them tha t the Charkha is the key to 
Swaraj! I have not been able to justify the claim a ll these years. 
Now for my third point: Non-violence is not somethi ng of the other world. If it 
is, I have no use for it. I am of the earth and if non-violence is something really 
worthwhile I want to realize it here on this earth while still I am alive. And how 
else can it be realized except in a society which h as compassion and other 
similar virtues as its characteristics? 
If you go to the house of one who has use for viole nce you will find his drawing 
room decorated with tigers' skins, deers' horns, sw ords, guns and such like. I 
have been to the Viceregal Lodge, I also saw Mussol ini. In the houses of both I 
found arms hanging on the walls. I was given a salu te with arms, a symbol of 
violence. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 143  Just as arms symbolize violence the Charkha symboli zes non-violence, in the 
sense that we can most directly realize non-violenc e through it. But it cannot 
symbolize non-violence so long as we do not work in  accordance with its spirit. 
The sword in Mussolini's hall seemed to say "Touch me and I will cut you." It 
gave a vivid picture of violence. It seemed to ask you to touch it and realize its 
power. So also we must illustrate the power of the Charkha so that a mere look 
at it may speak to us about non-violence. But we ar e bankrupt today. What is 
our answer to Socialists? They complain that we hav e been harping on the 
Charkha for years and yet we have achieved nothing.  
The Charkha was there during Muslim rule also. Dacc a was famous for its 
muslins. The Charkha then was a symbol of poverty a nd not of non-violence. 
The kings took forced labour from women and depress ed classes. The same was 
later repeated by the East India Company. Kautilya mentions in his  
Arthashastra the existence of such forced labour. For ages the C harkha was 
thus a symbol of violence and the use of force and compulsion. The spinner got 
but a handful of grain or two small coins, while la dies of the court went about 
luxuriously clad in the finest of muslins, the prod uct of exploited labour. 
As against this, I have presented the Charkha to yo u as a symbol of non-
violence. If I did not make it clear to you so far,  it was my mistake. You know I 
am among the maimed and can move but slowly. Yet I do believe that the work 
done so far has not been a waste. 
I shall now pass to my fourth point. We have not ye t proved that there can be 
no Swaraj without the Charkha. It cannot be proved so long as you do not 
explain it to Congressmen. The Charkha and the Cong ress should become 
synonyms. 
The task of proving the superiority of non-violence  is a difficult one. We have 
to fathom its depths if we are to realize its truth . The world is going to put me 
to the test. It may declare me a fool for my tall t alk about the Charkha. The 
task of making the Charkha, which for centuries had  been a symbol of poverty, 
helplessness, injustice and forced labour, the symb ol now of mighty non-violent Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 144  strength, of the new social order and of the new ec onomy, has fallen on our 
shoulders. We have to change history. And I want to  do it through you. 
I hope you follow what I am saying. But if in spite  of it you do not believe that 
the Charkha has the power to achieve Swaraj, I will  ask you to leave me. Here 
you are at the cross roads. If you continue with me  without faith you will be 
deceiving me and doing a great wrong to the country . I beg of you not to 
deceive me in the evening of my life. 
It is- I who am responsible for defects in our work ing so far. The fault is mine 
because I have remained the head even when I was co nscious of its defects. But 
let bygones be bygones. Do we honestly believe toda y that the Charkha is the 
emblem of non-violence? How many of us are there wh o believe so from the 
depths of our heart? 
Now we have the tri-colour flag. What is it but a p iece of Khadi of specific 
length and breadth? You can well have another piece  in its place. But behind 
that Khadi cloth lie encased your feelings. It is a  symbol of Swaraj, a symbol of 
national emancipation. We cannot forget it. We will  not remove it. We are 
prepared to die for it. So also the Charkha should be an emblem of non-
violence. 
What does the Charkha, as an emblem of nonviolence,  signify in the economic 
sphere? Call it self- sufficiency or what you like.  In the name- of national 
reconstruction and self-sufficiency millions are be ing bled white in Western 
countries, as also in other countries for their sak e. Ours is not a self-sufficiency 
of that pattern. The Charkha is the way to get rid of exploitation and 
domination. I am not so much concerned with words a s with the thing itself. 
We are familiar with the controversy in our religio n as to whether God has a 
form or no. The believers in form prefer to worship  God through an emblem. So 
if non-violence is to be pursued as an ideal, the C harkha must be acknowledged 
as its true form and emblem, and kept ever before v iew. Whenever I think of 
non-violence the picture of the Charkha comes befor e me. We cannot visualize 
non-violence in the abstract. So we choose an objec t which can symbolize for 
us the formless. That is what the Charkha does for me and that is why I worship Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 145  it. Unless you understand and imbibe this spirit be hind my worship of the 
Charkha you will not gain an understanding of non-v iolence even for a hundred 
years. That capacity for non-violence which I find in the Charkha can also be 
perceived by you only if you approach it with a hea rt like mine. That is why I 
say: Follow me or leave me. If you want to come wit h me I will give you a 
scheme and do everything possible. If you have not understood what I mean I 
am prepared to sit and discuss it with you the whol e day. But if you say that 
you have grasped my meaning when you really have no t, you will be deceiving 
both yourselves and me. Ours is not an Association for making profit. We do not 
seek loaves and fishes. There are a thousand fields  in which we can serve the 
country. Why then remain in Charkha work and sail u nder false colours? Please 
do not therefore remain with me under an illusion. Let me go my way alone. 
But if it were found that I was myself suffering fr om an illusion and that my 
belief in the Charkha was mere idol-worship, either  you may burn me to ashes 
with the wood of the Charkha, or I myself would set  fire to the Charkha with 
my own hand. 
If the Charkha Sangh has to go, let us wind it up w ith our own hands. That will 
put an end to all our struggle. Then the Charkha wh ich has for the moment put 
us into a labyrinth of difficulties will be left in  the hands of a few who believe 
in it, and may in their hands prove to be a mighty weapon. If you regard it as 
sheer folly I certainly have no ambition to run an idiots' association and thus 
degrade the country. On the other hand, if you can manifest non-violence 
through the Charkha, it will not merely move but sw eep forward. You will not 
then have to worry about keeping it alive. 
I repeat that you either leave me alone or digest w hat I say and follow me. I 
have brought this new idea to you after two years o f penitential thinking. I do 
not know if I have succeeded in conveying my idea t o you. If I have been able 
to carry conviction please do one thing. Those of y ou who want to remain with 
me give me in writing that you regard the Charkha f rom today as the emblem of 
non-violence. You have to make your decision today.  If you do not or cannot 
regard the Charkha as the emblem of non-violence an d yet you remain with me, Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 146  then you will thereby put yourself in an awkward pl ight and also drag me down 
with you.   
Khadi – Why and How, 1959, p.153-57 
 
One epoch of Khadi has ended. Khadi has achieved so mething for the benefit of 
the poor. Now we have to demonstrate how the poor c an be self- supporting.   
Ideology of the Charkha 1959, p.94 
 
I saw that our work would be incomplete, so long as  we did not carry the 
message of the Charkha to every home.   
Khadi – Why and How, 1959, p.149 
 
The Charkha is the symbol of non-violent economic s elf-sufficiency. If we and 
the people grasp this significance of the Charkha n ot a pice need be spent on 
propaganda for the Charkha. Nor need we look to the  rich for alms. We shall 
without effort become the centre of hope, and the p eople will come to us of 
their own accord. They will not go elsewhere to see k work. Every village will 
become the nerve- centre of independent India. Indi a will then not be known 
by her cities like Bombay and Calcutta, but by her 400 millions inhabiting the 
seven lakhs of villages. The problems of Hindu-Musl im differences, 
untouchability, conflicts, misunderstandings and ri valries will all melt away. 
This is the real function of the Sangh. We have to live and die for it.   
Khadi – Why and How, 1959, p.150 
 
The pursuit of the Charkha must become the mainspri ng of manifold other 
activities like village industries, Nai Talim etc. If we are able to adopt the 
Charkha intelligently we can revive the entire econ omic life of our villages once 
more.   
Khadi – Why and How, 1959, p.151 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 147   
By its help we have been able to provide the villag e people with a large amount 
of money. But can we still hold, as we have always maintained, that Swaraj is 
impossible without the Charkha? So long as we do no t substantiate this claim 
the Charkha is really no more than a measure of rel ief, to which we turn 
because we can do nothing else about it. It would n ot then be the means of our 
salvation.   
Khadi – Why and How, 1959, p.154 
 
Now I feel that Khadi alone cannot revive the villa ges. Village uplift is possible 
only when we rejuvenate village life as a whole, re vive all village industries and 
make the entire village industrious.   
Khadi – Why and How, 1959, p.181 
 
Khadi is not an occupation or draft merely to earn a livelihood. None of us 
should harbour this idea.   
Khadi – Why and How, 1959, p.184 
 
Our reason for putting forward Khadi is that it is the only way to redeem the 
people from the disease of inertia and indifference , the only way to generate in 
them the strength for freedom. If other crafts are also thus revitalized, our 
villages could be made self- sufficient and self-re liant.   
Khadi – Why and How, 1959, p.185 
 
But what we are required to prove above all is the necessity for Khadi for 
establishing a strong, non-violent village economy.   
Khadi – Why and How, 1959, p.189 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 148  In my opinion, however, the real celebration (of Ch arkha Jayanti) will come 
only when the music of the wheel which is the symbo l of Independence and 
non-violence will be heard in every home. If a few or even a crore of poor 
women spin in order to earn a pittance, what can th e celebration mean to 
them and what achievement can that be? This can wel l happen even under a 
despotic rule and is today visible, wherever capita l holds sway. Millionaires are 
sustained by the charity, they dole out to the poor , may be even in. the form of 
wages. 
The celebration will only be truly worth-while when  the rich and the poor alike 
understand that all are equal in the eyes of God, t hat each one, in his own 
place, must earn his bread by labour, and that the independence of all will be 
protected, not by guns and ammunition but by the bu llets, in the shape of 
cones of hand-spun yarn, i.e. not by violence but b y non-violence.   
H., 22-9-’46, p.320 
 
Ponder and realize what wealth this would mean to I ndia, if 300 crores worth of 
cloth are produced by their own hands in the villag es. This is a veritable mint of 
gold for them and if Khadi became universal, the vi llages would rise to 
unknown heights. 
Today our masses are poverty-stricken, without the lustre of hope or 
intelligence in their eyes. The pure hands of the s pinners could create this 
miracle for them and everyone could help. They shou ld have understanding 
hearts and seeing eyes to detect the beauty in Khad dar even if it is coarse and 
not be allured by mill finery which could never clo the their nakedness in the 
true sense of the term. The only way to clothe thei r nakedness and drive away 
hunger is for them to grow their own food and make their own cloth. If this 
happy consummation could be achieved, the eyes of t he whole world would be 
turned towards India,.   
H., 22-9-’46, p.322 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 149  Before the Charkha class in full swing, everything else appears dull and lifeless 
to me. For I behold my Rama dancing in every thread  drawn. I find Swaraj in it. 
When I contemplate the strength of the yarn drawn b y 40 crores of hands, my 
heart is filled with an ecstasy of joy. 'O, but 20 crores of Indians will not take to 
spinning,' you say. Is it not a sign of our ignoran ce and lack of faith to refuse to 
believe in the possibility? Is it an impossible thi ng to expect every one of half, 
the population to spin for an hour a day? If we hav e not the capacity to 
sacrifice even this much for our Motherland, what i s our love of country worth?   
H., 22-9-’46, p.322 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 150   
CHAPTER 20 
OTHER VILLAGE INDUSTRIES 
Why Village Industries  
I recall a conversation I had with Fazalbhai in 192 0 when I was on the eve of 
launching the movement of Swadeshi. He characterist ically said to me, ' If you, 
Congressmen, become advertising agents of ours, you  will do no good to the 
country except to put a premium on our wares and to  raise the prices of our 
manufactures. His argument was sound. But he was no nplussed when I informed 
him that I was to encourage hand-spun and hand-wove n Khadi which had been 
woefully neglected and which needed to be revived i f the starving and 
unemployed millions were to be served. 
But Khadi is not the only such struggling industry.  I therefore suggest to you to 
direct your attention and effort to all the small-s cale, minor, unorganized 
industries that arc today in need of public support . They may be wiped out if no 
effort is made in their behalf. Some of these are b eing pushed back by large-
scale industries which flood the markets with their  manufactures. It is these 
that cry for your help.  
Cent Par Cent Swadeshi 1958, p.4 
 
I have no doubt in mv mind that we add to the natio nal wealth if we help the 
small-scale industries. I have no doubt also that t rue Swadeshi consists in 
encouraging and reviving these home industries. Tha t alone can help the dumb 
millions. It also provides an outlet for the creati ve faculties and resourcefulness 
of the people. It can also usefully employ hundreds  of youths in the country 
who are in need of employment. It may harness all t he energy that at present 
runs to waste. I do not want any one of those who a re engaged in more 
remunerative occupations to leave them and take to the minor industries. Just 
as I did with regard to the spinning wheel, I would  ask only those who suffer Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 151  from unemployment and penury to take to some of the se industries and add a 
little to their slender resources. 
It will thus be seen that the change in activity th at I have suggested to you does 
in no way conflict with the interests of the major industries. I want to say only 
this much that you, national servants, will restric t your activities to the minor 
industries and let the major ones help themselves a s they are doing today. The 
minor industries I conceive will not replace the ma jor ones, but will 
supplement them.   
Cent Par Cent Swadeshi 1958, p.5 
 
We may profess to gratuitously help textile, sugar and rice mills and, 
respectively, kill the village spinning wheel, the handloom and their product, 
Khadi, the village cane-crusher and its product, th e vitamin-laden and 
nourishing  gud  or molasses, and the hand-pounder and its product,  unpolished 
rice, whose pericarp, which holds the vitamins, is left intact by these pounders. 
Our clear duty is, therefore, to investigate the po ssibility of keeping in 
existence the village wheel, the village crusher an d the village pounder, and, 
by advertising their products, discovering their qu alities, ascertaining the 
condition of the workers and the number displaced b y the power driven 
machinery and discovering the methods of improving them, whilst retaining 
their village character, to enable them to stand th e competition of the mills. 
How terribly and criminally we have neglected them!  Here there is no 
antagonism to the textile or the sugar or the rice mills. Their products must be 
preferred to the corresponding foreign products. If  they were in danger of 
extinction from foreign competition, they should re ceive the needed support. 
But they stand in no such need. They are flourishin g in spite of foreign 
competition. What is needed is protection of the vi llage crafts and the workers 
behind them from the crushing competition of the po wer driven machinery, 
whether it is worked in India or in foreign lands. It may be that Khadi,  gud  and 
unpolished rice have no intrinsic quality and that they should die. But, except 
for Khadi not the slightest effort has been made, s o far as I am aware, to know Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 152  anything about the fate of the tens of thousands of  villagers who were earning 
their livelihood through crushing cane and pounding  rice.   
H., 10-8’34, p.204 
 
I have ruled out organized industries, not because they are  not  Swadeshi, but 
because they do not need special support. They can stand on their own legs 
and, in the present state of our awakening, can eas ily command a market. 
 H., 28-9’34, p.259 
 
In a nutshell, of the things we use, we should rest rict our purchases to the 
articles which villages manufacture. Their manufact ures may be crude. We 
must try to induce them to improve their workmanshi p, and not dismiss them 
because foreign articles or even articles produced in cities, that is big 
factories, are superior. In other words, we should evoke the artistic talent of 
the villager. In this manner shall we repay somewha t the debt we owe to them. 
We need not be frightened by the thought whether we  shall ever succeed in 
such an effort. Within our own times we can recall instances where we have 
not been baffled by the difficulty of our tasks whe n we have known that they 
were essential for the nation's progress. If, there fore, we as individuals believe 
that revivification of India's villages is a necess ity of our existence, if we 
believe that thereby only can we root out untouchab ility and feel one with all, 
no matter to what community or religion they may be long, we must mentally 
go back to the villages and treat them as our patte rn, instead of putting the 
city life before them for imitation. If this is the  correct attitude, then, 
naturally, we begin with ourselves and thus use, sa y, hand-made paper instead 
of mill-made, use village reed, wherever possible, instead of the fountain pen 
or the penholder, ink made in the villages instead of the big factories, etc. I 
can multiply instances of this nature. There is har dly anything of daily use in 
the home which the villagers have not made before a nd cannot make even now. 
If we perform the mental trick and fix our gaze upo n them, we immediately put 
millions of rupees into the pockets of the villager s, whereas at the present Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 153  moment we are exploiting the villagers without maki ng any return worth the 
name. It is time we arrested the progress of the tr agedy.   
H., 30-11’34, p.332 
 
Bit by bit village people are being confined only t o the hand-to-mouth business 
of scratching the earth. Few know today that agricu lture in the small and irre-
gular holdings of India is not a paying proposition . The villagers live a lifeless 
life. Their life is a process of slow starvation. T hey are burdened with debts.   
H., 16-11’34, p.316 
 
Extinction of village industries would complete the  ruin of the 7,00,000 villages 
in India.   
H., 16-11’34, p.316 
 
Mechanization is good when the hands are too few fo r the work intended to be 
accomplished. It is an evil when there are more han ds than required for the 
work, as is the case in India.   
H., 16-11’34, p.316 
 
But if the cloth manufactured in mills displaces vi llage hands, rice mills and 
flour mills not only displace thousands of poor wom en workers, but damage the 
health of the whole population in the bargain. Wher e people have no objection 
to taking flesh diet and can afford it, white flour  and polished rice may do no 
harm, but in India, where millions can get no flesh  diet even where they have 
no objection to eating it if they can get it, it is  sinful to deprive them of 
nutritious and vital elements contained in whole wh eat meal and unpolished 
rice. It is time medical men and others combined to  instruct the people on the 
danger attendant upon the use of white flour and po lished rice.   
H., 16-11’34, p.316 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 154   
The way to take work to the villagers is not throug h mechanization but through 
revival of the industries they have hitherto follow ed.   
H., 16-11’34, p.316 
 
'Hence the function of the All India Village Indust ries Association must, in my 
opinion, be to encourage the existing industries an d to revive, where it is 
possible and desirable, the dying or dead industrie s of villages according to the 
village methods, i.e. the villagers working in thei r own cottages as they have 
done from times immemorial. These simple methods ca n be considerably 
improved as they have been in hand-ginning, hand-ca rding, hand-spinning and 
hand- weaving.   
H., 16-11’34, p.316 
 
Khadi is the sun of the village solar system. The p lanets are the various 
industries which can support Khadi in return for th e heat and the sustenance 
they derive from it. Without it, the other industri es cannot grow. But during my 
last tour I discovered that, without the revival of  the other industries, Khadi 
could not make further progress. For villagers to b e able to occupy their spare 
time profitably, the village must be touched at all  points.   
H., 16-11’34, p.317 
 
Involuntary and voluntary idleness of villagers mak e them a perpetual prey of 
exploiters, foreign and indigenous. Whether the exp loiter is from outside or 
from the Indian cities, their state would be the sa me, they would have no 
Swaraj. So I said to myself, ' Let these people be asked to do something else; if 
they will not interest themselves in Khadi, let the m take up some work which 
used to be done by their ancestors, but which has o f late died out.' There are 
numerous things of daily use which they used to pro duce themselves not many 
years ago, but for which they now depend on the out er world. There are Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 155  numerous things of daily use to the town-dweller fo r which he depends on the 
villagers, but which he now imports from cities. Th e moment the villagers 
.decide to devote all their spare time to doing som ething useful and town-
dwellers to use those village products, the snapped  link between the villagers 
and the town-dwellers would be restored.   
H., 7-12’34, p.340 
 
I am not asking the city-dwellers to go to and live  in the villages. But I am 
asking them to render unto the villagers what is du e to them. Is there any 
single raw material that the city-dwellers can obta in except from the villager? 
If they cannot, why not teach him to work on it him self, as he used to before 
and as he would do now but for our exploiting inroa ds ? 
H., 7-12’34, p.340-41 
 
We shall have to see that the villagers become firs t of all self-contained and 
then cater for the needs of the city-dwellers.   
H., 7-12’34, p.341 
 
Other village industries come in as a hand-maid to Khadi. They cannot exist 
without Khadi, and Khadi will be robbed of its dign ity without them. Village 
economy cannot be complete without the essential vi llage industries such as 
hand-grinding, hand-pounding, soap-making, paper-ma king, matchmaking, 
tanning, oil-pressing, etc. Congressmen can interes t themselves in these and, if 
they are villagers or will settle down in villages,  they will give these industries 
a new life and a new dress. All should make it a po int of honour to use only 
village articles whenever and wherever available. G iven the demand there is no 
doubt that most of our wants can be supplied from o ur villages. When we have 
become village- minded, we will not want imitations  of the West or machine-
made products, but we will develop a true national taste in keeping with the Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 156  vision of a new India in which pauperism., starvati on and idleness will be 
unknown.   
Constructive Programme, 1961, p.16-17 
 
The revival of village industries is but an extensi on of the Khadi effort. Hand-
spun cloth, handmade paper, hand-pounded rice, home -made bread and jam, 
are not uncommon in the West. Only there they do no t have one-hundredth of 
the importance they have in India. For, with us, th eir revival means life, their 
destruction means death, to the villagers, as he wh o runs may see. Whatever 
the machine age may do, it will never give "employm ent to the millions whom 
the wholesale introduction of power machinery must displace.   
H., 4-1’35, p.372 
 
All of us should be convinced that the Charkha is t he symbol of non-violent 
economic self- sufficiency.   
Khadi- Why and How, 1959, p.150 
 
The pursuit of the Charkha must become the mainspri ng of manifold other 
activities like village industries, Nai Talim etc. If we are able to adopt the 
Charkha intelligently we can revive the entire econ omic life of our villages once 
more.   
Khadi- Why and How, 1959, p.151 
 
Our worker should be able to identify himself with all that requires to be done 
in the village, that is, with the entire life of th e village and yet feel as light as 
ever.   
Khadi- Why and How, 1959, p.159 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 157  I regard Charkha as the centre of village uplift. I n addition, the worker will 
have to see what other village crafts can prosper i n his village. The first in 
order among these crafts will be the bullock oil-pr ess. Our worker would have 
to know its technique which has now been scientific ally improved at 
Maganwadi. Another industry which may be introduced  is handmade paper. This 
has to be learnt not with the view of supplying pap er to the whole country but 
in order to make the village self-sufficient and ca pable of earning a little 
income. 
Next to oil and hand-made paper we must revive the hand -chakki  (grinding 
stone) — a vital thing in every village. Otherwise flour-mills which have been a 
source of anxiety to me for several years will be o ur fate. Similarly in regard to 
rice. We must get our people in the villages to tak e to hand-pounding of rice or  
hand-chakkis  for husking paddy, for it is a well-established fa ct that the white 
polished rice put out by mills is harmful to health .   
Khadi- Why and How, 1959, p.162 
 
The village worker should acquire all-round knowled ge about building up the 
whole village. There will be some sewing work in th e village, smithy, carpentry, 
leather work, agriculture, etc. -The village worker  should seek to bring about 
co-operation among the workers in these various occ upations so as to make 
them serve as harmonious parts of one whole.   
Khadi- Why and How, 1959, p.163 
 
Now we have to do the work anew with the objective of all-round village uplift. 
Let us see how far we can go. Even if our present a ctivities have to be 
slackened or reduced to nought for sometime on acco unt of these changes, it 
does not matter. We have created some sentiment abo ut Khadi among the 
people. But if there is some error in what we told the people about the 
significance of Khadi we must pause. If ours was a wrong claim we must declare 
our error openly and withdraw our claim. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 158  I would ask city-dwellers to produce their own Khad i. I would forgo the 
temptation to supply Khadi to them. We shall go and  settle in the villages. In 
case workers want to leave us on account of this ch ange we shall let them go. 
Unless our head and heart are converted to this ext ent we cannot achieve the 
desired result. We of the A.I.S.A. will merely dire ct policy. But decentralizing 
our work as much as possible we shall free ourselve s from day to day Khadi 
work completely. Thereafter we shall concentrate ou r energy and attention on 
the other activities or crafts carried out in the v icinity of the village we settle 
in. Only then will the real substance of our work b e realized. . . .Today our 
main concern should be to lay the foundation for th is work as deep as possible.   
Khadi- Why and How, 1959, p.177 
 
I am thinking of ways and means of improving the co ndition of the people 
through a rehabilitation of agriculture, cattle-bre eding and all other village 
industries. My problem will be solved, if I succeed  even in half a dozen villages, 
for as is the part so is the whole.   
Khadi- Why and How, 1959, p.181 
 
Begin with Yourself 
Correspondents have been writing, and friends have been seeing me, to ask me 
how to begin the village industries work and what t o do first. 
The obvious answer is, "Begin with yourself and do first that which is easiest for 
you to do." 
This answer, however, does not satisfy the enquirer s. Let me, therefore, be 
more explicit. 
Each person can examine all the articles of food, c lothing and other things that 
he uses from day to day and replace foreign makes o r city makes, by those 
produced by the villagers in their homes or fields with the simple inexpensive 
tools they can easily handle and mend. This replace ment will be itself, an 
education of great value and a solid beginning. The  next step will be opened Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 159  out to him of itself. For instance, say, the beginn er has been hitherto using a 
tooth-brush made in a Bombay factory. He wants to r eplace it with a village 
brush. He is advised to use a  babul  twig. If he has weak teeth or is toothless, he 
has to crush one end of it, with a rounded stone or  a hammer, on a hard 
surface. The other end he slits with a knife and us es the halves as tongue- 
scrapers. He will find these brushes to be cheaper and much cleaner than the 
very unhygienic factory- made tooth-brush. The city -made tooth-powder he 
naturally replaces with equal parts of clean, finel y- ground, wood-charcoal and 
clean salt. He will replace mill-cloth with village -spun Khadi, and mill- husked 
rice with hand-husked, unpolished rice, and white s ugar with village-made  gur.  
These I have taken merely as samples ... to deal wi th the difficulties that have 
been mentioned by those who have been discussing th e question with me.  
H., 25-1-’35, p.400  
 
Dairying 
Criminal negligence is the only cause of the misera ble condition of our cattle. 
Our  pinjrapoles, though they are an answer to our instinct for mercy , are a 
clumsy demonstration of its execution. Instead of b eing model dairy farms and 
great profitable national institutions, they are me rely depots for receiving 
decrepit cattle. Whilst professing the religion of cow protection, we have 
enslaved the cow and her progeny, and have become s laves ourselves.   
Y.I, 6-10-’21, p.318  
 
An ideal  goshala  would supply the city of its domicile with cheap a nd 
wholesome milk from cattle of its own keeping, and cheap and lasting foot-
wear not out of slaughtered hide but of the hide of  dead cattle. Such a  goshala  
will not be on one or two acres of ground in the he art of a city or in its 
immediate neighbourhood but it would have at some d istance, but within easy 
reach, fifty to a hundred acres of ground where a m odern dairy and a modern 
tannery would be conducted on strictly business but  national lines. Thus there 
would be no profits and no dividends to be paid and  there would be also no loss Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 160  incurred.. In the long run such institutions dotted  all over India would be a 
triumph of Hinduism and would be proof of Hindu ear nestness about cow, that 
is, cattle protection and it would provide decent e mployment for thousands of 
men including educated men; for both dairy and tann ery work requires expert 
scientific knowledge. Not Denmark but Indian should  be a model State for the 
finest dairy experiments, and India should not to h er shame have to export nine 
crore rupees worth of dead cattle hide annually and  for her consumption use 
slaughtered cattle hide. 
If such a state of things is a shame for India it i s a greater shame for Hindus. I 
wish that all the  goshala Committees will fake to heart the remarks I made in  
reply to the Giridih address and make their  goshalas into ideal dairies and 
tanneries and a refuge for all worn out and maimed cattle.   
Y.I., 22-10-’25, p.361  
 
Every  goshala  or  pinjrapole  should have a tannery adequate to its needs 
attached to it. In other words, the manager in char ge of every such institution 
should have a thorough knowledge of the immediate s teps necessary for 
utilizing the remains of dead cattle. If this is do ne, the question, viz. how many 
heads of cattle should a particular  goshala  contain, would not arise at all. 
I do not know what the rate of mortality of cattle in  goshalas  is nor is it 
relevant to my proposition. So long as there is a s ingle head of cattle in a  
goshala its manager ought to know how to dispose of its rem ains after it is 
dead, just as he is expected to know how to look af ter it while it is alive. 
Such humanitarian institutions for the protection o f cattle as I have described 
should normally take charge of the remains of the c attle that might die in the 
village. Therein lies the interest of the cattle, t he depressed classes and the 
general public alike. In villages where there are n o  goshalas  or the concomitant 
tanneries, some local person who believes in cow pr otection should take it 
upon himself to get the carcasses removed to the ne arest tannery or get the 
preliminary processes performed upon it and send th e useful parts there. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 161  The establishment of such tanneries as I have descr ibed does not require much 
capital outlay. Only some initial expenditure would  be needed to train up 
workers for this work.   
Y.I., 3-11-1-’27, p.367  
 
Hand-pounding of Rice and Hand-grinding of Corn 
In my writing on cent per cent Swadeshi, I have sho wn how some aspects of it 
can be tackled immediately with benefit to the star ving millions both 
economically and hygienically. The richest in the l and can share the benefit. 
Thus if rice can be pounded in the villages after t he old fashion, the wages will 
fill the pockets of the rice-pounding sisters and t he rice-eating millions will get 
some sustenance from the unpolished rice instead of  pure starch which the 
polished rice provides. Human greed, which takes no  account of the health or 
the wealth of the people who come under its heels, is responsible for the hide-
ous rice-mills one sees in all the rice-producing t racts. If public opinion was 
strong, it will make rice-mills an impossibility by  simply insisting on unpolished 
rice and appealing to the owners of rice-mills to s top a traffic that undermines 
the health of a whole nation and robs the poor peop le of an honest means of 
livelihood.   
H., 26-10-’34, p.292  
 
I regard the existence of power wheels for the grin ding of corn in thousands of 
villages as the limit of our helplessness. I suppos e India does not produce all the 
engines or grinding machines. . . . The planting of  such machinery and engines 
on a large scale in villages is also a sign of gree d. Is it proper to fill one's 
pockets in this manner at the expense of the poor? Every such machinery puts 
thousands of  hand-chakkis  out of work and takes away employment from 
thousands of housewives and artisans who make these  chakkis.  Moreover, the 
process is infective and will spread to every villa ge industry. The decay of the 
latter spells too the decay of art. If it meant rep lacement of old crafts by new 
ones, one might not have much to say against it. Bu t this is not what is Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 162  happening. In the thousands of villages where power  machinery exists, one 
misses the sweet music in the early morning of the grinders at work.   
H., 10-3-’46, p.34  
 
Machine Oil and Ghani Oil 
Shri Jhaverbhai has also examined the cause of the decline of the village  ghani.  
The most potent cause is the inability of the oilma n to command a regular 
supply of seeds. The villages are practically delud ed of seeds after the season. 
The oilman has no money to store the seeds, much le ss to buy them in. the 
cities. Therefore he has disappeared or is fast dis appearing. Lakhs of  ghanis  are 
today lying idle causing a tremendous waste of the country's resources. Surely it 
is the function of the State to resuscitate the exi sting  ghanis  by conserving 
seeds in the places of their origin and making them  available to the village 
oilman at reasonable rates. The Government loses no thing by giving this aid. It 
can be given, so Shri Jhaverbhai contends, through co-operative societies or 
Panchayats. If this is done, Shri Jhaverbhai is of opinion, based on research, 
that  ghani  oil can compete with the machine product and villa ger can be 
spared the infliction of the adulterated oil he get s today. It should be borne in 
mind that the only fat the villager gets, when he g ets any, is what the oils can 
give him. To  ghee  he is generally a stranger. 
He (Shri Jhaverbhai) has found out why this machine  oil is at all cheaper than 
the  ghani  oil. He gives three reasons, two of which are unav oidable. They are 
capital and the ability of the machine to extract t he last drop of oil and that 
too in a shorter time than the  ghani.  These advantages are neutralized by the 
commission the owner of this oil mill has to pay to  the middleman. But Shri 
Jhaverbhai cannot cope with the third reason, adult eration, unless he also 
takes to it. This naturally he will not do. He ther efore suggests that 
adulteration should be dealt with by the law. This can be done by enforcing the 
Anti-Adulteration Act if there is one or by enactin g it by licensing oil mills.   
H., 2-9-’39, p.253  
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 163  Gur and Khandsari 
Take the sugar industry. The largest major industry  next to the textile is that of 
the manufacture of sugar. It stands in no need of o ur assistance. Sugar factories 
are fast multiplying. Popular agencies have done li ttle to help the growth of 
this industry. It is indebted for its growth to fav ourable legislation. And today 
the industry is so prosperous and expanding that th e production of jaggery is 
becoming a thing of the past. It is admittedly supe rior to refined sugar in 
nutritive value. It is this very valuable cottage i ndustry that cries out for your 
help. This by itself furnishes large scope for rese arch and substantial help. We 
have to investigate the ways and means of keeping i t alive. This is but an 
illustration of what I mean.   
Cent Per Cent Swadeshi, 1958, p.5  
 
The advantages, attributed to  tadi,  are all available from other foodstuffs.  Tadi  
is made out of khajuri  juice. Fresh  khajuri  juice is not an intoxicant. It is 
known as  nira  in Hindustani and many people have been cured of t heir 
constipation as a result of drinking  nira.  I have taken it myself though it did not 
act as a laxative with me. I found that it had the same food value as sugar-cane 
juice. If one drinks a glass of  nira  in the morning instead of drinking tea etc., 
he should not need anything else for breakfast. As in the sugar-cane juice, palm 
juice can be boiled to make palm jaggery.  Khajuri  is a variety of palm tree. 
Several varieties of palm grow spontaneously in our  country. All of them yield 
drinkable juice. As  nira  gets fermented very quickly, it has to be used up 
immediately and therefore on the spot. Since this c ondition is difficult to fulfil 
except to a limited extent, in practice, the best u se of  nira  is to convert it into 
palm jaggery. Palm jaggery can well replace sugar-c ane jaggery. In fact some 
people prefer it to the latter. One advantage of pa lm jaggery over sugarcane 
jaggery is that it is less sweet and therefore one can eat more of it. The All-
India Village Industries Association has done a gre at deal to popularize palm 
jaggery, but much remains to be done. If the palms that are used for making  
tadi  are used for making jaggery, India will never lack  sugar and the poor will Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 164  be able to get good jaggery for very little money. Palm jaggery can be 
converted into molasses and refined sugar. But the jaggery is much more useful 
than refined sugar. The salts present in the jagger y are lost in the process of 
refining. Just as refined wheat flour and polished rice lose some of their nutri-
tive value because of the loss of the pericarp, ref ined sugar also loses some of 
the nutritive value of the jaggery. One may general ize that all foodstuffs are 
richer if taken in their natural state as far as po ssible. 
Key to Health, 1960, p.33-34  
 
Bee-keeping 
Bee-keeping seems to me to possess immense possibil ities. Apart from its 
village value, it may be cultivated as a hobby by m oneyed young men and 
women. They will add to the wealth of the country a nd produce the finest 
health-giving sugar for themselves. If they are phi lanthropically inclined, they 
can distribute it as health-giving food among sickl y Harijan children. There is no 
reason why it should be a luxury of the rich or an expensive medicinal vehicle 
in the hands of the  hakims  and  vaidyas.  No doubt, my hope is based on 
inferences drawn from meagre data. Experiments that  may be made in villages 
and in cities by young men and women should show wh ether honey can become 
a common article of food or has to remain an uncomm on article, which it is 
today.   
H., 1-2-’35, p.407  
 
Tanning 
It is estimated that rupees nine crores worth of ra w hide is annually exported 
from India and that much of it is returned to her i n the shape of manufactured 
articles. This means not only a material, but also an intellectual, drain. We 
miss the training we should receive in tanning and preparing the innumerable 
articles of leather we need for daily use. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 165  Tanning requires great technical skill. An army of chemists can find scope for 
their inventive talent in this great industry. Ther e are two ways of developing. 
One for the uplift of Harijans living in the villag es and eking out a bare 
sustenance, living in filth and degradation and con signed to the village ghetto, 
isolated and away from the village proper. This way  means part re-organization 
of villages and taking art, education, cleanliness,  prosperity and dignity to 
them. This means also the application of chemical t alent to village uplift. 
Tanning chemists have to discover improved methods of tanning. The village 
chemist has to stoop to conquer. He has to learn an d understand the crude 
village tanning, which is still in existence but wh ich is fast dying owing to 
neglect, not to say want of support. But the crude method may not be 
summarily scrapped, at least not before a sympathet ic examination. It has 
served well for centuries. It could not have done s o, if it had no merit. The only 
research I know in this direction is being carried on in Santiniketan, and then it 
was started at the now defunct Ashram at Sabarmati.  I have not been able to 
keep myself in touch with the progress of the exper iment at Santiniketan. 
There is every prospect of its revival at the Harij an Ashram, which the 
Sabarmati Ashram has now become. These experiments are mere drops in the 
ocean of possible research. 
Cow-preservation is an article of faith in Hinduism . No Harijan worth his salt 
will kill cattle for food. But, having become untou chable, he has learnt the evil 
habit of eating carrion. He will not kill a cow but  will eat with the greatest 
relish the flesh of a dead cow. It may be physiolog ically harmless. But psy-
chologically there is nothing, perhaps, so repulsiv e as carrion-eating. And yet, 
when a dead cow is brought to a Harijan tanner's ho use, it is a day of rejoicing 
for the whole household. Children dance round the c arcass, and as the animal is 
flayed, they take hold of bones or pieces of flesh and throw them at one 
another. As a tanner, who is living at the Harijan Ashram, describing the scenes 
at his own now forsaken home, tells me the whole fa mily is drunk with joy at 
the sight of the dead animal. I know how hard I hav e found it working among 
Harijans to wean them from the soul-destroying habi t of eating carrion. 
Reformed tanning means the automatic disappearance of carrion-eating. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 166  Well, here is the use for high intelligence and the  art of dissection. Here is also 
a mighty step in the direction of cow-preservation.  The cow must die at the 
hands of the butcher, unless we learn the art of in creasing her capacity of milk-
giving, unless we improve her stock and make her ma le progeny more useful for 
the field and carrying burdens, unless we make scie ntific use of all her excreta 
as manure, and unless, when she and hers die, we ar e prepared to make the 
wisest use of her hide, bone, flesh, entrails, etc.  
I am just now concerned only with the carcass. It i s well to remember here that 
the village tanner, thank God, has to deal only wit h the carcass, not the 
slaughtered animal. He has no means of bringing the  dead animal in a decent 
way. He lifts it, drags it, and this injures the sk in and reduces the value of the 
hide. If the villagers and the public knew the pric eless and noble service the 
tanner renders, they will provide easy and simple m ethods of carrying it, so as 
not to injure the skin at all. 
The next process is flaying the animal. This requir es great skill. I am told that 
none, not even surgeons, do this work better or mor e expeditiously than the 
village tanner does with his village knife. I have inquired of those who should 
know. They have not been able to show me an improve ment upon the village 
tanner. This is not to say that there is none bette r. I merely give the reader the 
benefit of my own very limited experience. The vill age tanner has no use for 
the bone. He throws it away. Dogs hover round the c arcass whilst it is flayed, 
and take away some, if not all, of the bones. This is a dead loss to the country. 
The bones, if powdered fine, apart from their other  uses, make valuable 
manure. What remains after the dogs have taken away  their share is 
transported to foreign countries and returns to us in the shape of handles, 
buttons, etc. 
The second way is urbanizing this great industry. T here are several tanneries in 
India doing this work. Their examination is outside  the scope of this article. 
This urbanization can do little good to the Harijan s, much less to the villages. It 
is a process of double drain from the villages. Urb anization in India is slow but 
sure death for her villages and villagers. Urbaniza tion can never support ninety Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 167  per cent of India's population, which is living in her 7,00,000 villages. To 
remove from these villages tanning and such other i ndustries is to remove what 
little opportunity there still is for making skille d use of the hand and the head. 
And when the village handicrafts disappear, the vil lagers working only with 
their cattle on the field, with idleness for six or  four months in the year, must, 
in the words of Madhusudan Das, be reduced to the l evel of the beast and be 
without proper nourishment, either of the mind or t he body, and, therefore, 
without joy and without hope. 
Here is work for the cent per cent Swadeshi lover a nd scope for the harnessing 
of technical skill to the solution of a great probl em. The work fells three apples 
with one throw. It serves the Harijans, it serves t he villagers, and it means 
honourable employment for the middle class intellig entsia who are in search of 
employment. Add to this the fact that intelligentsi a have a proper opportunity 
of coming in direct touch with the villagers.   
H., 7-9-’34, p.236-37  
 
Soap 
Villages would prepare their own soap from sajji-clay.  That soap will not have 
the luring fragrance of soaps turned out in the fac tories of Tata and Godrej. Its 
packing also will not be so attractive. But it will  have the quality of self-
sufficiency even like Khadi.   
Khadi- Why and How, 1959, p. 185 
 
Hand-made Paper 
I was told that, if there were enough orders, the p aper could be supplied at the 
same cost as the mill-made article. I know that han d-made paper can never 
supply the daily growing demand for paper. But love rs of the seven hundred 
thousand villages and their handicrafts will always  want to use hand-made 
paper, if it is easily procurable. Those who use ha nd-made paper know that it Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 168  has a charm of its own. Who does not know the famou s Ahmedabad paper? 
What mill-made paper can beat it in durability or p olish? 
The account-books of the old style are still made o f that paper. But it is 
probably a perishing industry like many such others . With a little 
encouragement, it ought never to perish. If there w as supervision, the 
processes might be improved and the defects that ar e to be noticed with some 
of this hand-made paper may be easily removed. The economic condition of the 
numberless people engaged in these little known tra des is well worth 
investigating. They will surely allow themselves to  be guided and advised and 
feel thankful to those who would take interest in t hem. 
H., 14-9-’34, p.234  
 
Ink 
The ink with which I am writing comes from Tenali. It supports about 12 
workers. It is making headway against odds. I had t hree more specimens sent to 
me by different makers, all no doubt struggling lik e the Tenali group. They 
interested me. I entered into correspondence with t hem. But I could do no 
more for them. A Swadeshi organization will examine  the samples of these inks 
in a scientific manner and guide them and encourage  the most promising ones. 
It is a good and growing industry requiring expert chemical knowledge.   
H., 14-9-’34, p.241  
 
Village Exhibitions 
If we want and believe that the village should not only survive but also become 
strong and flourishing, then the village perspectiv e is the only correct view-
point. If this is true then in our exhibitions ther e can be no place for the 
glamour and pomp of the cities. There should be no necessity for games and 
other entertainments that belong to the cities. An exhibition should not 
become a  tamasha;  nor a source of income; it should never become the  adver-
tising medium for traders. No sales should be allow ed there. Even Khadi and Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 169  village industry products should not be sold. An ex hibition should be a medium 
of education, should be attractive and it should be  such as to infuse in the 
villager the impulse to take to some industry or th e other. It should bring out 
the glaring defects and drawbacks in the present da y village life, and show 
methods to be adopted to set them right. It should also be able to indicate the 
extent of achievement in that direction ever since the idea of village uplift was 
sponsored. It should also teach how to make village  life artistic. 
Now let us see what an exhibition will be like if i t is to conform to the above 
conditions. 
1.  There should be two models of villages— one as exis ting today and the 
other an improved one. The improved village will be  clean all throughout. 
Its houses, its roads, its surroundings and its fie lds will be all clean. The 
condition of the cattle should also improve. Books,  charts, and pictures 
should be used to show what industries give increas ed income and how. 
2.  It must show how to conduct the various village ind ustries, wherefrom to 
obtain the needed implements, how to make them. The  actual working of 
each industry should be demonstrated. Along with th ese the following 
should also find place: 
a)  Ideal village diet; 
b)  Comparison between village industry and machine ind ustry; 
c)  Model lessons on rearing animals; 
d)  Art section; 
e)  Model of village latrine; 
f)  Farm-yard manure,  v.  chemical manure; 
g)  Utilization of hides, bones, etc. of animals; 
h)  Village music, musical instruments, village dramas;  
i)  Village games, village  akhadas  and forms of exercise; 
j)  Nai Talim; Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 170  k)  Village medicine; 
l)  Village maternity home. 
Subject to the policy enunciated in the beginning, this list may be further 
expanded. What I have indicated is by way of exampl e only, it should not be 
taken to be exhaustive. I have not made any mention  of the Gharkha and other 
village industries as they are taken for granted. W ithout them the exhibition 
will be absolutely useless.   
Gram Udyog Patrika, July 1946 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 171   
CHAPTER 21 
VILLAGE TRANSPORT A Plea for the Village Cart 
Shri Ishvarbhai S. Amin of Baroda sends me a long n ote on animal power  v.  
machine power. From it I copy the following relevan t portion: 
"Animal power is not costlier than machine power in  fields or short distance 
work and hence can compete with the latter in most cases. The present-day 
tendency is towards discarding animal power in pref erence to machine power. 
Take for example a bullock-driven cart, costing Rs.  100 and Rs. 200 for the 
bullocks. The bullocks can drive the cart at least 15 miles per day with a load 
of 16 Bengal maunds on rough sandy village roads. T his service will cost Re 0-
12-0 for two bullocks, Re 0-6-0 for the cartman and  Re-0-4-0 for cart 
depreciation, in total Re 1-6-0 per day. A one-ton motor lorry will cost for 15 
miles at least one gallon of petrol, some lubricati ng oil, huge repair and upkeep 
expenses, and a costly driver. For 15 miles' run th e lorry will cost Re 1-12-0 for 
petrol including lubricating oil, Re 0-12-0 for mai ntenance at the rate of Rs 6 
per day of eight hours' service and Re 0-8-0 for th e driver, cleaner and extra 
men required to load and empty the lorry. Hence the  total cost is Rs 2-12-0 i.e. 
Re 1-6-0 per cartload of 16 Bengal maunds. One bull ock cart is able to carry 7 
to 8 cartloads of manure in one day from the villag e site to the field which is 
about ½ mile away and will cost only Re 1-6-0 plus Re 0-6-0 for the extra man 
required to help the cartman to fill and empty the cart. While a motor lorry to 
do this job will not cost in any way less. A motor lorry may compete when it has 
to carry loads at a stretch for a long distance on a good metal road, where 
bullock carts seem too slow and uneconomical. It is  also not desirable to take 
animals long distances at one stretch as it tells m uch upon their energy and 
strength. Bullock carts, however, have been found t oiling long distances all day 
and night in competition with motor lorries from ra ilway stations to far-off 
interior places, but the physical condition of thes e bullocks is pitiable, because 
the owners give them less food in proportion to the  low earning. It is the 
slowness only which goes against the bullock cart, when rapid transport of Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 172  goods or the movement of men from one place to anot her is considered 
important. Villagers, however, to whom spare time b rings no money and time 
saved by motor is of no importance, should make it a point to walk for short 
distances and use carts for long journeys. If a far mer has his own cart and 
travels in it, he has not to spend anything in the form of ready money but uses 
the produce of his own field in producing power by feeding bullocks. Really 
grass and grain should be looked upon by the farmer  as his petrol, and the cart 
the motor lorry, and bullocks the engine converting  grass into power. The 
machine will neither consume grass nor will it yiel d manure, an article of vast 
importance. Then the villager has to have his bullo cks; in any case he has his 
grass. And if he has a cart, he is maintaining the village carpenter and the 
blacksmith; and if he is keeping a cow, he is maint aining a hydrogenation plant 
converting vegetable oil into solid butter or ghee and also at the same time a 
bullock manufacturing machine—thus serving a twofol d purpose." 
The invasion of the motor lorry may or may not succ eed. It would be wisdom if 
intelligent workers will study the pros and cons an d definitely guide the 
villagers. Shri Ishvarbhai's note should provoke th e thought of all village 
workers in the direction indicated in it.  
H., 3-7-’37, p.168  
 
Motor  V.  Cart 
Gram Udyog Patrika  for August (1946) examines the respective merits o f motor 
vans and carts for village propaganda. Those who wi ll read the whole argument 
should send for the  Patrika.  I give below the most important part of the 
argument: 
"We have been asked whether District Boards and oth er such local bodies, who 
wish to set apart a certain amount of money for vil lage work will do well to 
invest in motor vans for propaganda work of various  kinds in villages. It is a 
happy sign that institutions such as these are begi nning to realize their duty to 
the villages and are seeking to bridge the gulf tha t now exists between towns 
and villages and between the literate and the illit erate. The question is Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 173  whether speeding up matters by the use of motor van s which can visit more 
than one village in a night will suit the purpose. 
In all our expenditure, especially when that expend iture is undertaken 
expressly for the benefit of the village people, it  is necessary to see that the 
money spent goes back to the villager. District and  Local Boards obtain their 
money from the people, and their purchases must be such as will help to 
circulate money among the people. If on the other h and the money taken from 
the villagers by way of rates and taxes is sent out  of the locality, it must 
necessarily result in impoverishment of the people,  and this will perforce mean 
that there will be less and less money in the coffe rs of District and Local 
Boards. 
A Local Board does not set apart more than a few th ousands of rupees for 
village work. If it decides to buy even one motor v an for the purpose, it means 
about Rs 5,000 sent out of the locality to pay for the van and, in addition, 
constant expenditure on tyres and other spare parts , besides day to day 
expenditure on petrol, all of which are imported an d to pay for which money 
has to be drained out of the locality. The manifest  object of this expenditure is 
rural welfare, but, in order to be able to hear occ asional lectures on 
agriculture, health, prohibition, child welfare and  such like, or to listen to the 
gramophone or the radio, the villager has to bear t his heavy expenditure when 
he and his family have to live on about Rs 2 a mont h. What the villager needs 
above all is profitable employment. We steadily dep rive him of employment by 
buying imported articles, and by way of compensatio n give him lectures, magic 
lantern shows and tinned music all at his expense, and pat ourselves on the 
back that we are working for his welfare. Can anyth ing be more absurd? 
Compare with this what happens if in the place of t he motor van the much 
despised bullock cart were used. It will not make s o much stir nor so effectively 
declare to all the world that something wonderful i s being done for the 
villages. But if mere stage-acting and trumpet-blow ing are not intended but 
real quiet constructive work, then we submit that t he bullock cart will do much 
better. It can reach the most remote villages which  a motor lorry cannot do. It Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 174  costs only a fraction of the money required for a v an, so that many bullock 
carts can be bought, if necessary, to serve groups of villages in the district. The 
money spent on them goes to the village carpenter, blacksmith and cart- 
driver. Not a pie of it need go out of the district . The cart itself may be made 
an exhibit if it is scientifically constructed with  disked wheels, proper steel 
bearings, and axles with well placed and designed h ubs, spokes and felloes. The 
expenditure on equipment consequently instead of dr aining wealth out of the 
village will direct it into it. A motor is necessar y where speed is of the essence 
of the work to be done. But nothing of the kind can  be claimed for propaganda 
to be carried on in villages for rural welfare. On the other hand, slow, steady 
methods will be of greater avail. It will be an adv antage not to be able to rush 
from one village to another but to spend some time in each place. Only thus 
can the life and the problems of the people be prop erly understood, and the 
work directed to meet those problems be effective. 
Rural work and motor vans appear, therefore to go i ll together. What is 
required is steady, constructive effort, not lightn ing speed and empty show. We 
would commend to Local Boards and public institutio ns genuinely interested in 
village welfare to start by using only village-made  goods, to study the 
conditions which are steadily producing poverty in the villages, and concentrate 
on removing them one by one. When every side of vil lage life needs intensive, 
well- considered effort, it seems a waste of public  money to throw it away on 
methods which attempt to bring about village uplift  overnight." 
It is to be hoped that those who interest themselve s in village welfare will take 
to heart the obvious argument advanced in favour of  the cart. It will be cruel to 
destroy the village economy through the very agency  designed for village 
welfare.   
H., 16-9-’39, p.276  
 
Bullocks as Means of Transport 
The bullocks are the means of transport everywhere in our villages and have 
not ceased to be such even in a place like Simla. T he railway train and the Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 175  motor car go there, but all along the mountain road  I found bullocks trudging 
up and down dragging heavily-laden carts. It seems as if this means of transport 
is part of our lives and our civilization. And the bullock has to endure if our 
handicraft civilization is to endure. 
You have to find out whose animals are the best and  to discover how he 
manages to keep them so well. You will find out who se cow gives the largest 
amount of milk and discover how he keeps her and fe eds her. You may fix some 
prize for the best bullock and the best cow in the village. Without model cattle 
we cannot have a model village.   
H., 15-9-’40, p.282  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 176   
CHAPTER 22 
CURRENCY, EXCHANGE AND TAX 
Under my system, it is labour which is the current coin, not metal. Any person 
who can use his labour has that coin, has wealth. H e converts his labour into 
cloth, he converts his labour into grain. If he wan ts peraffin oil, which he 
cannot himself produce, he uses his surplus grain f or getting the oil. It is 
exchange of labour on free, fair and equal terms—he nce it is no robbery. You 
may object that this is a reversion to the primitiv e system of barter. But is not 
all international trade based on the barter system?   
H., 2-11-’34, p.302  
 
Then every village of India will almost be a self- supporting and self-contained 
unit, exchanging only such necessary commodities wi th other villages where 
they are not locally producible.   
Natesan, p.336  
 
My experience tells me that in order to make Khadi universal both in the cities 
and villages, it should be made available only in e xchange for yarn. As time 
passes I hope people will themselves insist on buyi ng Khadi through yarn 
currency.   
Swaraj through Charkha,1945, p.5  
 
Labour, as a matter of fact, is as much money as me tallic coin. If some put 
their money in* any particular concern, you put you r labour in it. Just as 
without money your labour would be useless, so also  the money in the world 
would be perfectly useless without labour.   
H., 2-2-’34, p.2,6  
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 177  Self-sufficiency does not mean narrowness. To be se lf-sufficient is not to be 
altogether self-contained. In no circumstances woul d we be able to produce all 
the things we need. So though our aim is complete s elf-sufficiency, we shall 
have to get from outside the village what we cannot  produce in the village; we 
shall have to produce more of what we can in order thereby to obtain in 
exchange what we are unable to produce.   
Khadi- Why and How, 1959, p. 166  
 
Just as gold and silver emerge as coin from the min t, so Khadi alone should 
emerge from a yarn bank.   
H., 7-7-’46, p.209  
 
In my part of India shells and seedless dried almon ds were used as coins 
accepted by the people and the State treasury. They  had no intrinsic value. 
They were measure of people's deep poverty. They co uld not afford the lowest 
metal coin. Five shells would buy them a little veg etable or a needle. I have 
suggested a measure which will not be a mere token but which will have always 
an intrinsic value which will also be its market va lue. In that sense it will be an 
ideal measure. For the present and by way of experi ment I have suggested a 
warp length of a single thread of yarn as the lowes t measure and to be used in 
dealings principally with the spinners and generall y with Khadi lovers. The 
spinners Can have all their daily wants supplied as  against fixed quantity of 
yarn. Stores will need to be maintained by the *A.I .S.A. in combination with the 
A.I.V.I.A. and ultimately with those who will give their cooperation. As I 
conceive it, the system can be worked only if it is  decentralized. This is not its 
demerit but merit. 
H., 18-1-’42, p.5  
 
Payment (of tax) in labour invigorates the nation. Where people perform labour 
voluntarily for the service of society, exchange of  money becomes unnecessary. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 178  The labour of collecting the taxes and keeping acco unts is saved and the results 
are equally good. 
H., 25-3-’39, p.65  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 179   
CHAPTER 23 
VILLAGE SANITATION 
Divorce between intelligence and labour has resulte d in criminal negligence of 
the villages. And so, instead of having graceful ha mlets dotting the land, we 
have dung-heaps. The approach to many villages is n ot a refreshing experience. 
Often one would like to shut one's eyes and stuff o ne's nose; such is the 
surrounding dirt and offending smell. If the majori ty of Congressmen were 
derived from our villages, as they should be, they should be able to make our 
villages models of cleanliness in every sense of th e word. But they have never 
considered it their duty to identify themselves wit h the villagers in their daily 
lives. A sense of national or social sanitation is not a virtue among us. We may 
take a kind of a bath, but we. do not mind dirtying  the well or the tank or the 
river by whose side or in which we perform ablution s. I regard this defect as a 
great vice which is responsible for the disgraceful  state of our villages and the 
sacred banks of the sacred rivers and for the disea ses that spring from 
insanitation.  
Constructive Programme 1961, p.15 
 
The things to attend to in the villages are cleanin g tanks and wells and keeping 
them clean, getting rid of dung heaps. If the worke rs will begin the work 
themselves, working like paid  bhangis  from day to day and always letting the 
villagers know that they are expected to join them so as ultimately to do the 
whole work themselves, they may be sure that they w ill find that the villagers 
will sooner or later co-operate. 
Lanes and streets have to be cleansed of all the ru bbish, which should be 
classified. There are portions which can be turned into manure, portions which 
have simply to be buried and portions which can be directly turned into wealth. 
Every bone picked up is valuable raw material from which useful articles can be 
made or which can be crushed into rich manure. Rags  and waste-paper can be Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 180  turned into paper, and excreta picked up are golden  manure for the village 
fields. 
Village tanks are promiscuously used for bathing, w ashing clothes, and drinking 
and cooking purposes. Many village tanks are also u sed by cattle. Buffaloes are 
often to be seen wallowing in them. The wonder is t hat, in spite of this sinful 
misuse of village tanks, villages have not been des troyed by epidemics. It is the 
universal medical evidence that this neglect to ens ure purity of the water 
supply of villages is responsible for many of the d iseases suffered by the 
villagers. 
This, it will be admitted, is a gloriously interest ing and instructive service, 
fraught with incalculable benefit to the suffering humanity of India. I hope it is 
clear from my description of the way in which the p roblem should be tackled, 
that, given willing workers who will wield the broo m and the shovel with the 
same ease and pride as the pen and the pencil, the question of expense is 
almost wholly eliminated. All the outlay that will be required is confined to a 
broom, a basket, a shovel and a pickaxe, and possib ly some disinfectant. Dry 
ashes are, perhaps, as effective a disinfectant as any that a chemist can supply. 
But here let philanthropic chemists tell us what is  the most effective and cheap 
village disinfectant that villagers can improvise i n their villages.   
H., 8-2-’35, p.416  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 181   
CHAPTER 24  
VILLAGE HEALTH AND HYGIENE 
In a well-ordered society the citizens know and obs erve the laws of health and 
hygiene. It is established beyond doubt that ignora nce and neglect of the laws 
of health and hygiene are responsible for the major ity of diseases to which 
mankind is heir. The very high death rate among us is no doubt due largely to 
our gnawing poverty, but it could be mitigated if t he people were properly 
educated about health and hygiene. 
Mens sana in corpore sano  is perhaps the first law for humanity. A healthy m ind 
in a healthy body is a self-evident truth. There is  an inevitable connection 
between mind and body. If we were in possession of healthy minds, we would 
shed all violence and, naturally obeying the laws o f health, we would have 
healthy bodies without an effort. 
Constructive Programme, 1961, p.21  
 
It is necessary to understand the meaning of the wo rd health. Health means 
body ease. He is a healthy man whose body is free f rom all disease; he carries 
on his normal activities without fatigue. Such a ma n should be able with ease to 
walk ten to twelve miles a day, and perform ordinar y physical labour without 
getting tired. He can digest ordinary simple food. His mind and his senses are in 
a state of harmony and poise. 
Key to Health, 1960, p.3 
 
The fundamental laws of health and hygiene are simp le and easily learnt. The 
difficulty is about their observance. Here are some : 
Think the purest thoughts and banish all idle and i mpure thoughts. 
Breathe the freshest air day and night. 
Establish a balance between bodily and mental work.  Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 182  Stand erect, sit erect, and be neat and clean in ev ery one of your acts, and let 
these be an expression of your inner condition. 
Eat to live for service of fellow-men. Do not live for indulging yourselves. 
Hence your food must be just enough to keep your mi nd and body in good 
order. Man becomes what he eats. 
Your water, food and air must be clean, and you wil l not be satisfied with mere 
personal cleanliness, but you will infect your surr oundings with the same 
threefold cleanliness that you will desire for your selves.  
Constructive Programme, 1961, p.22 
 
Nature Cure for Disease 
The practice of nature cure does not require high a cademic qualifications or 
much erudition. Simplicity is the essence of univer sality. Nothing that is meant 
for the benefit of the millions requires much erudi tion. The latter can be 
acquired only by the few and therefore can benefit the rich only. But India lives 
in her seven lakhs of villages—obscure, tiny, out-o f-the-way villages, where the 
population in some cases hardly exceeds a few hundr ed, very often not even a 
few score. I would like to go and settle down in so me such village. That is real 
India, my India, for which I live. You cannot take to these humble people the 
paraphernalia of highly qualified doctors and hospi tal equipment. In simple 
natural remedies and Ramanama lies their only hope.   
H., 7-4-’46, p.69  
 
I hold that where the rules of personal, domestic a nd public sanitation are 
strictly observed and due care is taken in the matt er of diet and exercise, there 
should be no occasion for illness or disease. Where  there is absolute purity, 
inner and outer, illness becomes impossible. If the  village people could but 
understand this, they would not need doctors, hakim s or vaidyas. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 183  Nature cure implies an ideal mode of life and that in its turn presupposes ideal 
living conditions in towns and villages. The name o f God is, of course, the hub 
round which the nature cure system revolves.  
H., 26-5-’46, p.153  
 
Nature cure implies that the treatment should be th e. cheapest and the 
simplest possible. The ideal is that such treatment  should be carried out in the 
villages. The villagers should be able to provide t he necessary means and 
equipment. What cannot be had in the villages shoul d be procured. Nature cure 
does mean a change for the better in one's outlook on life itself. It means 
regulation of one's life in accordance with the law s of health. It is not a matter 
of taking the free medicine from the hospital or fo r fees. A man who takes free 
treatment from the hospital accepts charity. The ma n who accepts nature cure 
never begs. Self-help enhances self-respect. He tak es steps to cure himself by 
eliminating poisons from the system and takes preca utions against falling ill in 
the future. 
Right diet and balanced diet are necessary. Today o ur villages are as bankrupt 
as we are ourselves. To produce enough vegetables, fruits and milk in the 
villages, is an essential part of the nature cure s cheme. Time spent on this 
should not be considered a waste. It is bound to be nefit all the villagers and 
ultimately the whole of India,   
H., 2-6-’46, p.165  
 
The nature cure of my conception for the villagers is limited to rendering such 
aid as can be given to them through what can be pro cured in the village. For 
example, I would not need either electricity or ice  for them. Such work can 
only be for those like me who have become village-m inded.   
H., 11-8-’46, p.257  
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 184  My nature cure is designed solely for villagers and  villages. Therefore, there is 
no place in it for the microscope, X-rays and simil ar things. Nor is there room in 
nature cure for medicines, such as quinine, emetin and penicillin. Personal 
hygiene and healthy living are of primary importanc e. And these should suffice. 
If everyone could achieve perfection in this art, t here could be no disease. And, 
while obeying all the laws of nature in order to cu re illness, if it does come, the 
sovereign remedy ever lies in Ramanama. But this cu re through Ramanama can-
not become universal in the twinkling of an eye. To  carry conviction to the 
patient, the physician has to be a living embodimen t of the power of Rama-
nama. Meantime, all that Can possibly be had from t he five agencies of nature 
must be taken and used. They are earth, water, ethe r, fire and wind. This, to 
my mind, is the limit of nature cure. Therefore, my  experiment in Uruli 
Kanchan consists in teaching the villagers how to l ive clean and healthy lives 
and in trying to cure the sick through the proper u se of the five agencies. If 
necessary, curative herbs that grow locally, may be  used. Wholesome and 
balanced diet is, of course, an indispensable part of nature cure.   
H., 11-8-’46, p.260  
 
The science of natural therapeutics is based on a u se, in the treatment of 
disease, of the same five elements which constitute  the human body.   
Key to Health., 1960, p.57  
 
Earth 
Just lays great emphasis on the use of earth. I fel t that I ought to give it a trial. 
For constipation, Just advises cold mud poultice on  the lower abdomen. I made 
a mud poultice by mixing clean dry earth with water , packed it in a piece of 
thin cloth and kept it on the abdomen throughout th e night. The result was 
most satisfactory.   
Key to Health, 1960, p. 58-59 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 185  The mud poultice should be 3 inches broad, 6 inches  long and £ inch thick.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.59  
 
It is my experience that a mud poultice applied to the head, relieves headache 
in most cases. I have tried it in hundreds of cases . Headache may be due to 
several causes, but whatever the cause, as a genera l rule, an application of 
mud poultice relieves it for the time being. 
Mud poultices cure ordinary boils. I have applied m ud to discharging abscesses 
as well. For these cases I prepare the poultice by packing the mud in a clean 
piece of cloth dipped in potassium permanganate lot ion, and apply it to the 
abscess after washing it clean with permanganate lo tion. In the majority of 
cases this treatment results in complete cure. I do  not remember a single case 
in which it has failed me. Mud application immediat ely relieves the pain of a 
wasp sting. I have used it in many cases of scorpio n bite, though with much less 
success.   
Key to Health, 1960, p. 59-60 
 
In high fever, an application of mud poultice on th e head and abdomen is very 
useful. Although it does not always bring down the temperature, it does 
invariably soothe the patient and make him feel bet ter so that the patients 
themselves ask for these applications. 
I have used it in several cases of typhoid fever. T he fever no doubt runs its own 
course but mud applications seem to relieve restles sness and abate the 
suffering.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.60  
 
In Sevagram we have made free use of hot mud poulti ces as a substitute for 
antiphlogistine. A little oil and salt is added to the mud and it is heated suffi-
ciently long to ensure sterilization.   Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 186  Key to Health, 1960, p.61  
 
It is safe to use soft alluvial clay, which is neit her gritty nor sticky. One should 
never use earth taken from manured soil. Earth shou ld be dried, pounded, and 
passed through a fine sieve. If there is any doubt as to its cleanliness, it should 
be well heated and thus sterilized.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.61  
 
Just writes that clean earth may be eaten in order to overcome constipation. 
Five to ten grams is the maximum dose. The rational e is said to be this. Earth is 
not digested. It acts as roughage and must pass out . The peirstalsis thus 
stimulated pushes out the faecal matter as well. I have not tried it myself. 
Therefore those who wish to do so, should try it on  their own responsibility. I 
am inclined to think that a trial or two is not lik ely to harm anyone.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.62  
 
Water 
Hip bath and sitz bath are the most important of Ku hne's contributions to 
hydro-therapy. He has devised a special tub for use  though one can do without 
it. Any tub thirty to thirty-six inches long accord ing to the patient's height 
generally serves the purpose. Experience will indic ate the proper size. The tub 
should be filled with fresh cold water so that it d oes not overflow when the 
patient sits in it. In summer the water may be iced , if it is not cold enough, to 
give a gentle shock to the patient. Generally, wate r kept in earthen jars 
overnight answers the purpose. Water can also be co oled by putting a piece of 
cloth on the surface of the water and then fanning it vigorously. The tub should 
be kept against the bathroom wall and a plank put i n the tub to serve as back 
rest. The patient should sit in the tub keeping his  feet outside. Portions of the 
body outside water should be kept well covered so t hat the patient does not 
feel cold. After the patient is comfortably seated in the tub, gentle friction Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 187  should be applied to his abdomen with a soft towel.  This bath can be taken for 
five to thirty minutes. When it is over, the body s hould be rubbed dry and the 
patient put to bed. 
Hip bath brings down the temperature in high fever and given in the manner 
described above it never does any harm, and may do much good. It relieves 
constipation and improves digestion. The patient fe els fresh and active after it. 
In cases of constipation, Kuhne advises a brisk wal k for half an hour 
immediately after the bath. It should never be give n on a full stomach. 
I have tried hip baths on a fairly large scale. The y have proved efficacious in 
more than 75 cases out of 100. In cases of hyperpyr exia, if the patient's 
condition permits of his being seated in the tub, t he temperature immediately 
invariably falls at least by two to three degrees, and the onset of delirium is 
averted.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.63-65  
 
Now about the sitz or friction bath. The organ of r eproduction is one of the 
most sensitive parts of the body. There is somethin g illusive about the 
sensitiveness of the glans penis and the foreskin. Anyway, I know not how to 
describe it. Kuhne has made use of this knowledge f or therapeutic purposes. He 
advises application of gentle friction to the outer  end of the external sexual 
organ by means of a soft wet piece of cloth, while cold water is being poured. 
In the case of the male the glans penis should be c overed with the foreskin 
before applying friction. The method advised by Kuh ne is this. A stool should be 
placed in a tub of cold water so that the seat is j ust about the level of the 
water in the tub. The patient should sit on the sto ol with his feet outside the 
tub and apply gentle friction to the sexual organ w hich just touches the surface 
of the water in the tub. This friction should never  cause pain. On the contrary 
the patient should find it pleasant and feel rested  and peaceful at the end of 
the bath. Whatever the ailment, the sitz bath makes  the patient feel better for 
the time being. Kuhne places sitz baths higher than  hip baths. I have had much 
less experience of the former than of the latter. T he blame, I think, lies mostly Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 188  with myself. I have been lax. Those whom I advised sitz baths, have not been 
patient with the experiment, so that I cannot expre ss an opinion on the 
efficacy of these baths, based on personal experien ce. It is worth a trial by 
everyone. If there is any difficulty about finding a tub, it is possible to pour 
water from a jug or a  lota  and take the friction bath. It is bound to make th e 
patient feel rested and peaceful. As a general rule , people pay scant attention 
to the cleansing of the sexual organ. The friction bath will easily achieve that 
end. Unless one is particularly careful, dirt accum ulates between the foreskin 
and the glans penis. This must be removed. Insisten ce on keeping the sexual 
organ clean and patiently following the treatment o utlined above will make the 
observance of Brahmacharya comparatively easier. It  will result in making the 
local nerve endings less sensitive and unwanted sem inal emissions less likely. 
To say the least, it is very unclean to allow semin al emissions to occur. Greater 
insistence on cleanliness should and will cause a f eeling of revulsion against the 
process and make one much more particular than othe rwise in taking all the 
precautions to avoid them.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.67-69  
 
Wet sheet packs are also useful in the treatment of  prickly heat, urticaria, 
other forms of skin irritation, measles, smallpox e tc. I have tried them on a 
fairly large scale for these ailments. For smallpox  and measles cases, I added 
enough potassium permanganate to the water to give it a light pink colour. The 
sheet used for these patients, should afterwards be  sterilized by soaking in it 
boiling water and leaving it in it till it cools do wn sufficiently and then washed 
with soap and water. 
In cases where circulation has become sluggish, the  leg muscles feel sore and 
there is a peculiar ache and feelings of discomfort  in the legs, an ice massage 
does a lot of good. This treatment is more effectiv e in summer months. 
Massaging a weak patient with ice in winter might p rove a risky affair. 
Now a few words about the therapeutics of hot water . An intelligent use of hot 
water gives relief in many cases. Application of io dine is a very popular remedy Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 189  for all sorts of injuries and the like. Application  of hot water will prove equally 
effective in most of these cases. Tincture of iodin e is applied on swollen and 
bruised areas. Hot water fomentations are likely to  give equal relief, if not 
more. Again, iodine drops are used in cases of ear- ache. Irrigation of the ear 
with warm water is. likely to relieve the pain in m ost of these cases. The use of 
iodine is attended with certain risks. The patient may have allergy towards the 
drug. Iodine mistaken for something else and taken internally might prove 
disastrous. But there is no risk whatsoever in usin g hot water. Boiling water is 
as good a disinfectant as tincture of iodine. I do not mean to belittle the 
usefulness of iodine or suggest that hot water can replace it in all cases. Iodine 
is one of the few drugs which I regard most useful and necessary, but it is an 
expensive thing. The poor cannot afford to buy it a nd moreover its use cannot 
be safely entrusted to everybody. But water is avai lable everywhere. We may 
not despise its therapeutic value because it is obt ained so easily. Knowledge of 
common household remedies often proves a godsend in  many a crisis.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.71-72  
 
Steam is a more valuable therapeutic agent. It can be used to make the patient 
sweat. Steam baths are most useful in cases of rheu matism and other joint-
pains. The easiest as well as the oldest method of taking steam bath is this. 
Spread a blanket or two on a sparsely but tightly w oven cot and put one or two 
covered vessels full with boiling water under it. M ake the patient lie flat on the 
cot and cover him up in such a way that the ends of  the covering blankets touch 
the .ground and thus prevent the steam from escapin g and the outside, air from 
getting in. After arranging everything as above, th e lid from the vessels 
containing boiling water is removed and steam soon gets on to the patient lying 
between the blankets. It may be necessary to change  the water once or twice. 
Usually in India people keep an  angithi  under the pots to keep the water 
boiling. This ensures continuous discharge of steam , but is attended with risk of 
accidents. A single spark might set fire to the bla nkets or to the cot and Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 190  endanger the patient's life. Therefore, it is advis able to use the method 
described by me even though it might seem slow and tedious. 
Some people add  neem  leaves or other herbs to the water used for genera ting 
steam. I do not know if such an addition increases the efficiency of steam. The 
object is to induce sweat and that is attained by m ere steam. 
In cases of cold feet or aching of legs, the patien t should be made to sit with 
his feet and legs immersed up to the knees in as ho t water as he can bear. A 
little mustard powder can be added to the water. Th e foot bath should not last 
for more than fifteen minutes. This treatment impro ves the local circulation 
and gives immediate relief. 
In cases of common cold and sore throat a steam ket tle which is very much like 
an ordinary tea kettle with a long nozzle can be us ed for applying steam to the 
nose or throat. A rubber tube of required length ca n be attached to any 
ordinary kettle for this purpose.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.73-75  
 
Akash 
Akash  might be taken for the empty space surrounding the  earth and the 
atmosphere round it.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.75  
 
Sky or the ether is the abode of the atmosphere. On e can pump out air say 
from an empty bottle and create a vacuum, but who c an pump out the vacuum 
itself? That is  akash.  
This  akash  we have to make use of to maintain or to regain he alth.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.76  
 
The more we utilize this great element  akash the healthier we will be. The first 
lesson to be learnt is this, that we should not put  any partition between Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 191  ourselves and the sky — the infinite — which is ver y near and yet very far away. 
If our bodies could be in contact with the sky with out the intervention of 
houses, roofs and even clothes, we are likely to en joy the maximum amount of 
health. This is not possible for everyone. But all can and should accept the 
validity of the statement and adapt life accordingl y. To the extent that we are 
able to approach the state in practice, we will enj oy contentment and peace of 
mind.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.77  
 
This train of thought will make the thinker keep hi s surroundings as open as 
possible. He will not fill the house with unnecessa ry furniture and will use the 
minimum of clothes that are necessary. Many househo lds are so packed with all 
sorts of unnecessary decorations and furniture whic h one can very well do 
without, that a simple living man will feel suffoca ted in those surroundings. 
They are nothing but means of harbouring dust, bact eria and insects.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.78  
 
One should make it a point to sleep in the open. Su fficient covering should be 
used to protect oneself against the inclemencies of  the weather — against cold 
and dew. In rainy season an umbrella-like roof with out walls should be used for 
keeping the rain out. For the rest, the starlit blu e canopy should form the roof, 
so that whenever one opens one's eyes, he or she ca n feast them on the ever 
changing beautiful panorama of the heavens. He will  never tire of the scene 
and it will not dazzle or hurt his eyes. On the con trary, it will have a soothing 
effect on him. To watch the different starry conste llations floating in their 
majesty is a feast for the eyes. One who establishe s contact with the stars as 
living witnesses to all his thoughts will never all ow any evil or impurity to enter 
his mind and will enjoy peaceful, refreshing sleep.  
Let us descend from the  akash  above to the  akash within and immediately 
about us. Thus the skin has millions of pores. If w e fill up the empty space 
within these pores, we simply die. Any clogging of the pores therefore must Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 192  interfere with the even flow of health. Similarly w e must not fill up the 
digestive tract with unnecessary foodstuffs. We sho uld eat only as much as we 
need and no more. Often one overeats or eats indige stible things without being 
aware of it. An occasional fast, say once a week or  once a fortnight, will enable 
one to keep the balance even. If one is unable to f ast for the whole day, one 
should miss one or more meals during the day. Natur e abhors a vacuum is only 
partially true. Nature constantly demands a vacuum.  The vast space 
surrounding us is the standing testimony of the tru th.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.79-81  
 
Sun 
Sunbath is as useful as ordinary water bath though the two cannot replace one 
another. In cases of debility and slow circulation,  exposure of the uncovered 
body to the morning sun acts as an all-round genera l tonic and accelerates the 
metabolism. The morning sun has the largest amount of ultra-violet rays which 
are a most effective component of the sun's rays. I f the patient feels cold, he 
should lie in the sun covered up and gradually expo se more and more of his 
body as he gets used to it. One can also take the s unbath pacing up and down 
in the sun without any clothes on, in a private enc losure or in any other place 
away from public gaze. If such a place is not withi n easy reach, one can just 
cover up the private parts by tying up a piece of c loth or a  langoti  and expose 
the rest of his body to the sun.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.81-82  
 
I know of many persons who have been benefited by s unbaths. It is a well-
known treatment for tuberculosis.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.82  
 
Sun treatment often results in the cure of intracta ble ulcers.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.82  Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 193   
Air 
This fifth element is as important as the four alre ady discussed in the foregoing 
pages. The human body which is composed of the five  elements cannot do 
without any one of them. Therefore no one should be  afraid of air. Generally, 
wherever our people go, they make devices to keep o ut the sun and the air and 
thus jeopardize their health. If one cultivates the  habit of living in the open in 
the midst of plenty of fresh air, right from childh ood, the body will become 
hardened and he or she will never suffer from cold in the head and the like 
ailments.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.83  
 
The Extent of Medical Aid 
With the commencement of the activities of the A.I. V.I.A., medical aid finds a 
prominent, if not almost an exclusive, place on the  programme of many 
workers. The aid consists in distributing among the  villagers free medicines, 
Allopathic, Ayurvedic, Unani or Homeopathic, or all  combined. Druggists selling 
these medicines are quite ready to oblige workers a pproaching them for a few 
medicines, which co£t them a trifle and which, in t heir opinion, may, if they 
look at the gift selfishly, bring them more buyers.  The poor patients become 
the victims of well-intentioned, but ill-informed o r over-enthusiastic, workers. 
More than three-fourths of these drugs are not only  useless but imperceptibly, 
if not perceptibly, harmful to the bodies into whic h they are put. Where they 
do bring some temporary relief to the patients, the ir substitutes -are as a rule 
to be found in the village bazaar. 
Therefore, A.I.V.I.A. is leaving medical relief of the kind I have described 
severely alone. Its primary care is educative in ma tters of health as well as of 
economy. Are not both inter-related? Does not healt h mean wealth for the 
millions? Their bodies, not their intellect, are th e primary instruments of 
wealth. The Association, therefore, seeks to teach people how to prevent Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 194  disease. It is well known that the food of the mill ions is very deficient in its 
nourishing value. What they do eat they misuse. The ir knowledge of hygiene is 
practically nil. Village sanitation is as bad as it  well can be. If, therefore, these 
defects can be put right and the people imbibe the simple rules of hygiene, 
most of the ailments they suffer from must disappea r without further effort or 
any outlay of money. Hence the Association does not  contemplate opening 
dispensaries. Investigations are now being made to find out what the villages 
can supply in the shape of drugs. Satish Babu's. ch eap remedies* are an effort in 
that direction. But incredibly simple though they a re, he is experimenting with 
a view to making drastic reduction in the number of  these remedies, without 
diminishing their efficacy. He is studying the baza ar drugs and testing them and 
comparing them with the corresponding drugs in the British pharmacopoeia. 
The desire is to wean the simple villagers from the  awe of mysterious pills and 
infusions.   
Key to Health, 1960, p.59  
 
Where cases of fever, constipation or such common d iseases come to village 
workers for help they will certainly have to render  such help as they can. 
Where one is certain of the diagnosis, there is no doubt that the village bazaar 
medicine is the cheapest and best. If one must stoc k drugs, castor oil, quinine 
and boiling water are the best medical agents. Cast or oil may be locally 
procurable. The  senna  leaf may serve the same purpose. Quinine I should use 
sparingly. Every fever does not require quinine tre atment. Nor does every fever 
yield to quinine. Most fevers will disappear after a fast or a semifast. 
Abstention from cereals, pulses and milk, and takin g fruit juices or boiling 
raisin water, even boiling  gud  water with fresh lemon juice or tamarind, is a 
semifast. Boiling water is a most powerful medical agent. It may move the 
bowels, it will induce perspiration and therefore a bate fever; it is the safest 
and cheapest disinfectant. In every case where it i s required to be drunk, the 
water must be allowed to cool till it is fairly bea rable to the skin. Boiling does Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 195  not mean mere heating. The water begins to bubble a nd evaporate after it is on 
the boil. 
Where the workers do not know for certain what to d o, they must allow the 
local  vaidya  to have full sway. Where he is non-existent or unr eliable and the 
workers know a philanthropic doctor nearby, they ma y invoke his assistance. 
But they will find that the most effective way of d ealing even with disease is to 
attend to sanitation. Let them remember that nature  is the finest physician. 
They may be sure that nature is repairing what man has damaged. She appears 
to have become powerless when man continuously hamp ers her. Then she sends 
death — her last and peremptory agent to destroy wh at is beyond repair — and 
provides a fresh garment for the wearer. Sanitary a nd hygienic workers are 
therefore the best helpers or the best physicians e very person has, whether he 
knows it or not.   
H., 5-4-’35, p. 59 
 
Medical relief as part of village work or social se rvice plays an important part in 
many reports I receive from numerous organizations.  This relief consists of 
medicines supplied to patients who from far and nea r flock to any person who 
advertises himself as distributor of such relief. I t means no trouble on the part 
of the medicine man. He need not have much or any k nowledge of diseases and 
the symptoms. Medicines he often receives free from  obliging chemists. 
Donations are always to be had from indiscriminate donors whose conscience is 
satisfied if they can distribute their charity in a id of suffering humanity. 
This social service has appeared to me to be the la ziest form of service and 
often even mischievous. It works mischief when the patient is expected to do 
nothing save to swallow the drug given to him. He i s none the wiser for having 
received the medicine. If anything he is worse off than before. The knowledge 
that he can get for nothing or for a trifle, a pill  or a potion that will correct 
certain irregularities will tempt him to repeat the m. The fact that he gets such 
aid free of charge will undermine his self-respect which should disdain to 
receive anything for nothing. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 196  There is another type of medical relief which is a boon. It is given by those who 
know the nature of diseases, who will tell the pati ents why they have their 
particular complaints and will also tell them how t o avoid them. Such servants 
will rush to assist at all odd hours of the day or night. Such discriminating relief 
is an education in hygiene, teaching the people how  to observe cleanliness and 
to gain health. But such service is rare. In the ma jority of cases mention of 
medical relief in reports is a piece of advertiseme nt leading to donations for 
other activities requiring perhaps as little exerti on or knowledge as medical 
relief. I would therefore urge all workers in the s ocial field, whether urban or 
rural, to treat their medical activity as the least  important item of service. It 
would be better to avoid all mention of such relief . Workers would do well to 
adopt measures that would prevent disease in their localities. Their stock of 
medicines should be as small as possible. They shou ld study the bazaar 
medicines available in their villages, know their r eputed properties, and use 
them as far as possible. They will find as we are f inding in Sindi (a village near 
Wardha) that hot water, sunshine, clean salt and so da with an occasional use of 
castor oil or quinine answer most purposes. We make  it a point to send all 
serious cases to the Civil Hospital. Patients flock  to Mirabahen and receive 
lessons in hygiene and prevention of diseases. They  do not resent this method 
of approach instead of simply being given a powder or a mixture.  
H., 9-11-’35, p.308 
 
* Home and Village Doctor,  By Satish Chandra Das Gupta, Khadi Pratishthan, 15 , College 
Square, Calcutta. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 197                                                                                                                                                                                                       
CHAPTER 25 
DIET 
Whilst it is true that man cannot live without air and water, the thing that 
nourishes the body is food. Hence the saying, food is life. 
Food can be divided into three categories: vegetari an, flesh and mixed. Flesh 
foods include fowl and fish. Milk is an animal prod uct and cannot by any means 
be included in a strictly vegetarian diet. It serve s the purpose of meat to a very 
large extent. In medical language it is classified as animal food. A layman does 
not consider milk to be animal food. On the other h and, eggs are regarded by 
the layman as a flesh food. In reality, they are no t. Nowadays sterile eggs are 
also produced. The hen is not allowed to see the co ck and yet it lays eggs. A 
sterile egg never develops into a chick. Therefore,  he who can take milk should 
have no objection to taking sterile eggs. 
Medical opinion is mostly in favour of a mixed diet , although there is a growing 
school, which is strongly of the opinion that anato mical and physiological 
evidence is in favour of man being a vegetarian. Hi s teeth, his stomach, 
intestines etc. seem to prove that nature has meant  man to be a vegetarian. 
Vegetarian diet, besides grains, pulses, edible roo ts, tubers and leaves, 
includes fruits, both fresh and dry. Dry fruit incl udes nuts like almonds, pis-
tachio, walnut etc. 
I have always been in favour of pure vegetarian die t. But experience has taught 
me that in order to keep perfectly fit, vegetarian diet must include milk and 
milk products such as curds, butter,  ghee etc. This is a significant departure 
from my original idea. I excluded milk from my diet  for six years. At that time, 
I felt none the worse for the denial. But in the ye ar 1917, as a result of my own 
ignorance, I was laid on with severe dysentery. I w as reduced to a skeleton, but 
I stubbornly refused to take any medicine and with equal stubborness refused 
to take milk or buttermilk. But I could not build u p my body and pick up 
sufficient strength to leave the bed. I had taken a  vow of not taking milk. A Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 198  medical friend suggested that at the time of taking  the vow, I could have had in 
mind only the milk of the cow and buffalo; why shou ld the vow prevent me 
from taking goat's milk? My wife supported him and I yielded. Really speaking, 
for one who has given up milk, though at the time o f taking the vow only the 
cow and the buffalo were in mind, milk should be ta boo. All animal milks have 
practically the same composition, though the propor tion of the components 
varies in each case. So I may be said to have kept merely the letter, not the 
spirit, of the vow. Be that as it may, goat's milk was produced immediately and 
I drank it. It seemed to bring me new life. I picke d up rapidly and was soon able 
to leave the bed. On account of this and several si milar experiences, I have 
been forced to admit the necessity of adding milk t o the strict vegetarian diet. 
But I am convinced that in the vast vegetable kingd om there must be some 
kind, which, while supplying those necessary substa nces which we derive from 
milk and meat, is free from their drawbacks, ethica l and other. 
In my opinion there are definite drawbacks in takin g milk or meat. In order to 
get meat we have to kill. And we are certainly not entitled to any other milk 
except the mother's milk in our infancy. Over and a bove the moral drawback, 
there are others, purely from the point of view of health. Both milk and meat 
bring with them the defects of the animal from whic h they are derived. 
Domesticated cattle are hardly ever perfectly healt hy. Just like man, cattle 
suffer from innumerable diseases. Several of these are overlooked even when 
the cattle are subjected to periodical medical exam inations. Besides, medical 
examination of all the cattle in India seems to be an impossible feat, at any 
rate for the present. I am conducting a dairy at th e Sevagram Ashram. I can 
easily get help from medical friends. Yet I cannot say with certainty that all the 
cattle in the Sevagram Dairy are healthy. On the co ntrary, a cow that had been 
considered to be healthy by everybody was found to be suffering from 
tuberculosis. Before this diagnosis was made, the m ilk of that cow had been 
used regularly in the Ashram. The Ashram also takes  milk from the farmers in 
the neighbourhood. Their cattle have not been medic ally examined. It is 
difficult to determine whether a particular specime n of milk is safe for 
consumption or not. We have to rest content with as  much safety as boiling of Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 199  the milk can assure us of. If the Ashram cannot boa st of foolproof medical 
examination of its cattle, and be certain of the sa fety of its dairy products, the 
situation elsewhere is not likely to be much better . What applies to the milch 
cattle applies to a much greater extent to the anim als slaughtered for meat. As 
a general rule, man just depends upon luck to escap e from such risks. He does 
not seem to worry much about his health. He conside rs himself to be quite safe 
in his medical fortress in the shape of doctors, vaids  and  hakims . His main 
worry and concern is how to get wealth and position  in society. This worry 
overshadows all the rest. Therefore, so long as som e selfless scientist does not, 
as a result of patient research work, discover a ve getable substitute for milk 
and meat, man will go on taking meat and milk. 
Now let us consider mixed diet. Man requires food w hich can supply tissue 
building substances to provide for the growth and d aily wear and tear of the 
body. It should also contain something which can su pply energy, fat, certain 
salts and roughage to help the excretion of waste m atter. Tissue building 
substances are known as proteins. They are obtained  from milk, meat, eggs, 
pulses and nuts. The proteins contained in milk and  meat, in other words, the 
animal proteins being more easily digestible and as similable, are much more 
valuable than vegetable proteins. Milk is superior to meat. The medicoes tell us 
that in cases where meat cannot be digested, milk i s digested quite easily. For 
vegetarians milk being the only source of animal pr oteins, is a very important 
article of diet. The proteins in raw eggs are consi dered to be the most easily 
digestible of all proteins. 
But everybody cannot afford to drink milk. And milk  is not available in every 
place. I would like to mention here a very importan t fact with regard to milk. 
Contrary to the popular belief, skimmed milk is a v ery valuable article of diet. 
There are times when it proves even more useful tha n whole milk. The chief 
function of milk is to supply animal proteins for t issue building and tissue 
repair. Skimming, while it partially removes the fa ts, does not affect the 
proteins at all. Moreover, the available skimming i nstruments cannot remove all Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 200  the fat from milk. Neither is there any likelihood of such an instrument being 
constructed. 
The body requires other things besides milk, whole or skimmed. I give the 
second place to cereals — wheat, rice,  juwar, bajri  etc. These are used as the 
staple diet. Different cereals are used as staple i n different provinces of India. 
In many places, more than one kind of cereals are e aten at the same time for 
instance, small quantities of wheat,  bajri  and rice are often served together. 
This mixture is not necessary for the nourishment o f the body. It makes it 
difficult to regulate the quantity of food intake, and puts an extra strain upon 
digestion. As all these varieties supply starch mai nly, it is better to take one 
only, at a time. Wheat may well be described as the  king among the cereals. If 
we glance at the world map, we find that wheat occu pies the first place. From 
the point of view of health, if we can get wheat, r ice and other cereals become 
unnecessary. If wheat is not available and  juwar  etc. cannot be taken on 
account of dislike or difficulty in digesting them,  rice has to be resorted to. 
The cereals should be properly cleansed, ground on a grinding stone, and the 
resulting flour used as it is. Sieving of the flour  should be avoided. It is likely to 
remove the  bhusi  or the pericarp which is a rich source of salts an d vitamins, 
both of which are most valuable from the point of v iew of nutrition. The 
pericarp also supplies roughage, which helps the ac tion of the bowels. Rice 
grain being very delicate, nature has provided it w ith an outer covering or 
epicarp. This is not edible. In order to remove thi s inedible portion, rice has to 
be pounded. Pounding should be just sufficient to r emove the epicarp on the 
outer skin of the rice grain. But machine pounding not only removes the outer 
skin, but also polishes the rice by removing its pe ricarp. The explanation of the 
popularity of polished rice lies in the fact that p olishing helps preservation. The 
pericarp is very sweet and unless it is removed, ri ce is easily attacked by 
certain organisms. Polished rice and wheat without its pericarp, supply us with 
almost pure starch. Important constituents of the c ereals are lost with the 
removal of the pericarp. The pericarp of rice is so ld as rice polishings. This and 
the pericarp of wheat can be cooked and eaten by th emselves. They can be Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 201  also made into  chapatis  or cakes. It is possible that rice  chapatis  may be more 
easily digestible than whole rice and in this form a lesser quantity may result in 
full satisfaction. 
We are in the habit of dipping each morsel of the  chapati  in vegetable or  dal  
gravy before eating it. The result is that most peo ple swallow their food 
without proper mastication. Mastication is an impor tant step in the 'process of 
digestion, especially that of starch. Digestion of starch begins on its coming 
into contact with saliva in the mouth. Mastication ensures a thorough mixing of 
food with saliva. Therefore, starchy foods should b e eaten in a relatively dry 
form, which results in a greater flow of saliva and  also necessitates their 
thorough mastication. 
After the starch supplying cereals come the protein  supplying pulses—beans, 
lentils etc. Almost everybody seems to think that p ulses are an essential 
constituent of diet. Even meat eaters must have pul ses. It is easy to understand 
that those who have to do hard manual work and who cannot afford to drink 
milk, cannot do without pulses. But I can say witho ut any hesitation whatsoever 
that those who follow sedentary occupations as for instance, clerks, 
businessmen, lawyers, doctors, teachers and those w ho are not too poor to buy 
milk, do not require pulses. Pulses are generally c onsidered to be difficult to 
digest and are eaten in a much smaller quantity tha n cereals. Out of the 
varieties of pulses, peas, gram and haricot beans a re considered to be the most 
and mung  and  masoor  (lentils) the least difficult to digest. 
Vegetables and fruits should come third on our list . One would expect them to 
be cheap and easily available in India. But it is n ot so. They are generally 
considered to be delicacies meant for the city peop le. In the villages fresh 
vegetables are a rarity, and in most places fruit i s also not available. This 
shortage of greens and fruits is a slur on the admi nistration of India. The 
villagers can grow plenty of green vegetables if th ey wish to. The question of 
fruit cannot be solved so easily. The land legislat ion is bad from the villager's 
standpoint. But I am transgressing. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 202  Among fresh vegetables, a fair amount of leafy vege tables must be taken every 
day. I do not include potatoes, sweet potatoes,  suran  etc., which supply starch 
mainly, among vegetables. They should be put down i n the same category as 
starch supplying cereals. A fair helping of ordinar y fresh vegetables is 
advisable. Certain varieties such as cucumber, toma toes, mustard and cress and 
other tender leaves need not be cooked. They should  be washed properly and 
then eaten raw in small quantities. 
As for fruits, our daily diet should include the av ailable fruits of the season, 
e.g. mangoes,  jambu, guavas, grapes,  papaiyas , limes—sweet or sour, oranges, 
moosambi,  etc. should all be used in their season. The best time for taking fruit 
is in the early morning. A breakfast of fruit and m ilk should give full satis-
faction. Those who take an early lunch may well hav e a breakfast of fruit only. 
Banana is a good fruit. But as it is very rich in s tarch, it takes the place of 
bread. Milk and banana make a perfect meal. 
A certain amount of fat is also necessary. This can  be had in the form of  ghee  
or oil. If  ghee  can be had, oil becomes unnecessary. It is difficu lt' to digest and 
is not so nourishing as pure  ghee.  An ounce and a half of  ghee  per head per 
day, should be considered ample to supply the needs  of the body. Whole milk 
also is a source of  ghee.  Those who cannot afford it should take enough oil to 
supply the need for fat. Among oils, sweet oil, gro undnut oil and cocoa-nut oil 
should be given preference. Oil must be fresh. If a vailable, it is better to use 
hand- pressed oil. Oil and  ghee  sold in the bazaar are generally quite useless. It  
is a matter of great sorrow and shame. But so long as honesty has not become 
an integral part of business morals, whether throug h legislation or through 
education, the individual will have to procure the pure article with patience 
and diligence. One should never be satisfied to tak e what one can get, 
irrespective of its quality. It is far better to do  without  ghee  and oil altogether 
than to eat rancid oil and adulterated  ghee.  As in the case of fats, a certain 
amount of sugar is also necessary. Although sweet f ruits supply plenty of sugar, 
there is no harm in taking one to one and a half ou nces of sugar, brown or 
white, in the day. If one cannot get sweet fruits, sugar may become a Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 203  necessity. But the undue prominence given to sweet things nowadays is wrong. 
City folk eat too much of sweet things. Milk puddin gs, milk sweets and sweets 
of other kinds are consumed in large quantities. Th ey are all unnecessary and 
are harmful except when taken in very small quantit ies. It may be said without 
any fear of exaggeration that to partake of sweetme ats and other delicacies, in 
a country where the millions do not even get an ord inary full meal, is 
equivalent to robbery. 
What applies to sweets, applies with equal force to  ghee  and oil. There is no 
need to eat food fried in ghee  or oil. To use up  ghee  in making  puris  and  laddus 
is thoughtless extravagance. Those who are not used  to such food cannot eat 
these things at all. For instance, Englishmen on th eir first coming into our 
country cannot eat our sweets and fried foodstuffs.  Those that do eat them I 
have often seen fall ill. Taste is acquired, not bo rn with us. All the delicacies of 
the world cannot equal the relish that hunger gives  to food. A hungry man will 
eat a dry piece of bread with the greatest relish, whereas one who is not 
hungry will refuse the best of sweetmeats. 
Now let us consider how often and how much should o ne eat. Food should be 
taken as a matter of duty—even as a medicine—to sus tain the body, never for 
the satisfaction of the palate. Thus, pleasurable f eeling comes from satisfaction 
of real hunger. Therefore, we can say that relish i s dependent upon hunger and 
not outside it. Because of our wrong habits and art ificial way of living, very few 
people know what their system requires. Our parents  who bring us into this 
world do not, as a rule, cultivate self-control. Th eir habits and their way of 
living influence the children to a certain extent. The mother's food during 
pregnancy is bound to affect the child. After that during childhood, the mother 
pampers the child with all sorts of tasty foods. Sh e gives the child a little bit 
out of whatever she herself may be eating and the c hild's digestive system gets 
a wrong training from its infancy. Habits once form ed are difficult to shed. 
There are very few who succeed in getting rid of th em. But when the 
realization comes to man that he is his own bodygua rd, and his body has been Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 204  dedicated to service, he desires to learn the laws of keeping his body in a fit 
condition and tries hard to follow them. 
We have now reached a point when we can lay down th e amount of various 
foods required by a man of sedentary habits, which most men and women who 
will read these pages, are. 
Cow's milk 2 lbs. 
Cereals (wheat, rice,  bajri,  in all) 6 oz. 
Vegetables leafy 3 oz. 
„ others 5 oz. 
„ raw 1 oz. 
Ghee  1½ oz. 
or Butter 2 oz. 
Gur  or white sugar  1½oz. 
 
Fresh fruit according to one's taste and purse. In any case it is good to take two 
sour limes a day. The juice should be squeezed and taken with vegetables or in 
water, cold or hot. 
All these weights are of raw stuff. I have not put down the amount of salt. It 
should be added afterwards according to taste. 
Now, how often should one eat? Many people take two  meals a day. The 
general rule is to take three meals: breakfast earl y in the morning and before 
going out to work, dinner at midday and supper in t he evening or later. There is 
no necessity to have more than three meals. In the cities some people keep on 
nibbling from time to time. This habit is harmful. The digestive apparatus 
requires rest. 
Key to Health, 1960, p. 13-27 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 205   
CHAPTER 26  
VILLAGE PROTECTION 
Peace Brigade 
Some time ago I suggested the formation of a Peace Brigade whose members 
would risk their lives in dealing with riots, espec ially communal. The idea was 
that this Brigade should substitute the police and even the military. This reads 
ambitious. The achievement may prove impossible. Ye t, if the Congress is to 
succeed in its non-violent struggle, it must develo p the power to deal 
peacefully with such situations. 
Let us therefore see what qualifications a member o f the contemplated Peace 
Brigade should possess. 
1.  He or she must have a living faith in nonviolence. This is impossible 
without a living faith in God. A non-violent man ca n do nothing save by the 
power and grace of God. Without it he won't have th e courage to die 
without anger, without fear and without retaliation . Such courage comes 
from the belief that God sits in the hearts of all and that there should be 
no fear in the presence of God. The knowledge of th e omnipresence of 
God also means respect for the lives of even those who may be called 
opponents or goondas. This contemplated interventio n is a process of 
stilling the fury of man when the brute in him gets  the mastery over him. 
2.  This messenger of peace must have equal regard for all the principal 
religions of the earth. Thus, if he is a Hindu, he will respect the other 
faiths current in India. He must therefore possess a knowledge of the 
general principles of the different faiths professe d in the country. 
3.  Generally speaking, this work of peace can only be done by local men in 
their own localities. 
4.  The work can be done singly or in groups. Therefore  no one need wait for 
companions. Nevertheless one would naturally seek c ompanions in one's 
own locality and form a local Brigade. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 206  5.  This messenger of peace will cultivate through pers onal service contacts 
with the people in his locality or chosen circle, s o that when he appears to 
deal with ugly situations, he does not descend upon  the members of a 
riotous assembly as an utter stranger liable to be looked upon as a suspect 
or an unwelcome visitor. 
6.  Needless to say, a peace bringer must have a charac ter beyond reproach 
and must be known for his strict impartiality.  
7.  Generally there are previous warnings of coming sto rms. If these are 
known, the Peace Brigade will not wait till the con flagration breaks out 
but will try to handle the situation in anticipatio n. 
8.  Whilst, if the movement spreads, it might be well i f there are some whole-
time workers, it is not absolutely necessary that t here should be. The idea 
is to have as many good and true men and women as p ossible. These can 
be had only if volunteers are drawn from those who are engaged in various 
walks of life but have leisure enough to cultivate friendly relations with 
the people living in their -circle and otherwise po ssess the qualifications 
required of a member of the Peace Brigade. 
9.  There should be a distinctive dress worn by the mem bers of the 
contemplated Brigade so that in course of time they  will be recognized 
without the slightest difficulty. 
These are but general suggestions. Each centre can work out its own 
constitution on the basis here suggested. 
H., 18-6-’38, p. 152 
 
My Idea of a Police Force 
Even in a non-violent State a police force may be n ecessary. This, I admit, is a 
sign of my imperfect Ahimsa. I have not the courage  to declare that we can 
carry on without a police force as I have in respec t of an army. Of course I can 
and do envisage a state where the police will not b e necessary; but whether we 
shall succeed in realizing it, the future alone wil l show. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 207  The police of my conception will, however, be of a wholly different pattern 
from the present-day force. Its ranks will be compo sed of believers in non-
violence. They will be servants, not masters, of th e people. The people will 
instinctively render them every help, and through m utual co-operation they will 
easily deal with the ever-decreasing disturbances. The police force will have 
some kind of arms, but they will be rarely used, if  at all. In fact the policemen 
will be reformers. Their police work will be confin ed primarily to robbers and 
dacoits. Quarrels between labour and capital and st rikes will be few and far 
between in a non-violent State, because the influen ce of the non-violent 
majority will be so great as to command the respect  of the principal elements 
in society. Similarly there will be no room for com munal disturbances. 
H., 1-9-’40, p. 265 
 
Non-violent Volunteer Corps 
Some time ago an attempt was made, at my instance, to form  shanti dais  but 
nothing came of it. This lesson, however, was learn t that the membership, in 
its very nature, of such organizations could not be  large. Ordinarily, the 
efficient running of a large volunteer corps based on force implies the 
possibility of the use of force in the event of bre ach of discipline. In such 
bodies little or no stress is laid on a man's chara cter. Physique is the chief 
factor. The contrary must obtain in non-violent bod ies in which character or 
soul force must mean everything and physique must t ake second place. It is 
difficult to find many such persons. That is why no n-violent corps must be 
small, if they are to be efficient. Such Brigades m ay be scattered all over; 
there may be one each for a village or a  mohalla.  The members must know one 
another well. Each corps will select its own head. All the members will have 
the same status, but where everyone is doing the sa me work there must be one 
person under whose discipline all must come, or els e the work will suffer. 
Where there are two or more Brigades the leaders mu st consult among 
themselves and decide on a common line of action. I n that way alone lies 
success. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 208  If non-violent volunteer corps are formed on the ab ove lines, they can easily 
stop trouble. These corps will not require all the physical training given in 
akhadas,  but a certain port of it will be necessary. 
One thing, however, should be common to members of all such organizations 
and that is implicit faith in God. He is the only c ompanion and doer. Without 
faith in Him these Peace Brigades will be lifeless.  By whatever name one calls 
God, one must realize that one can only work throug h His strength. Such a man 
will never take another's life. He will allow himse lf, if need be, to be killed and 
thereby live through his victory over death. 
The mind of the man in whose life the realization o f this law has become a 
living reality will not be bewildered in crisis. He  will instinctively know the 
right way to act. 
In spite, however, of what I have said above, I wou ld like to give some rules 
culled from my own experience: 
1.  A volunteer may not carry any weapons. 
2.  The members of a corps must be easily recognizable.  
3.  Every volunteer must carry bandages, scissors, need le and thread, surgical 
knife, etc. for rendering first aid. 
4.  He should know how to carry and remove the wounded.  
5.  He should know how to put out fires, how to enter a  fire area without 
getting burnt, how to climb heights for rescue work  and descend safely 
with or without his charge. 
6.  He should be well acquainted with all the residents  of his locality. This is a 
service in itself. 
7.  He should recite  Ramanama  ceaselessly in his heart and persuade others 
who believe to do likewise. 
Man often repeats the name of God parrot- wise and expects fruit from so 
doing. The true seeker must have that living faith which will not only dispel the 
untruth of parrot-wise repetition from within him b ut also from the hearts of 
others.  
H., 5-5-’46, p. 113 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 209   
CHAPTER 27  
THE VILLAGE WORKER 
The Ideal Village Worker 
I propose to speak to you about the ideal of work a nd life that you have to keep 
in view and work towards. 
You are here not for a career in the current sense of the term. Today man's 
worth is measured in Rs. as. ps. and a man's educat ional training is an article of 
commerce. If you have come with that measure in min d, you are doomed to 
disappointment. At the end of your studies you may start with an honorarium of 
ten rupees and end with it. You may not compare it with what a manager of a 
great firm or a high official gets. 
We have to change the current standards. We promise  you no earthly careers, 
in fact we want to wean you from ambition of that k ind. You are expected to 
keep your food-bill within Rs 6 a month. The food-b ill of an I.C.S. may come to 
Rs 60 a month, but that does not mean that he is or  will be on that account 
physically or intellectually or morally superior to  you. He may be for all his 
sumptuous living even inferior in all these respect s. You have come to this 
institution because, I presume, you do not value yo ur qualifications in metal. 
You delight in giving your service to the country f or a mere pittance. A man 
may earn thousands of rupees on the Stock Exchange but may be thoroughly 
useless for our purposes. They would be unhappy in our humble surroundings 
and we should be unhappy in theirs. We want ideal l abourers in the country's 
cause. They will not bother about what food they ge t, or what comforts they 
are assured by the villagers whom they serve. They will trust to God for 
whatever they need, and will exult in the trials an d tribulations they might 
have to undergo. This is inevitable in our country where we have 7,00,000 
villages to think of. We cannot afford to have a sa laried staff of workers who 
have an eye to regular increments, provident funds and pensions. Faithful 
service of the villagers is its own satisfaction. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 210  Some of you will be tempted to ask if this is also the standard for the villagers. 
Not by any means. These prospects are for us servan ts and not for the village 
folk our masters. We have sat on their backs all th ese years, and we want to 
accept voluntary and increasing poverty in order th at our masters' lot may be 
much better than it is today. We have to enable the m to earn much more than 
they are earning today. That is the aim of the Vill age Industries Association. It 
cannot prosper unless it has an ever-increasing num ber of servants such as I 
have described. May you be such servants. 
H., 23-5-’36, p. 119 
 
Requisite Qualifications 
[The following are some qualifications prescribed b y Gandhiji for Satyagrahis. But as a 
village worker was according to him also to be a tr ue Satyagrahi, these qualifications may 
be regarded as applying also to a village worker. —  Ed.] 
1.  He must have a living faith in God, for He is his o nly Rock. 
2.  He must believe in truth and non-violence as his cr eed and therefore have 
faith in the inherent goodness of human nature whic h he expects to evoke 
by his truth and love expressed through his sufferi ng. 
3.  He must be leading a chaste life and be ready and w illing for the sake of 
his cause to give up his life and his possessions. 
4.  He must be a habitual Khadi-wearer and spinner. Thi s is essential for India. 
5.  He must be a teetotaller and be free from the use o f other intoxicants in 
order that his reason may be always unclouded and h is mind constant. 
6.  He must carry out with a willing heart all the rule s of discipline as may be 
laid down from time to time. 
The qualifications are not to be regarded as exhaus tive. They are illustrative 
only.  
H., 25-3-’39, p. 64 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 211   
His Duties 
1.  Every worker shall be a habitual wearer of Khadi ma de from self-spun yarn 
or certified by the A. I. S. A. and must be a teeto taller. If a Hindu, he must 
have abjured untouchability in any shape or form in  his own person or in 
his family and must be a believer in the ideal of i nter-communal unity, 
equal respect and regard for all religions and equa lity of opportunity and 
status for all irrespective of race, creed or sex. 
2.  He shall come in personal contact with every villag er within his 
jurisdiction. 
3.  He shall enroll and train workers from amongst the villagers and keep a 
register of all these. 
4.  He shall keep a record of his work from day to day.  
5.  He shall organize the villages so as to make them s elf-contained and self-
supporting through; their agriculture and handicraf ts. 
6.  He shall educate the village folk in sanitation and  hygiene and take all 
measures for {prevention of ill health and disease among them. 
7.  He shall organize the education of the village folk  from birth to death 
along the lines of  Nayee Talim , in accordance with the policy laid down by 
the Hindustani Talimi Sangh. 
8.  He shall see that those whose names are missing on the statutory voters' 
roll are duly entered therein. 
9.  He shall encourage those who have not yet acquired the legal 
qualification, to acquire it for getting the right of franchise. 
H., 15-2-’48, p. 32 
 
Village Work 
The centre of the village worker's life will be the  spinning wheel. The idea at 
the back of Khadi is that it is an industry supplem entary to agriculture and co-
extensive with it. The spinning wheel cannot be sai d to have been established Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 212  in its own proper place in our life, until we can b anish idleness from our 
villages and make every village home a busy hive. 
The worker will not only be spinning regularly but will be working for his bread 
with the adze or the spade or the last, as the case  may be. All his hours minus 
the eight hours of sleep and rest will be fully occ upied with some work. He will 
have no time to waste. He will allow himself no laz iness and allow others none. 
His life will be a constant lesson to his neighbour s in ceaseless and joy-giving 
industry. Our compulsory or voluntary idleness has to go. If it does not go, no 
panacea will be of any avail, and semi-starvation w ill remain the eternal 
problem that it is. He who eats two grains must pro duce four. Unless the law is 
accepted as universal, no amount of reduction in po pulation would serve to 
solve the problem. If the law is accepted and obser ved, we have room enough 
to accommodate millions more to come. 
The village worker will thus be a living embodiment  of industry. He will master 
all the processes of Khadi, from cotton-sowing and picking to weaving, and will 
devote all his thought to perfecting them. If he tr eats it as a science, it won't 
jar on him, but he will derive fresh joy from it ev ery day, as he realizes more 
and more its great possibilities. If he will go to the village as a teacher, he will 
go there no less as a learner. He will soon find th at he has much to learn from 
the simple villagers. He will enter into every deta il of village life, he will 
discover the village handicrafts and investigate th e possibilities of their growth 
and their improvement. He may find the villagers co mpletely apathetic to the 
message of Khadi, but he will, by his life of servi ce, compel interest and atten-
tion. Of course, he will not forget his limitations  and will not engage in, for 
him, the futile task of solving the problem of agri cultural indebtedness. 
Sanitation and hygiene will engage a good part of h is attention. His home and 
his surroundings will not only be a model of cleanl iness, but he will help to 
promote sanitation in the whole village by taking t he broom and the basket 
round. 
He will not attempt to set up a village dispensary or to become the village 
doctor. These are traps which must be avoided. I ha ppened during my Harijan Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 213  tour to come across a village where one of our work ers who should have known 
better had built a pretentious building in which he  had housed a dispensary and 
was distributing free medicine to the villages arou nd. In fact, the medicines 
were being taken from home to home by volunteers an d the dispensary was 
described as boasting a register of 1,200 patients a month! I had naturally to 
criticize this severely. That was not the way to do  village work, I told him. His 
duty was to inculcate lessons of hygiene and sanita tion in the village folk and 
thus to show them the way of preventing illness, ra ther than attempt to cure 
them. I asked him to leave the palace-like building  and to hire it out to the 
Local Board and to settle in thatched huts. All tha t one need stock in the way 
of drugs is quinine, castor oil and iodine and the like. The worker should 
concentrate more on helping people realize the valu e of personal and village 
cleanliness and maintaining it at all cost. 
Then he will interest himself in the welfare of the  village Harijans. His home 
will be open to them. In fact, they will turn to hi m naturally for help in their 
troubles and difficulties. If the village folk will  not suffer him to have the 
Harijan friends in his house situated in their mids t, he must take up his 
residence in the Harijan quarters. 
A word about the knowledge of the alphabet. It has its place, but I should warn 
you against a misplaced emphasis on it. Do not proc eed on the assumption that 
you cannot proceed with rural instruction without f irst teaching the children or 
adults how to read and write. Lots of useful inform ation on current affairs, 
history, geography and elementary arithmetic, can b e given by word of mouth 
before the alphabet is touched. The eyes, the ears and the tongue come before 
the hand. Reading comes before writing, and drawing  before tracing the letters 
of the alphabet. If this natural method is followed , the understanding of the 
children will have a much better opportunity of dev elopment than when it is 
under check by beginning the children's training wi th the alphabet. 
The worker's life will be in tune with the village life. He will not pose as a 
litterateur buried in his books, loathe to listen t o details of humdrum life. On 
the contrary, the people, whenever they see him, wi ll find him busy with his Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 214  tools—spinning wheel, loom, adze, spade, etc.—and a lways responsive to their 
meanest inquiries. He will always insist on working  for his bread. God has given 
to everyone the capacity of producing more than his  daily needs and, if he will 
only use his resourcefulness, he will not be in wan t of an occupation suited to 
his capacities, however poor they may be. It is mor e likely than not that the 
people will gladly maintain him, but it is not impr obable that in some places he 
may be given a cold shoulder. He will still plod on . It is likely that in some 
villages he may be boycotted for his pro- Harijan p roclivities. Let him in that 
case approach the Harijans and-look to them to prov ide him with food. The 
labourer is always worthy of his hire and, if he co nscientiously serves them, let 
him not hesitate to accept his food from the Harija ns, always provided that he 
gives more than he takes. In the very early stages,  of course, he will draw his 
meagre allowance from a central fund where such is possible. 
Remember that our weapons are spiritual. It is a fo rce that works irresistibly, if 
imperceptibly. Its progress is geometrical rather t han arithmetical. It never 
ceases so long as there is a propeller behind. The background of all your 
activities has, therefore, to be spiritual. Hence t he necessity for the strictest 
purity of conduct and character. 
You will not tell me that this is an impossible pro gramme, that you have not 
the qualifications for it. That you have not fulfil led it so far should be no 
impediment in your way. If it appeals to your reaso n and your heart, you must 
not hesitate. Do not fight shy of the experiment. T he experiment will itself 
provide the momentum for more and more effort. 
H., 31-8-’34, p. 227-30 
 
Items of Village Work 
The very first problem the village worker will solv e is its sanitation. It is the 
most neglected of all the problems that baffle work ers and that undermine 
physical well-being and breed disease. If the worke r became a voluntary  
bhangi,  he would begin by collecting night-soil and turn i t into manure and 
sweeping village streets. He will tell people how a nd where they should Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 215  perform daily functions and speak to them on the va lue of sanitation and the 
great injury caused by its neglect. The worker will  continue to do the work 
whether the villagers listen to him or no. 
H., 9-1-’37, p. 383 
 
If rural reconstruction were not to include rural s anitation, our villages would 
remain the muck-heap that they are today. Village s anitation is a vital part of 
village life and is as difficult as it is important . It needs a heroic effort to 
eradicate age-long insanitation. The village worker  who is ignorant of the 
science of village sanitation, who is not a success ful scavenger, cannot fit 
himself for village service. 
It seems to be generally admitted that without the new or basic education the 
education of millions of children in India is well- nigh impossible. The village 
worker has, therefore, to master it, and become a b asic education teacher 
himself. 
Adult education will follow in the wake of basic ed ucation as a matter of 
course. Where this new education has taken root, th e children themselves 
become their parents' teachers. Be that as it may, the village worker has to 
undertake adult education also. 
Woman is described as man's better half. As long as  she has not the same rights 
in law as man, as long as the birth of a girl does not receive the same welcome 
as that of a boy, so long we should know that India  is suffering from partial 
paralysis. Suppression of woman is a denial of Ahim sa. Every village worker 
will, therefore, regard every woman as his mother, sister or daughter as the 
case may be, and look upon her with respect. Only s uch a worker will command 
the confidence of the village people. 
It is impossible for an unhealthy people to win Swa raj. Therefore we should no 
longer be guilty of the neglect of the health of ou r people. Every village worker 
must have a knowledge of the general principles of health. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 216  Without a common language no nation can come into b eing* Instead of worrying 
himself with the controversy about Hindi-Hindustani  and Urdu, the village 
worker will acquire a knowledge of the  rashtrabhasha , which should be such as 
can be understood by both Hindus and Muslims. 
Our infatuation for English has made us unfaithful to provincial languages. If 
only as penance for this unfaithfulness the village  worker should cultivate in 
the villagers a love of their own speech. He will h ave equal regard for all the 
other languages of India, and will learn the langua ge of the part where he may 
be working, and thus be able to inspire the village rs there with a regard for 
their own speech. 
The whole of this programme will, however, be a str ucture on sand if it is not 
built on the solid foundation of economic equality.  Economic equality must 
never be supposed to mean possession of an equal am ount of worldy goods by 
everyone. It does mean, however, that everyone will  have a proper house to 
live in, sufficient and balanced food to eat, and s ufficient Khadi with which to 
cover himself. It also means that the cruel inequal ity that obtains today will be 
removed by purely non-violent means.  
H., 18-8-’40, p. 252 
 
A Talk to Village Workers 
Khadi will certainly occupy the centre of the villa ge industries. But remember 
that we have to concentrate on making the villages self-sufficing in Khadi. Out 
of self-sufficing Khadi will follow commercial Khad i as a matter of course. 
You will of course take up any other industry avail able in villages and for which 
you can find a market, care being taken that no sho p has to be run at a loss and 
no article produced for which there is no market. G ive eight hours of your day 
to any home craft you like and show to the villager s that as you earn your 
wage, even so can they earn it by eight hours' work . 
You will also not take a companion to work with you . Our policy is to send a 
single worker to a village or group of villages. Th at will enable him to bring his Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 217  resourcefulness into full play. He may pick out any  number of companions from 
the village itself. They will work under his direct ion, but he will be mainly 
responsible for the village under his charge. 
Let us not be tempted by the allurements of the mac hine age; let us 
concentrate on rendering our own body-machines perf ect and efficient 
instruments of work, and let us get the best out of  them. This is your task. Go 
ahead with it, without flinching. 
H., 2-11-’35, p. 302 
 
Fear Complex 
Many workers are so frightened of village life that  they fear that if they are not 
paid by some agency they will not be able to earn t heir living by labouring in 
villages, especially if they are married and have a  family to support. In my 
opinion this is a demoralizing belief. No doubt, if  a person goes to a village with 
a city mentality and wants to live in villages the city life, he will never earn 
enough unless he, like the city people, exploits th e villagers. But if a person 
settles in a village and tries to live like the vil lagers, he should have no 
difficulty in making a living by the sweat of his b row. He should have 
confidence that if the villagers who are prepared t o toil all the year round in 
the traditional unintelligent manner can earn their  living, he must also earn at 
least as much as the average villager. This he will  do without displacing a single 
villager, for he will go to a village as a producer , not as a parasite. 
If the worker has the ordinary size family, his wif e and one other member 
should be full-time workers. Such a worker won't im mediately have the muscle 
of the villager, but he will more than make up for the deficiency by his 
intelligence, if only he will shed his diffidence a nd fear complex. He would be 
doing productive work, and not be a mere consumer, unless he gets an 
adequate response from the villagers, so as to occu py the whole of his time in 
serving them. In that case he will be worth the com mission on the additional 
production of the villagers induced by his effort. But the experience of the few 
months that the village work has gone on under the aegis of the A.I.V.I.A. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 218  shows that the response from the villagers will be very slow and that the 
worker will have to become a pattern of virtue and work before the villagers. 
That will be the best object-lesson for them which is bound to impress them 
sooner or later, provided that he lives as one of t hem and not as a patron 
seated amongst them to be adored from a respectful distance. 
The question, therefore, is what remunerative work can he do in the village of 
his choice ? He and the members of the family will give some time to cleaning 
the village, whether the villagers help him or not,  and he will give them such 
simple medical assistance as is within his power to  give. Every person can 
prescribe a simple opening drug or quinine, wash a boil or wound, wash dirty 
eyes and ears, and apply a clean ointment to a woun d. I am trying to find out a 
book that will give the simplest directions in the ordinary cases occurring daily 
in the villages. Anyway these two things must be an  integral part of village 
work. They ought not to occupy more than two hours of his time per day. The 
village worker has no such thing as an eight hours'  day. For him the labour for 
the villager is a labour of love. For his living, t herefore, he will give eight hours 
at least in addition to the two hours. It should be  borne in mind that under the 
new scheme propounded by the A.I.S.A. and A.I.V.I.A . all labour has an equal 
minimum value. Thus a carder who works at his bow f or one hour and turns out 
the average quantity of cards will get exactly the same wage that the weaver, 
the spinner or the paper-maker would, for the given  quantity of their 
respective work per hour. Therefore, the worker is free to choose and learn 
whatever work he can easily do, care being always t aken to choose such labour 
whose product is easily saleable in his village or the surrounding area or is in 
demand by the Associations. 
One great need in every village is an honest shop w here unadulterated food-
stuffs and other things can be had for the cost pri ce and a moderate 
commission. It is true that a shop, be it ever so s mall, requires some capital. 
But a worker who is at all known in the area of his  work should command 
sufficient confidence in his honesty to enable him to make small wholesale 
purchases on credit. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 219  I may not take these concrete suggestions much furt her. An observant worker 
will always make important discoveries and soon kno w what labour he can do to 
earn a living and be at the same time an object-les son to the villagers whom he 
is to serve. He will therefore have to choose labou r that will not exploit the 
villagers, that will not injure their health or mor als but will teach the villagers 
to take up industries to occupy their leisure hours  and add to their tiny in-
comes. His observations will lead him to direct his  attention to the village 
wastes including weeds and the superficial natural resources of the village. He 
will soon find that he can turn many of them to goo d account. If he picks up 
edible weeds, it is as good as earning part of his food. Mirabehn has presented 
me with a museum of beautiful marble-like stones wh ich serve several useful 
purposes as they are, and I would soon convert them  into bazaar articles if I 
had leisure and would invest into simple tools to g ive them different shapes. 
Kakasaheb had, given to him, split bamboo waste tha t was destined to be 
burnt, and with a rude knife he turned some of it i nto paper knives and wooden 
spoons both saleable in limited quantities. Some wo rkers in Maganwadi occupy 
their leisure in making envelopes out of waste pape r blank on one side. 
The fact is the villagers have lost all hope. They suspect that every stranger's 
hand is at their throats and that he goes to them o nly to exploit them. Divorce 
between intellect and labour has paralysed their th inking faculty. Their working 
hours they do not use to the best advantage. The wo rker should enter such 
villages full of love and hope, feeling sure that w here men and women labour 
unintelligently and remain unemployed half the year  round, he, working all the 
year round and combining labour with intelligence, cannot fail to win the 
confidence of the villagers and earn his living hon estly and well by labouring in 
their midst. 
'But what about my children and their education?' s ays the candidate worker. If 
the children are to receive their education after t he modern style, I can give no 
useful guidance. If it be deemed enough to make the m healthy, sinewy, honest, 
intelligent villagers, any day able to earn their l ivelihood in the home of their 
parents' adoption, they will have their all-round e ducation under the parental Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 220  roof and withal they will be partly earning members  of the family from the 
moment they reach the years of understanding and ar e able to use their hands 
and feet in a methodical manner. There is no school  equal to a decent home 
and no teachers equal to honest virtuous parents. M odern high school education 
is a dead weight on the villagers. Their children w ill never be able to get it, 
and thank God they will never miss it if they have the training of the decent 
home. If the village worker is not a decent man or woman, capable of 
conducting a decent home, he or she had better not aspire after the high 
privilege and honour of becoming a village worker.  
H., 23-11-’35, p. 324-25 
 
Village Workers' Questions 
I 
[At the workers' meeting instead of asking Gandhiji  to address them they gave him a list of 
questions on which he requested to enlighten them. Questions were about the duties of 
the village workers, their livelihood, body labour,  maintaining a diary, working among  
dublas  of Gujarat etc.] 
The only duty of the village worker is to serve the  villagers, and he can best 
serve them if he keeps the eleven vows in front of him as a beacon- light. The 
vows are contained in two couplets composed by Vino ba and now repeated at 
each prayer by inmates of most of the Ashrams in th e country: 
अ/glyph466हंसा स/glyph216य  अ/glyph233तेय  /glyph295/glyph234मचय/glyph110 असं/glyph275ह।  
शर/glyph548र/glyph303म  अ/glyph233वाद  सव/glyph110/glyph288  भयवज/glyph110न॥  
सव/glyph110धम/glyph110 समान/glyph216व  /glyph233वदेशी /glyph233पश/glyph110भावना।  
ह/glyph548ं एकादश  सेवावीं न/glyph297/glyph216व/glyph582 /glyph302त/glyph470न/glyph231चय/glyph582॥  
[Non-violence, truth, non-stealing,  brahmacharya , non-possession, body-labour, control of 
the palate, fearlessness, equal respect for all rel igions, swadeshi  (restricting oneself to 
the use and service of one's nearest surroundings i n preference to those more remote), Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 221  spirit of unexclusive brotherhood— these eleven vow s should be observed in a spirit of 
humility.] 
How is he to earn his livelihood ? Is he to draw an  allowance from an 
institution, or to earn it by labouring for it, or to depend upon the village for it? 
The ideal way is to depend upon the village. There is no shame therein, but 
humility. There is no scope for self-indulgence eit her, for I cannot think of a 
village which would encourage or tolerate self-indu lgence. Ail that the worker 
need do is to work "for the village all his working  hours, and to collect whatever 
grain and vegetables he needed from the village. He  may collect a little money 
too (for postage and other monetary expenditure) if  he should need it, though I 
do not think he could not do without it. The villag e would willingly support him 
if he has gone there at the invitation of the villa ge. I can conceive an occasion 
when the villagers might not be able to tolerate hi s views and withdraw their 
support, as, for instance, they did when I admitted  untouchables in the 
Satyagrahashram in 1915. Then he should work for hi s living. It is no use 
depending on an institution. 
The village worker is in the village to do as much body labour as possible and to 
teach the villagers to outgrow idleness. He might d o any kind of labour, but 
give preference to scavenging. Scavenging was certa inly productive labour. I 
like some of the workers' insistence on devoting at  least half an hour on work 
entirely of service and of a productive kind. Scave nging certainly came under 
that category. Also grinding; for, money saved is m oney gained. 
I have no doubt that the village worker must be pre pared to account for every 
minute of his waking hours and must fill them with work and mention it 
distinctly in his diary. A real diary is a mirror o f the diarist's mind and soul, but 
many might find it difficult to make a truthful rec ord of their mind's activities. 
In that case they may confine themselves to a recor d of their physical 
activities. But it should not be done in a haphazar d way. Simply saying, 
"Worked in the kitchen" would not do. One may have whiled away one's time in 
the kitchen. Specific items of work should be menti oned. Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 222  Service of  dublas , means readiness to share their toil and their har dships, and 
to get into touch with their masters and to see tha t they dealt with them justly 
and kindly. 
The village worker will leave politics alone. He ma y become a Congress 
member, but he may not take part in an election cam paign. He has his work cut 
out for himself. The Village Industries Association  and the Spinners' Association 
were both created by the Congress, and yet they wor k independently of the 
Congress. That is why they and their members steer clear of all Congress 
politics. That is the non-violent way. 
He will also leave village factions alone. He must go and settle there 
determined to do without most of the things he does  not do without in a city. If 
I sit down in a village I should have to decide wha t things I should not take with 
me to the village, however inherently harmless thos e things may be. The 
question is whether those things will sort well or ill with the life of an ordinary 
villager. He will be incorruptible and stand like a  rock against the inroad of 
temptations and save the village from them. Even on e pure soul can save a 
whole village, as one Bibhishana saved Lanka. Sodom  and Gomorrah were not 
destroyed so long as there was one pure soul left i n them.  
H., 29-2-’36, p. 18-19 
 
II 
[In answer to a question if a village worker can al low himself milk, fruit and vegetables 
which villagers cannot afford, Gandhiji wrote:] 
The main thing to be borne in mind by the village w orker is that he is in the 
village for the villagers' service, and it is his r ight and his duty to allow himself 
such articles of diet and other necessaries as woul d keep him fit and enable 
him to fulfill his function. This will necessarily involve the acceptance of a 
higher standard of living by the village worker, bu t I have an impression that 
the villagers do not grudge the worker these necess ary things. The worker's 
conscience is the test. He must be self- restrained , he will eat nothing in order Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 223  to indulge his palate, he will go in for no luxurie s, and will fill all his waking 
hours with work of service. In spite of this, it is  likely that a handful of people 
will cavil at his mode of life. We have to live tha t criticism down. The diet I 
have suggested is not quite unobtainable in a villa ge, with a certain amount of 
labour. Milk can generally be obtained, and there a re numerous fruits, e.g.  ber, 
karamda, mhora  flower, which are easily available, but which we c ount of no 
value because they are so easily available. There a re all kinds of leaves 
available which grow wild in our villages, which we  do not use because of sheer 
ignorance or laziness (if not snobbery). I am mysel f using numerous varieties of 
these green leaves which I had never tried before, but which I find I should 
have used. It is quite possible to make a cow in a village pay for her upkeep and 
maintenance. I have not tried the experiment but I think it should be possible. I 
have also an impression that it is not impossible f or the villagers to obtain and 
live on the same articles of diet as the village wo rkers and thus to adopt the 
same standard of life.   
H., 24-8-’35, p. 223 
 
III 
In almost all villages there are parties and factio ns. When we draft local help, 
whether we wish it or not, we become involved in lo cal power politics. How can 
we steer clear of this difficulty? Should we try to  by-pass both parties and carry 
on work with the help of outside workers? Our exper ience has been that such 
work becomes entirely contingent upon outside aid a nd crumbles down as soon 
as the latter is withdrawn. What should we do then to develop local initiative 
and foster local co-operation? 
A.  Alas for India that parties and factions are to be  found in the villages as they 
are to be found in our cities. And when power polit ics enter our villages with 
less thought of the welfare of the villages and mor e of using them for 
increasing the parties' own power, this becomes a h indrance to the progress of 
the villagers rather than a help. I would say that whatever be the consequence, 
we must make use as much as possible of local help and if we are free from the Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 224  taint of power politics, we are not likely to go wr ong. Let us remember that the 
English-educated men and women from the cities have  criminally neglected the 
villages of India which are the backbone of the cou ntry. The process of 
remembering our neglect will induce patience. I hav e never gone to a single 
village which is devoid of an honest worker. We fai l to find him when we are 
not humble enough to recognize any merit in our vil lages. Of course, we are to 
steer clear of local politics and this we shall lea rn to do when we accept help 
from all parties and no parties, wherever it is rea lly good. I would regard it as 
fatal for success to by-pass villagers. As I knew t his very difficulty I have tried 
rigidly to observe the rule of one village, one wor ker, except that where he or 
she does not know Bengali, an interpreter's help ha s been given. I can only say 
that this system has so far answered the purpose. I  must, therefore, discount 
your experience. I would further suggest that we ha ve got into the vicious habit 
of coming to hasty conclusions. Before pronouncing such a sweeping 
condemnation as is implied in the sentence that 'wo rk becomes entirely 
contingent upon outside aid and crumbles down as so on as the latter is 
withdrawn I would go so far as to say that even a f ew years' experience of 
residence in a single village, trying to work throu gh local workers, should not 
be regarded as conclusive proof that work could not  be done through and by 
local workers. The contrary is obviously true. It n ow becomes unnecessary for 
me to examine the last sentence in detail. I can ca tegorically say to the 
principal worker : ' If you have any outside help, get rid of it. Work singly, 
courageously, intelligently with all the local help  you can get and, if you do not 
succeed, blame only yourself and no one else and no thing else.' 
H., 2-3-’47, p. 44 
 
Conversation with Trainees 
Q.  Do the village folk come to see you? 
A.  They do, but not without fear, and perhaps even su spicion. These also are 
among the many shortcomings of villagers. We have t o rid them of these. 
Q.  How? Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 225  A.  By gently insinuating ourselves into their affecti ons. We must disabuse them 
of the fear that we have gone there to coerce them,  we must show them by our 
behaviour that there, is no intention to coerce, no r any selfish motive. But this 
is all patient work. You cannot quickly convince th em of your  bona fides.  
Q. Don't you think that only those who work without  any remuneration or 
allowance can inspire confidence in them, i.e. thos e who accept nothing 
whether from any Association or from the village? 
A.  No. They do not even know who is and who is not wo rking for remuneration. 
What does impress them is the way in which we live,  our habits, our talks, even 
our gestures. There may be a few who suspect us of a desire to earn; we have 
to dispel their suspicion no doubt. And then do not  run away with the feeling 
that he who accepts nothing from an Association or from the village is by any 
means an ideal servant. He is often a prey to self- righteousness which debases 
one. 
Q,. You teach us village crafts. Is that to give us  a means of earning our 
livelihood or to enable us to teach the villagers? If it is for the latter object, 
how can we master a craft in the course of a year? 
A.  You are being taught the ordinary crafts, because unless you know the 
principles you will not be able to help people with  suggestions. The most 
enterprising among you would certainly earn a livin g by following a craft. The 
things we teach here are such that you are likely t o be able to bring to the 
villagers better knowledge of them. We have improve d grinding stones and rice-
husking stones and oil-presses. We are carrying on experiments in improving our 
tools and we have to take the improvements to them.  Above all there is truth 
and honesty in business that we have to teach them.  They adulterate, milk, 
they adulterate oil, they will adulterate truth for  petty gain. It is not their 
fault, it is ours. We have so long-ignored them and  only exploited them, never 
taught them anything better. By close contact with them we can easily correct 
their ways. Long neglect and isolation has dulled t heir intellect and even moral 
sense. We have to brighten them up and revive them all along the line.  
H., 25-7-’36, p. 187 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 226   
Danger from Within 
No movement or organization having vitality- dies f rom external attack. It dies 
of internal decay. What is necessary is character a bove suspicion, ceaseless 
effort accompanied by ever increasing knowledge of the technique of the work 
and a life of rigorous simplicity. Workers without character, living far above the 
ordinary life of villagers, and devoid of the knowl edge required of them for 
their work, can produce no impression on the villag ers. 
As I write these lines instances of those workers w ho for want of character or 
simple living damaged the cause and themselves recu r to my mind. Happily 
instances of positive misconduct are rare. But the greatest hindrance to the 
progress of the work lies in the inability of worke rs of quality to support them-
selves on the village scale. If every one of such w orkers puts on his work a price 
which village service cannot sustain, ultimately th ese organizations must be 
wound up. For the insistence of payments on the cit y scale except in rare and 
temporary cases would imply that the gulf between c ities and villages is un-
bridgeable. The village movement is as much an educ ation of the city people as 
of the villagers. Workers drawn from cities have to  develop village mentality 
and learn the art of living after the manner of vil lagers. This does not mean 
that they have to starve like the villagers. But it  does mean that there must be 
a radical change in the old style of life. While th e standard of living in the 
villages must be raised the city standard has to un dergo considerable revision, 
without the worker being required in any way to ado pt a mode of life that 
would impair his health. 
H., 11-4-’36, p. 68 
 
Our Villages 
A young man who is trying to live in a village and earn his livelihood has sent 
me a pathetic letter. He does not know much English . I am therefore giving the 
letter below in an abridged form: Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 227  "Three years ago when I was 20 years old I came to this village life after 
spending 15 years in a town. My domestic circumstan ces did not allow me to 
have college education. The work you have taken up for village revival has 
encouraged me to pursue village life. I have some l and. My village has a 
population of nearly 2,500. After close contact wit h this village I find the 
following among more than three-fourths of the peop le: 
(1)  Party feelings and quarrels. 
(2)  Jealousy. 
(3)  Illiteracy. 
(4)  Wickedness. 
(5)  Disunion. 
(6)  Carelessness. 
(7)  Lack of manners. 
(8)  Adherence to the old meaningless customs. 
(9)  Cruelty. 
This is an out of the way place. No great man has e ver visited such remote 
villages. The company of great ones is essential fo r advancement. So I am 
afraid to live in this village. Shall I leave this village? If not, what guidance will 
you give me?" 
Though no doubt there is exaggeration in the pictur e drawn by the young 
correspondent, his statement may be generally accep ted. The reason for the 
tragic state is not far to seek. Villages have suff ered long from neglect by those 
who have had the benefit of education. They have ch osen the city life. The 
village movement is an attempt to establish healthy  contact with the villages 
by inducing those who are fired with the spirit of service to settle in them and 
find self-expression in the service of villagers. T he defects noticed by the 
correspondent are not inherent in village life. Tho se who have settled in 
villages in the spirit of service are not dismayed by the difficulties facing them. 
They knew before they went that they would have to contend against many Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 228  difficulties including even sullenness on the part of villagers. Only those, 
therefore, who have faith in themselves and in thei r mission will serve the 
villagers and influence their lives. A true life li ved amongst the people is in 
itself an object-lesson that must produce its own e ffect upon immediate 
surroundings. The difficulty with the young man is,  perhaps, that he has gone 
to the village merely to earn a living without the spirit of service behind it. I 
admit that village life does not offer attractions to those who go there in 
search of money. Without the incentive of service v illage life would jar after 
the novelty has worn out. No young man having gone to a village may abandon 
the pursuit on the slightest contact with difficult y. Patient effort will show that 
villagers are not very different from city- dweller s and that they will respond to 
kindliness and attention. It is no doubt true that one does not have in the 
villages the opportunity of contact with the great ones of the land. With the 
growth of village mentality the leaders will find i t necessary to tour in the 
villages and establish a living touch with them. Mo reover the companionship of 
the great and the good is available to all through the works of saints like 
Ghaitanya, Ramakrishna, Tulsidas, Kabir, Nanak, Dad u, Tukaram, Tiruvalluvar, 
and others too numerous to mention though equally k nown and pious. The 
difficulty is to get the mind tuned to the receptio n of permanent values. If it is 
modern thought — political, social, economical, sci entific — that is meant, it is 
possible to procure literature that will satisfy cu riosity. I admit, however, that 
one does not find such as easily as one finds relig ious literature. Saints wrote 
and spoke for the masses. The vogue for translating  modern thought to the 
masses in an acceptable manner has not yet quite se t in. But it must come in 
time. I would, therefore, advise young men like my correspondent not to give 
in but persist in their effort and by their presenc e make the village more 
livable and lovable. That they will do by serving t he villages in a manner 
acceptable to the villagers. Everyone can make a be ginning by making the 
villages cleaner by their own labour and removing i lliteracy to the extent of 
their ability. And if their lives are clean, method ical and industrious, there is 
no doubt that the infection will spread in the vill ages in which they may be 
working.  Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 229  H., 20-2-’37, p. 16 
 
Pilgrimage to Villages 
Shri Sitaram Sastry has been organizing what may be  called pilgrimages of 
workers who convey the message of village service a mong their surroundings. I 
would suggest that the pilgrims should avoid all tr avelling by rail, motor, or 
even village carts. If they will adopt my advice, t hey will observe that their 
work will be more effective and that the expenses w ill be practically nil. No 
more than two or three should form a party. I would  expect villagers to house 
and feed the parties. Small parties will be no tax on the resources of villagers, 
as large ones are likely to be. 
The work of the parties should be more in the natur e of sanitary service, survey 
of village conditions and instruction of the villag er^ as to what they can do 
without much, if any, outlay of money to improve th eir health and economic 
conditions. 
H., 22-3-’35, p. 42 
 
New Ways for Old? 
Workers must not, without considerable experience, interfere with the old 
tools, old methods and old partners. They will be s afe if they think of im-
provements, retaining intact the old existing backg round. They will find that it 
is true economy. 
H., 29-3-’35, p. 49 
 
All-round Village Service 
A Samagra Gramasevak must know everybody living in the village and render 
them such service as he can. That does not mean tha t the worker will be able 
to do everything single-handed. He will show them t he way of helping 
themselves and procure for them such help and mater ials as they require. He Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 230  will train up his own helpers. He will so win over the villagers that they will 
seek and follow his advice. Supposing I go and sett le down in a village with a 
ghani , I won't be an ordinary  ghanchi  earning 15-20 rupees a month. I will be a 
Mahatma  ghanchi.  I have used the word ' Mahatma ' in fun but what I  mean to 
say is that as a  ghanchi  I will become a model for the villagers to follow.  I will 
be a ghanchi  who knows the Gita and the Quran. I will be learne d enough to 
teach their children. I may not be able to do so fo r lack of time. The villagers 
will come to me and ask me: " Please make arrangeme nts for our children's 
education." I will tell them: "I can find you a tea cher but you will have to bear 
the expenses." And they will be prepared to do so m ost willingly. I will teach 
them spinning and when they come and ask me for the  services of a weaver, I 
will find them a weaver on the same terms as I foun d them a teacher. And the 
weaver will teach them how to weave their own cloth . I will inculcate in them 
the importance of hygiene and sanitation and when t hey come and ask me for a 
sweeper, I will tell them: "I will be your sweeper and I will train you all in the 
job." This is my conception of Samagra Gramaseva.  
H., 17-3-’46, p. 42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 231   
CHAPTER 28 
GOVERNMENT AND THE VILLAGES 
What the Government Can Do 
It is legitimate to ask what Congress Ministers wil l do for Khaddar and other 
village industries now that they are in office. Whe ther a Minister is separately 
appointed or not, a department for the work is sure ly necessary. In these times 
of scarcity of food and clothing, this department c an render the greatest help. 
The Ministers have experts at their disposal throug h the A.I.S.A. and the 
A.I.V.I.A. It is possible to clothe today the whole  of India in Khadi on the 
smallest outlay and in the shortest time possible. Each Provincial Government 
has to tell the villagers that they must manufactur e their own Khaddar for their 
own use. This brings in automatic local production and distribution. And there 
will undoubtedly be a surplus for the cities at lea st to a certain extent which, 
in its turn, will reduce the pressure on the local mills. The latter will then be 
able to take part in supplying the want of cloth in  other parts of the world. 
 
How can this result be brought about? 
The Governments should notify the villagers that th ey will be expected to 
manufacture Khaddar for the needs of their villages  within a fixed date after 
which no cloth will be supplied to them. The Govern ments in their turn will 
supply the villagers with cotton seed or cotton whe rever required, at cost price 
and the tools of manufacture also at cost, to be re covered in easy instalments 
payable, in, say, five years or more. They will sup ply them with instructors 
wherever necessary and undertake to buy surplus sto ck of Khaddar, provided 
that the villagers in question have their cloth req uirements supplied from their 
own manufacture. This should do away with cloth sho rtage without fuss and 
with very little overhead charges. 
The villages will be surveyed and a list prepared o f things that can be 
manufactured locally with little or no help and whi ch may be required for Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 232  village use or for sale outside, such for instance,  as ghani-pressed oil and cakes, 
burning oil prepared through  ghanis, hand-pounded rice,  tadgud , honey, toys, 
m^ts, handmade paper, village soap, etc. If enough care is thus taken the 
villages, most of them as good as dead or dying, wi ll hum with life and exhibit 
the immense possibilities they have of supplying mo st of their wants themselves 
and of the cities and towns of India. 
Then there is the limitless cattle wealth of India suffering from criminal 
neglect. Goseva Sangh, as yet not properly experien ced, can still supply 
valuable aid. 
Without the basic training the villagers are being starved for education. This 
desideratum can be supplied by the Hindustani Talim i Sangh. 
H., 28-4-’46, p. 104 
 
If I Were the Minister 
My views, expressed above, remain unaltered. One th ing has created a 
misunderstanding. Some friends have read compulsion  in that note. I am sorry 
for the obscurity. In it I had answered the questio n as to what representative 
governments could do if they wished. I had, I hope pardonably, assumed that 
such government's notices too could not be interpre ted as compulsion. For 
every act of a bona fide representative government would assume consent of 
the voters represented. The voters would mean the w hole populace, whether 
registered as voters or not. With the background, I  wrote that the government 
should notify to the villagers that mill cloth woul d not be supplied to the 
villagers after a certain fixed date, so as to enab le them to wear Khadi 
prepared by themselves. 
Whatever the meaning of my above article of 28th Ap ril last, I want to state 
that any scheme adopted about Khadi, without the wi lling co-operation of 
those concerned must mean death to Khadi as a means  for attaining Swaraj. 
Then the taunt that Khadi was a return to the darkn ess and slavery of the 
Middle Ages would be true. But I have held the cont rary view. Whilst Khadi Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 233  under compulsion was a badge of slavery, Khadi inte lligently and voluntarily 
prepared, primarily for one's own use, was easily t he badge of our freedom. 
Freedom is nothing if it is not all-round self-help . I, for one, would have 
nothing to do with Khadi, if it were not a free man 's privilege as well as duty. 
A friendly critic asks whether Khadi thus prepared could also and at the same 
time be for sale. Yes, if sale is its secondary use ; not if manufacture for sale is 
its only or even primary use. That we began with sa le of Khadi shows temporary 
necessity as well as our limited vision. Experience  is a great teacher. It has 
taught us many things. Not the least is its primary  use. But it is by no means 
the last. But I must leave this fascinating field o f speculation and proceed 
definitely to answer the question put in the headin g. 
My first business as the Minister in charge of revi val of the villages as the centre 
of all governmental activity, would be to find out from among the Permanent 
Service honest and incorruptible men capable for th e work. I would put the 
best among them in touch with the A.I.S.A. and the A.I.V.I.A., creations of the 
Congress, and bring in a scheme for giving the vill age-crafts the greatest 
encouragement. I would stipulate, there should be n o compulsion on the 
villagers, that they must not slave for others and that they should be taught to 
help themselves and rely upon their own labour and skill for the production of 
articles of food, cloth and other necessaries. The scheme would thus have to be 
comprehensive. I would instruct my first man, there fore, to see the Hindustani 
Talimi Sangh and see what it has to say. 
Let me assume that the scheme, thus produced, conta ins a clause, saying that 
the villagers themselves declare that they would no t want mill cloth, say, after 
one year from a fixed date, that they require cotto n, wool and necessary 
implements and instruction, not as a gift but to be  paid for on the easiest 
terms. The scheme provides too, that it will not ap ply at once to the whole of 
any province but only to a part to begin with. The scheme further tells one that 
the A.I.S.A. will guide and assist the working of t he scheme. 
Being convinced of its soundness, I would give it l egal form in consultation with 
the law department and issue a notification, fully describing the genesis of the Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 234  scheme. The villagers as well as the mill- owners a nd others would have been 
party to it. The notification will show clearly tha t it is the people's measure, 
though bearing the Government stamp. The Government  money will be used for 
the benefit of the poorest villagers, making the la rgest return possible to the 
people concerned. It will, therefore, be probably t he most profitable 
investment in which expert assistance will be volun tary and overhead charges 
the least item. The notification will give in detai l, the whole cost to the 
country and the return to the people. 
The only question for me as Minister is whether A.I .S.A. has the conviction and 
capacity to shoulder the burden of creating and gui ding a Khadi scheme to 
success. If it has, I would put my little barque to  sea with all confidence.  
H., 1-9-’46, p. 288 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 235   
CHAPTER 29 
INDIA AND THE WORLD 
When India becomes self-supporting, self-reliant, a nd proof against temptations 
and exploitation, she will cease to be the object o f greedy attraction for any 
power in the West or the East, and will then feel s ecure without having to carry 
the burden of expensive armament. Her internal econ omy will be India's 
strongest bulwark against aggression. 
Y.I., 2-7-’31, p. 161 
 
My notion of  Puma Swaraj  is not isolated independence but healthy and 
dignified independence. My nationalism, fierce thou gh it is, is not exclusive, is 
not devised to harm any nation or individual. Legal  maxims are not so legal as 
they are moral. I believe in the eternal truth of  sic utere tuo ut alienum non 
laedas (use thy own property so as not to injure thy neigh bour's).  
Y.I., 26-3-’31, p. 51 
 
A free democratic India will gladly associate herse lf with other free nations for 
mutual defence against aggression and for economic co-operation. She will 
work for the establishment of a real world order ba sed on freedom and 
democracy, utilizing the world's knowledge and reso urces for the progress and 
advancement of humanity.  
H., 23-9-’39, p. 278 
 
It only means that the Western nations have to use their skill. If they want to 
use their skill abroad, from philanthropic motives,  America would say, 'Well, we 
know how to make bridges, we won't keep it a secret , but we say to the whole 
world, we will teach you how to make bridges and we  will charge you nothing.' 
America says, 'Where other nations can grow one bla de of wheat, we can grow 
two thousand.' Then, America should teach that art free of charge to those who Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 236  will learn it, but not aspire to grow wheat for the  whole world, which would 
spell a sorry day for the world indeed.  
H., 2-11-’34, p. 302 
 
[Africans wanted to know what India could give them  and how they could achieve co-
operative industrialization in order to be saved fr om the terrible exploitation under which 
they were suffering.] 
The commerce between India and Africa, will be of i deas and services, not of 
manufactured goods against raw materials "after the  fashion °f Western 
exploiters. Then, India can offer you the spinning wheel. If I had discovered it 
when I was in South Africa, I would have introduced  it among the Africans who 
were my neighbours in Phoenix. You can grow cotton,  you have ample leisure 
and plenty of manual skill. You should study and ad opt the lesson of the village 
crafts we are trying to revive. Therein lies the ke y to your salvation.  
H., 24-2-’46, p. 18 
 
'Has the spinning wheel a message for America ? Can  it serve as a counter 
weapon to the atom bomb ? ' 
I do feel that it has a message for the U.S.A. and the whole world. ... I have not 
the slightest doubt that the saving of India and of  the world lies in the wheel. If 
India becomes the slave of the machine, then, I say , Heaven save the world.  
H., 17-11-’46, p. 404 
 
I feel in the innermost recesses of my heart. . . t hat the world is sick unto 
death of blood-spilling. The world is seeking a way  out, and I flatter myself 
with the belief that perhaps it will be the privile ge of the ancient land of India 
to show that way out to the hungering world.  
India’s Case for Swaraj, 1932, p. 209 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 237  If India fails, Asia dies. It has been aptly called  the nursery of many blended 
cultures and civilizations. Let India be and remain  the hope of all the exploited 
races of the earth, whether in Asia, Africa or in a ny part of the world.  
H., 5-10-’47, p. 354 
 
We do not want to cut adrift from the whole world. We will have a free 
interchange with all nations, but the present force d interchange has to go. We 
do not want to be exploited, neither do we want to exploit any other nation. 
Through the scheme we look forward to making all ch ildren producers, and so 
to change the face of the whole nation, for it will  permeate the whole of our 
social being. But that does not mean that we cut ad rift from the whole world. 
There will be nations that will want to interchange  with others because they 
cannot produce certain things. They will certainly depend on other nations for 
them, but the nations that will provide for them sh ould not exploit them. 
'But if you simplify your life to such an extent th at you need nothing from other 
countries, you will isolate yourselves from them; w hereas I want you to be 
responsible for America also.' 
It is by ceasing to exploit and to be exploited tha t we can be responsible for 
America. For America will then follow our example a nd there will be no 
difficulty in a free interchange between us.  
H., 12-2-’38, p. 2 
 
I know that the work (of shaping the ideal village)  is as difficult as to make of 
India an ideal country... But if one can produce on e ideal village, he will have 
provided a pattern not only for the whole country b ut perhaps for the whole 
world. More than this a seeker may not aspire after .  
Towards New Horizons, 1959, p. 99 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 238  'In free India whose interest shall be supreme? If a neighbouring State is in 
want, would India adopt an attitude of isolationism , saying that her own needs 
must come first?' 
A truly independent and free India would rush to th e help of her neighbours in 
distress. A man whose spirit of sacrifice does not go beyond his own 
community, himself becomes, and makes his community , selfish. The logical 
sequel of self-sacrifice is that the individual sac rifices himself for the com-
munity, the community for the district, the distric t for the Province, the 
Province for the nation, and the nation for the wor ld. A drop from the ocean 
perishes without doing any good. As a part of the o cean, it shares the glory of 
carrying on its bosom whole fleets of mighty ships.  
Towards New Horizons, 1959, p. 200 
 
Let no one commit the mistake of thinking, that Ram a-raj ya means a rule of 
the Hindus. My Rama is another name for Khuda or Go d. I want Khudai Raj , 
which is the same thing as the Kingdom of God on Ea rth. The establishment of 
such a Rajya would not only mean welfare of the who le of the Indian people 
but of the whole world.  
Towards New Horizons, 1959, p. 200 
 
I would like to see India free and strong so that s he may offer herself as a 
willing and pure sacrifice for the betterment of th e world. The individual, being 
pure, sacrifices himself for the family, the latter  for the village, the village for 
the district, the district for the province, the pr ovince for the nation, the 
nation for all.  
Y.I., 17-9-’25, p. 321 
 
Through Swaraj we would serve the whole world.  
Y.I., 16-4-’31, p. 79 
 Village Swaraj 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 239  There is no limit to extending our service to our n eighbours across our State-
made frontiers. God never made those frontiers. 
Y.I., 31-12-’31, p. 427 
 
 
SOURCES 
H :  Harijan 
Y.I.  : Young India 
  