 
Village Industries 
 
 
 
 
 
By : M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 5/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
 
Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
I wish to acknowledge with sincere gratitude the he lp rendered to me in the 
compilation of this booklet by Shri P. Y. Chinchank ar of the Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission, who readily made available t o me all the passages from 
the writings of Gandhiji bearing on Village Industr ies, which he had assiduously 
collected by going through the files of  Young India  and  Harijan. 
 
R. K. P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3   
CHAPTER 1 
WHY THE VILLAGE INDUSTRIES MOVEMENT 
I have no doubt in my mind that we add to the natio nal wealth if we help the 
small-scale industries. I have no doubt also that t rue Swadeshi consists in 
encouraging and reviving these home industries. Tha t alone can help the dumb 
millions. It also provides an outlet for the creati ve faculties and resourcefulness 
of the people. It can also usefully employ hundreds  of youths in the country 
who are in need of employment. It may harness all t he energy that at present 
runs to waste. I do not want anyone of those who ar e engaged in more 
remunerative occupations to leave them and take to the minor industries. Just 
as I did with regard to the spinning wheel, I would  ask only those who suffer 
from unemployment and penury to take to some of the se industries and add a 
little to their slender resources. 
Cent Per Cent Swadeshi , p. 5, Edn. 1958 
 
The idea behind the village industries scheme is th at we should look to the 
villages for the supply of our daily needs and that , when we find that some 
needs are not so supplied, we should see whether wi th a little trouble and 
organization, they cannot be profitably supplied by  the villagers. In estimating 
the profit, we should think of the villager, not of  ourselves. It may be that, in 
the initial stages, we might have to pay a little m ore than the ordinary price 
and get an inferior article in the bargain. Things will improve, if we will 
interest ourselves in the supplier of our needs and  insist on his doing better and 
take the trouble of helping to do better. 
Harijan , 23-11-1934, p. 324 
 
This is a constructive, not a destructive, programm e. The big industries can 
never, they don't hope to, overtake the unemployed millions. Their aim is 
primarily to make money for the few owners, never t he direct one of finding Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4  employment for the unemployed millions. The organiz ers of Khadi and other 
village industries don't hope in the near future to  affect the big industries. They 
may hope to bring a ray of light into the dark dung eons, miscalled cottages, of 
the villagers. . . . They are designed to  well utilize  the leisure hours of the idle 
millions. 
In this there is  no  war against the misuse and abuse of machinery, i.e . its use to 
the detriment of the millions. Dead machinery must not be pitted against the 
millions of living machines represented by the vill agers scattered in the seven 
hundred thousand villages of India. Machinery to be  well used has to help and 
ease human effort. The present use of machinery ten ds more and more to 
concentrate wealth in the hands of a few in total d isregards of millions of men 
and women whose bread is snatched by it out of thei r mouths. The movement 
represented by the A.I.S.A. and the A.I.V.I.A. has been conceived so as to 
minimize the evil wrought by the craze for amassing  large fortunes through the 
use of dead tools in order to avoid having to deal with very sensitive human 
tools. 
Harijan , 14-9-1935 
 
I would say that if the village perishes, India wil l perish too. It will be no more 
India. Her own mission in the world will get lost. The revival of the village is 
possible only when it is no more exploited. Industr ialization on a mass scale will 
necessarily lead to passive or active exploitation of the villagers as the 
problems of competition and marketing come in. Ther efore, we have to 
concentrate on the village being self-contained, ma nufacturing mainly for use. 
Provided this character of the village industry is maintained, there would be no 
objection to villagers using even the modern machin es and tools that they can 
make and can afford to use. Only they should not be  used as a means of 
exploitation of others. 
Harijan , 29-8-1936, p. 226 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  There is no doubt in my mind that in a country like  ours, teeming with millions 
of unemployed, something is needed to keep their ha nds and feet engaged in 
order that they may earn an honest living. It is fo r them that Khadi and cottage 
industries are needed. It is clear to me as dayligh t that they are badly needed 
at the present moment. What the future has in store  for them, I do not know, 
nor do I care to know. . . . These little things ad d substantially to the income of 
the poor villagers. If you can ensure them three an nas instead of the three pice 
that they get today, they will think they have won Swaraj. That is what Khadi is 
trying to do for the spinners today. 
Harijan , 2-1-1937 
 
The conception underlying both the Nai Talim and th e village industries 
programme, including Khaddar, was rooted in the sam e thing, viz., concern for 
the dignity and status of the village unit as again st the big cities and of the 
individual against the machine. The concern was fur ther augmented by the fact 
that India lives not in a handful of her big cities  but in her 7,00,000 villages. 
The problem was of re-establishment of justice betw een the town and the 
village. As it was, the balance was heavily tipped in favour of the former to the 
disadvantage of the latter. 
Harijan,  25-8-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6   
CHAPTER 2 
CAUSES OF DECLINE OF VILLAGE INDUSTRIES 
We eat mill-ground flour, and even the poor village r walks with a head-load of 
half a maund grain to have it ground in the nearest  flour mill. Do you know that 
in spite of the plenty of foodstuffs we produce we import wheat from outside 
and we eat the 'superfine' flour from Australia? We  will not use our hand-ground 
flour, and the poor villager also foolishly copies us. We thus turn wealth into 
waste, nectar into poison. For whole meal is the pr oper meal. Mill-ground flour 
is vitaminless flour, mill-ground flour kept for da ys is not only vitaminless, but 
poison. But we will not exert ourselves to produce flour which we must eat 
fresh every day, and will pay for less nutritious t hings and purchase ill-health in 
the bargain. This is not any abstruse economic trut h, it is a fact, which is daily 
happening before our eyes. The same is the case wit h rice and  gur  and oil. We 
will eat rice, polished of its substance, and eat l ess nutritious sugar and pay 
more for it than more nutritious  gur.  We have suffered the village oilman to be 
driven to extinction and we eat adulterated oils. W e idolize the cow, but kill 
her by slow degrees. We eat honey and kill the hone y-bee, with the result that 
honey is such a rare commodity today that it is onl y available to a 'Mahatma' 
like me or to those who must have it from the physi cian as a vehicle for the 
drugs he prescribes. If we took the trouble of lear ning scientific and harmless 
bee-keeping, we should get it cheaper and our child ren would get out of it all 
the carbohydrates they need. In all our dietetics, we mistake the shadow for 
the substance, preferring bone-white sugar to rich brown  gur  and pale white 
bread to rich brown bran-bread. 
We are said to be a nation of daily bathers. That w e are, to be sure, but we are 
none the better for it. For we bathe with unclean w ater, we foul our tanks and 
rivers with filth and use that water for drinking a nd bath. We lawyers and 
degree-holders and doctors will not learn the eleme ntary principles of 
sanitation and hygiene. We have not yet devised the  most economic method of Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  disposal of our evacuations and we turn our open he althy spaces into breeding 
grounds of disease. 
I implore you to throw off your inertia, to bestir yourselves to study these 
elementary facts and live more rational lives and l earn how to turn waste into 
wealth. I have told you simple truths which we woul d soon realize and act up to 
if we threw off the inertia of ages. But we have sh unned body-labour to the, 
detriment of our brains, and thus rest content with  the irrational ways of diet 
and living. Let us pull ourselves together and reso lve to make our bodies and 
brains more active. 
Harijan , 11-5-1935 
 
Any country that exposes itself to unlimited foreig n competition can be reduced 
to starvation and therefore, subjection if the fore igners desire it. This is known 
as peaceful penetration. One has to go only a step further to understand that 
the result would be the same as between hand-made g oods and those made by 
power-driven machinery. We are seeing the process g oing on before our eyes. 
Little flour mills are ousting the  chakki, oil mills the village  ghani,  rice mills the 
village  dhenki,  sugar mills the village £wr-pans, etc. This displa cement of 
village labour is impoverishing the villagers and e nriching the moneyed men. If 
the process continues sufficiently long, the villag ers will be destroyed without 
any further effort. No Chengis Khan could devise a more ingenious or more 
profitable method of destroying these villages. And  the tragedy of it all is that 
the villagers are unconsciously but none the less s urely contributing to their 
own destruction. To complete the tale of their woe,  let the reader know that 
even cultivation has ceased to be profitable. For s ome crops, the villager does 
not cover even the cost of seed. 
Harijan,  20-6-1936 
 
 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8   
CHAPTER 3 
DANGERS OF MECHANIZATION 
Mechanization is good when the hands are too few fo r the work intended to be 
accomplished. It is an evil when there are more han ds than required for the 
work, as is the case in India. . . . The problem wi th us is not how to find leisure 
for the teeming millions inhabiting our villages. T he problem is how to utilize 
their idle hours, which are equal to the working da ys of six months in the year. 
Strange as it may appear, every mill generally is a  menace to the villagers. I 
have not worked out the figures, but I am quite saf e in saying that every mill-
hand does the work of at least ten labourers doing the same work in their 
villages. In other words, he earns more than he did  in his village at the" 
expense of ten fellow-Villagers. Thus spinning and weaving mills have deprived 
the .villagers of a substantial means of livelihood . It is no answer in reply to say 
that they turn out cheaper, better cloth, if they d o so at all. .For, if they have 
displaced thousands of workers, the cheapest mill c loth is dearer, than the 
dearest Khadi woven in the villages. Coal is not de ar for the coal miner who can 
use it there and then nor is Khadi dear for the vil lager who manufactures * his 
own Khadi. But if the cloth manufactured in mills d isplaces village hands, rice 
mills and flour mills not only displace thousands o f poor women workers, but 
damage the health of the whole population in the ba rgain. Where people have 
no objection to taking flesh diet and can afford it , white flour and polished rice 
may do no harm, but in India, where millions can ge t no flesh diet even where 
they have no objection to eating it, if they can ge t it, it is sinful to deprive 
them of nutritious and vital elements contained in whole wheat meal and 
unpolished rice. It is time medical men and others combined to instruct the 
people on the danger attendant upon the use of whit e flour and polished rice... 
Hence the function of the All-India Village Industr ies Association must, in my 
opinion be to encourage the existing industries and  to revive, where it is 
possible and desirable, the dying or dead industrie s of villages according to the 
village methods, i.e., the villages working in thei r own cottages as may have Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9  done from times immemorial. These simple methods ca n be considerably 
improved as they have been in hand-ginning, hand-ca rding, hand-spinning and 
hand-weaving. 
A critic objects that the ancient plan is purely in dividualistic and can never 
bring about corporate effort. This view appears to me to be very superficial. 
Though articles may be manufactured by villagers in  their cottages, they can be 
pooled together and profits divided. The villagers may work under supervision 
and according to plan. The raw material may be supp lied from common stock. 
If the will to co-operative effort is created, ther e is surely ample opportunity 
for co-operation, division of labour, saving of tim e and efficiency of work. All 
these things are today being done by the All- India  Spinners' Association in over 
5,000 villages. 
Harijan , 16-11-1934 
 
When production and consumption both become localiz ed, the temptation to 
speed up production, indefinitely and at any price,  disappears. All the endless 
difficulties and problems that our present-day econ omic system presents, too, 
would then come to an end. Take a concrete instance . England today is the 
cloth shop of the world. It, therefore, needs to ho ld a world in bondage to se-
cure its market. But under the change that I have e nvisaged, she would limit 
her production to the actual needs of her 45 millio ns of population. When that 
need is satisfied, the production would necessarily  stop. It won't be continued 
for the sake of bringing in more gold irrespective of the needs of a people and 
at the risk of their impoverishment. There would be  no unnatural accumulation 
of hoards in the pockets of the few, and want in th e midst of plenty in regard 
to the rest, as is happening today, for instance, i n America. America is today 
able to hold the world in fee by selling, all kinds  of trinkets, or by selling her 
unrivalled skill, which she has a right to do. She has reached the acme of mass 
production, and yet she has not been able to abolis h unemployment or want. 
There are still thousands, perhaps millions of peop le in America who live in Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  misery, in spite of the phenomenal riches of the fe w. The whole of the 
American nation is not benefited by this mass produ ction. 
Harijan,  2-11-1934, p. 302 
 
Well, now the economics and civilization of a count ry where the pressure of 
population on land is greatest are and must be diff erent from those of a 
country where the pressure is least. Sparsely popul ated, America may have 
need of machinery. India may not need it at all. Wh ere there are millions upon 
millions of units of idle labour, it is no use thin king of labour-saving devices. If 
someone devised a machine which saved us the troubl e of using our hands to 
eat, eating would cease to be a pleasure, it would become a torture. The 
reason of our poverty is the extinction of our indu stries and our consequent 
unemployment. Some years ago India's agricultural p opulation was said to be 70 
per cent. Today it is said to be 90 per cent. It do es not mean that 90 per cent 
are agriculturists, but that instead of 70 per cent  who depended on land, 90 per 
cent are now driven to depend on land. In other wor ds, whereas there were 
industries and crafts enough to feed the 20 per cen t some time ago, these are 
no longer there and the people have thus been throw n on land. They thus steal 
their living, not because they want to, but because  there is no more land. 
Harijan , 11-5-1935 
 
I have no partiality for return to the primitive me thod of grinding and husking 
for the sake of them. I suggest the return, because  there is no other way of 
giving employment to the millions of villagers who are living in idleness. In my 
opinion, village uplift is impossible, unless we so lve the pressing economic 
distress. Therefore, to induce the villagers to uti lize their idle hours is in itself 
solid uplift work. 
Harijan , 30-11-1934 
 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11   
CHAPTER 4 
REHABILITATION OF VILLAGE INDUSTRIES 
We may profess to gratuitously help textile, sugar and rice mills and, 
respectively, kill the village spinning wheel, the handloom and their product, 
Khadi, the village cane crusher and its product, th e vitamin-laden and 
nourishing  gur  or molasses and the hand-pounder and its product, unpolished 
rice, whose pericarp, which holds the vitamins, is left intact by these pounders. 
Our clear duty is, therefore, to investigate the po ssibility of keeping in 
existence the village wheel, the village crusher an d the village pounder, and, 
by advertising their products, discovering their qu alities, ascertaining the 
condition of the workers and the number displaced b y the power-driven ma-
chinery and discovering the methods of improving th em, whilst retaining their 
village character, to enable them to stand the comp etition of the mills. How 
terribly and criminally we have neglected them! Her e, there is no antagonism 
to the textile or the sugar or the rice mills. Thei r products must be preferred to 
the corresponding foreign products. If they were in  danger of extinction from 
foreign competition they should receive the needed support. But they stand in 
no such need. They are flourishing in spite of fore ign competition. What is 
needed is protection of the village crafts and the workers behind them from the 
crushing competition of the power-driven machinery,  whether it is worked in 
India or in foreign lands. It may be that Khadi,  gur  and unpolished rice have no 
intrinsic quality and that they should die. But, ex cept for Khadi, not the slight-
est effort has been made, so far as I am aware, to know anything about the 
fate of the tens of thousands of villagers who were  earning their livelihood 
through crushing cane and pounding rice. Surely, th ere is in this work enough 
for an army of patriots. The reader will say, 'But this is very difficult work.' I 
admit. But it is most important and equally interes ting. I claim that this is true, 
fruitful and cent per cent Swadeshi! 
Harijan,  10-8-1934 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  In a nutshell, of the things we use, we should rest rict our purchases to the 
articles which villages manufacture. Their manufact ures may be crude. We 
must try to induce them to improve their workmanshi p, and not dismiss them 
because foreign articles or even articles produced in cities, that is, big facto-
ries, are superior. In other words, we should evoke  the artistic talent of the 
villager. In this manner, shall we repay somewhat, the debt we owe to them. 
We need not be frightened by the thought whether we  shall ever succeed in 
such an effort. Within our own times, we can recall  instances where we have 
not been baffled by the difficulty of our tasks whe n we have known that they 
were essential for this nation's progress. If, ther efore, we as individuals believe 
that revivification of India's villages is a necess ity of our existence, if we 
believe that thereby only can we root out untouchab ility and feel one with all, 
no matter to what community or religion they may be long, we must mentally go 
back to the villages and treat them as our pattern,  instead of putting the city 
life before them for imitation. If this is the corr ect attitude, then, naturally, 
we begin with ourselves and thus use, say, hand-mad e paper instead of mill- 
made, use village reed, whenever possible, instead of the fountain pen or the 
penholder, ink made in the villages instead of the big factories, etc. I can 
multiply instances of this nature. There is hardly anything of daily use in the 
home, which the villagers have not made before and cannot make even now. If 
we perform the mental trick and fix our gaze upon t hem, we immediately put 
millions of rupees into the pockets of the villager s, whereas at the present 
moment we are exploiting the villagers without maki ng any return worth the 
name. It is time we arrested the progress of the tr agedy. To me, the campaign 
against untouchability has begun to imply ever so m uch more than the 
eradication of the ceremonial untouchability of tho se who are labeled 
untouchables. For the city- dweller, the villages h ave become untouchable. He 
does not know them, he will not live in them, and i f he finds himself in a 
village, he will want to reproduce the city life th ere. This would be tolerable, if 
we could bring into being cities which would accomm odate 30 crores of human 
beings. This is much more impossible than the one o f reviving the village Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  industries and stopping the progressive poverty, wh ich is due as much to 
enforced unemployment as to any other cause. 
Harijan , 30-11-1934 
 
These (i.e. village industries other than Khadi) st and on a different footing from 
Khadi. There is not much scope for voluntary labour  in them. Each industry will 
take the labour of only certain, number of hands. T hese industries come in as a 
handmaid to Khadi. They cannot exist without Khadi,  and Khadi will be robbed 
of its dignity without them. Village economy cannot  be complete without the 
essential village industries such as hand-grinding,  hand-pounding, soap-making, 
paper-making, match-making, tanning, oil-pressing e tc. Congressmen can 
interest themselves in these and, if they are villa gers or will settle down in 
villages, they will give these industries a new lif e and a new dress. All should 
make it a point of honour to use only village artic les whenever and wherever 
available. Given the demand, there is no doubt that  most of our wants can be 
supplied from our villages. When we have become vil lage-minded, we will not 
want imitations of the West or machine- made produc ts, but we will develop a 
true national taste in keeping with the vision of a  new India in which 
pauperism, starvation and idleness will be unknown.  
Constructive Programme , Edn. 1948, p. 14-5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14   
CHAPTER 5 
DIFFICULTIES IN THE WAY 
My difficulties are two. One is whether it is possi ble to sell hand-made articles 
as cheaply as machine-made ones. The second is that  out of the articles that 
have been enumerated in the scheme there is hardly any except Khadi which 
can become universal. They will not, in a large mea sure, be consumed locally 
and so will have to be sold in the cities. This is as it should be. The villagers 
should, develop such a high degree of skill that ar ticles prepared by them 
should command a ready market outside. When our vil lages are fully developed 
there will be no dearth in them of men with a high degree of skill and artistic 
talent. There will be village poets, village artist s, village architects, linguists 
and research workers. In short there will be nothin g in life worth having which 
will not be had in the villages. Today the villages  are dung heaps. Tomorrow 
they will be like tiny gardens of Eden where dwell highly intelligent folk whom 
no one can deceive or exploit. 
The reconstruction of the villages along these line s should begin right now. 
That might necessitate some modification of the sch eme. The reconstruction of 
the villages should not be organized on a temporary  but permanent basis. 
My second difficulty is that in the scheme under qu estion, craft and education 
have been divorced from each other. Graft, art, hea lth and education should all 
be integrated into one scheme. Nai Talim is a beaut iful blend of all the four 
and covers the whole education of the individual fr om the time of conception 
to the moment of death. Therefore, I would not divi de village uplift work into 
watertight compartments from the very beginning but  undertake an activity 
which will combine all four. Instead of regarding c raft and industry as different 
from education, I will regard the former as the med ium for the latter. Nai 
Talim ought to be integrated into the scheme. 
Harijan,  10-11-1946 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15  "Begin with Yourself"  
Correspondents have been writing, and friends have been seeing me, to ask me 
how to begin the village industries work and what t o do first. 
The obvious answer is, "Begin with yourself and do first that which is easiest for 
you to do." 
This answer, however, does not satisfy the enquirer s. Let me, therefore, be 
more explicit. 
Each person can examine all the articles of food, c lothing and other things that 
he uses from day to day and replace foreign makes o r city makes, by those 
produced by the villagers in their homes or fields with the simple inexpensive 
tools they can easily handle and mend. This replace ment will be itself, an 
education of great value and a solid beginning. The  next step will be opened 
out to him of itself. For instance, say, the beginn er has been hitherto using a 
tooth-brush made in a Bombay factory. He wants to r eplace it with a village 
brush. He is advised to use a  babul  twig. If he has weak teeth or is toothless, 
he has to crush one end of it, with a rounded stone  or a hammer, on a hard 
surface. The other end he slits with a knife and us es the halves as tongue-
scrapers. He will find these brushes to be cheaper and much cleaner than the 
very unhygienic factory-made toothbrush. The city-m ade tooth-powder he 
naturally replaces with equal parts of clean, finel y-ground, wood-charcoal and 
clean salt. He will replace mill- cloth with villag e-spun Khadi, and mill-husked 
rice with hand-husked, unpolished rice, and white s ugar with village-made  gur.  
These I have taken merely as samples already mentio ned in these columns. I 
have mentioned them again to deal with the difficul ties that have been 
mentioned by those who have been discussing the que stion with me. 
Harijan , 25-1-1935 
 
 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16   
CHAPTER 6 
PATTERN OF STATE ASSISTANCE 
A suggestion has been made that there should be a s eparate minister for the 
work, as, for proper organization, it will occupy a ll the time of one minister. I 
dread to make the suggestion, for we have not yet o utlived the English scale of 
expenditure. Whether a minister is separately appoi nted or not, a department 
for the work is surely necessary. In these times of  scarcity of food and clothing, 
this department can render the greatest help. The m inisters have experts at 
their disposal through the A. I. S. A. and the A. I . V. I. A. It is possible to clothe 
today the whole of India in Khadi on the smallest o utlay and in the shortest 
time possible. Each provincial Government has to te ll the villagers that they 
must manufacture their own Khaddar for their own us e. This brings in 
automatic local production and distribution. And th ere will undoubtedly be a 
surplus for the cities at least to a certain extent  which, in its turn, will reduce 
the pressure on the local mills. The latter will th en be able to take part in 
supplying the want of cloth in other parts of the w orld. 
How can this result be brought about? 
The Governments should notify the villagers that th ey will be expected to 
manufacture Khaddar for the needs of their village within a fixed date after 
which no cloth will be supplied to them. The Govern ments in their turn will 
supply the villagers with cotton seed or cotton whe rever required, at cost price 
and the tools of manufacture also at cost, to be re covered in easy installments 
payable in, say, five years or more. They will supp ly them with instructors 
wherever necessary and undertake to buy surplus sto ck of Khaddar, provided 
that the villagers in question have their cloth req uirements supplied from their 
own manufacture. This should do away with cloth sho rtage without fuss and 
with very little overhead charges. 
The villages will be surveyed and a list prepared o f things that can be 
manufactured locally with little or no help and whi ch may be required for Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17  village use or for sale outside, such for instance,  as  ghani- pressed oil and 
cakes, burning oil prepared through ghanis , hand-pounded rice,  tadgur,  honey, 
toys, mats, hand-made paper, village soap, etc. If enough care is thus taken 
the villages, most of them as good as dead or dying , will hum with life and 
exhibit the immense possibilities they have of supp lying most of their wants 
themselves and of the cities and towns of India. 
Then there is the limitless cattle wealth of India suffering from criminal 
neglect. Goseva Sangh, as yet not properly experien ced, can still supply 
valuable aid. 
Without the basic training the villagers are being starved for education. This 
desideratum can be supplied by the Hindustani Talim i Sangh. 
Harijan,  28-4-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18   
CHAPTER 7 
SPINNING WHEEL — THE LIFE-GIVING SUN 
I feel convinced that the revival of hand-spinning and hand-weaving will make 
the largest contribution to the economic and the mo ral regeneration of India. 
The millions must have a simple industry to supplem ent agriculture. Spinning 
was the cottage industry years ago, and if the mill ions are to be saved from 
starvation, they must be enabled to reintroduce spi nning in their homes, and 
every village must repossess its own weaver. 
Young India,  21-7-1920 
 
I... claim for the Charkha the honour of being able  to solve the problem of 
economic distress in a most natural, simple, unexpe nsive and businesslike 
manner. The Charkha, therefore, is not only not use less... but it is a useful and 
indispensable article for every home. It is the sym bol of the nation's prosperity 
and, therefore, freedom. It is a symbol not of comm ercial war but of 
commercial peace. It bears not a message of ill-wil l towards the nations of the 
earth but of good-will and self-help. It will not n eed the protection of a navy 
threatening a world's peace and exploiting its reso urces, but it needs the 
religious determination of millions to spin their y arn in their own homes as 
today they cook their food in their own homes. I ma y deserve the curses of 
posterity for many mistakes of omission and commiss ion, but I am confident of 
earning its blessings for suggesting a revival of t he Charkha. I take my all on it. 
For every revolution of the wheel spins peace, good -will and love. And with all 
that, inasmuch as the loss of it brought about Indi a's slavery, its voluntary 
revival with all its implications must mean India's  freedom. 
Young India,  8-12-1921 
 
 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19  What is claimed for spinning is that: 
1. it supplies the readiest occupation to those who ha ve leisure and are in 
want of a few coppers; 
2. it is known to the thousands; 
3. it is easily learnt; 
4. it requires practically no outlay of capital; 
5. the wheel can be easily and cheaply made. Most of u s do not yet know that 
spinning can be done even with a piece of tile and splinter; 
6. the people have no repugnance to it; 
7. it affords immediate relief in times of famine and scarcity; 
8. it alone can stop the drain of wealth which goes ou tside India in the 
purchase of foreign cloth; 
9. it automatically distributes the millions thus save d among the deserving 
poor; 
10. even the smallest success means so much immediate g ain to the people; 
11. it is the most potent instrument of securing co -operation among the 
people. 
Young India,  21-8-1924 
 
I have often said that if seven lakhs of the villag es of India were to be kept 
alive, and if peace that is at the root of all civi lization is to be achieved, we 
have to make the spinning wheel the centre of all h andicrafts. Thus my faith in 
the spinning wheel is growing every day and I see i t more and more clearly that 
the Sun of the wheel will alone illumine the planet s of other handicrafts. But I 
go a step further and say that just as we go on dis covering new stars and 
planets in the vast solar system, even so we shall go on discovering fresh 
handicrafts every day. But for the sake of this thi ng, we have to make the 
spinning wheel the really life-giving Sun. 
Harijan,  19-2-1938 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20   
CHAPTER 8 
TANNING 
It is estimated that rupees nine crores worth of ra w hide is annually exported 
from India and that much of it is returned to her i n the shape of manufactured 
articles. This means not only a material, but also an intellectual, drain. We 
miss the training we should receive in tanning and preparing the innumerable 
articles of leather we need for daily use. 
Tanning requires great technical skill. An army of chemists can find scope for 
their inventive talent in this great industry. Ther e are two ways of developing 
it. One for the uplift of Harijans living in the vi llages and eking out a bare 
sustenance living in filth and degradation and cons igned to the village ghetto, 
isolated and away from the village proper. This way  means part re-organization 
of villages and taking art, education, cleanliness,  prosperity and dignity to 
them. This means also the application of chemical t alent to village uplift. 
Tanning chemists have to discover improved methods of tanning. The village 
chemist has to stoop to conquer. He has to learn an d understand the crude 
village tanning, which is still in existence but wh ich is fast dying owing to 
neglect, not to say want of support. But the crude method may not be 
summarily scrapped, at least not before a sympathet ic examination. It has 
served well for centuries. It could not have done s o, if it had no merit. The only 
research I know in this direction is being carried on in Santiniketan, and then it 
was started at the now defunct Ashram at Sabarmati.  I have not been able to 
keep myself in touch with the progress of the exper iment at Santiniketan. 
There is every prospect of its revival at the Harij an Ashram, which the 
Sabarmati Ashram has now become. These experiments are mere drops in the 
ocean of possible research. 
Cow-preservation is an article of faith in Hinduism . No Harijan worth his salt 
will kill cattle for food. But, having become untou chable, he has learnt the evil 
habit of eating carrion. He will not kill a cow but  will eat with the greatest 
relish the flesh of a dead cow. It may be physiolog ically harmless. But Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  psychologically there is nothing, perhaps, so repul sive as carrion- eating. And 
yet, when a dead cow is brought to a Harijan tanner 's house, it is a day of 
rejoicing for the whole household. Children dance r ound the carcass, and as the 
animal is flayed, they take hold of bones or pieces  of flesh and throw them at 
one another. As a tanner, who is living at the Hari jan Ashram, describing the 
scenes at his own now forsaken home, tells me the w hole family is drunk with 
joy at the sight of the dead animal. I know how har d I have found it working 
among Harijans to wean them from the soul-destroyin g habit of eating carrion. 
Reformed tanning means the automatic disappearance of carrion-eating. 
Well, here is the use for high intelligence and the  art of dissection. Here is also 
a mighty step in the direction of cow-preservation.  The cow must die at the 
hands of the butcher, unless we learn the art of in creasing her capacity of milk-
giving, unless we improve her stock and make her ma le progeny more useful for 
the field and carrying burdens, unless we make scie ntific use of all her excreta 
as manure, and unless, when she and hers die, we ar e prepared to make the 
wisest use of her hide, bone, flesh, entrails, etc.  
I am just now concerned only with the carcass. It i s well to remember here that 
the village tanner, thank God, has to deal only wit h the carcass, not the 
slaughtered animal. He has no means of bringing the  dead animal in a decent 
way. He lifts it, drags it, and this injures the sk in and reduces the value of the 
hide. If the villagers and the public knew the pric eless and noble service the 
tanner renders, they will provide easy and simple m ethods of carrying it, so as 
not to injure the skin at all. 
The next process is flaying the animal. This requir es great skill. I am told that 
none, not even surgeons, do this work better or mor e expeditiously than the 
village tanner does with his village knife. I have inquired of those who should 
know. They have not been able to show me an improve ment upon the village 
tanner. This is not to say that there is none bette r. I merely give the reader the 
benefit of my own very limited experience. The vill age tanner has no use for 
the bone. He throws it away. Dogs hover round the c arcass whilst it is flayed, 
and take away some, if not all, of the bones. This is a dead loss to the country. Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  The bones, if powdered fine, apart from their other  uses, make valuable 
manure. What remains after the dogs have taken away  their share is 
transported to foreign countries and returns to us in the shape of handles, 
buttons, etc. 
The second way is urbanizing this great industry. T here are several tanneries in 
India doing this work. Their examination is outside  the scope of this article. 
This urbanization can do little good to the Harijan s, much less to the villages. It 
is a process of double drain from the villages. Urb anization in India is slow but 
sure death for her villages and villagers. Urbaniza tion can never support ninety 
per cent of India's population, which is living in her 7,00,000 villages. To re- 
remove from these villages tanning and such other i ndustries is to remove what 
little opportunity there still is for making skille d use of the hand and the head. 
And when the village handicrafts disappear, the vil lagers working only with 
their cattle on the field, with idleness for six or  four months in the year, must, 
in the words of Madhusudan Das, be reduced to the l evel of the beast and be 
without proper nourishment, either of the mind or t he body, and, therefore, 
without joy and without hope. 
Here is work for the cent per cent Swadeshi lover a nd scope for the harnessing 
of technical skill to the solution of a great probl em. The work fells three apples 
with one throw. It serves the Harijans, it serves t he villagers, and it means 
honourable employment for the middle class intellig entsia who are in search of 
employment. Add to this the fact that intelligentsi a have a proper opportunity 
of coming in direct touch with the villagers. 
Harijan , 7-9-1934 
 
 
 
 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23   
CHAPTER 9 
DAIRYING 
Criminal negligence is the only cause of the misera ble condition of our cattle. 
Our  pinjrapols , though they are an answer to our instinct for mercy , are a 
clumsy demonstration of its execution. Instead of b eing model dairy farms and 
great profitable national institutions, they are me rely depots for receiving 
decrepit cattle. Whilst professing the religion of cow protection, we have 
enslaved the cow and her progeny, and have become s laves ourselves. 
Young India,  6-10-1921 
 
An ideal  goshala  would supply the city of its domicile with cheap a nd 
wholesome milk from cattle of its own keeping, and cheap and lasting foot-
wear not out of slaughtered hide but of the hide of  dead cattle. Such a  goshala  
will not be on one or two acres of ground in the he art of a city or in its 
immediate neighbourhood but it would have at some d istance, but within easy 
reach, fifty to a hundred acres of ground where a m odern dairy and a modern 
tannery would be conducted on strictly business but  national lines. Thus there 
would be no profits and no dividends to be paid and  there would be also no loss 
incurred. In the long run such institutions dotted all over India would be a 
triumph of Hinduism and , would be proof of Hindu e arnestness about cow, that 
is, cattle protection and it would provide decent e mployment for thousands of 
men including educated men; for both dairy and tann ery work requires expert 
scientific knowledge. Not Denmark but India should be a model State for the 
finest dairy experiments, and India should not to h er shame have to export nine 
crore rupees worth of dead cattle hide annually and  for her consumption use 
slaughtered cattle hide. If such a state of things is a shame for India it is a 
greater shame for Hindus. I wish that all the  Goshala Committees will take to 
heart the remarks I made in reply to the Giridih ad dress and make their  
goshalas into ideal dairies and tanneries and a refuge for a ll worn out and 
maimed cattle. Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  Young India , 22-10-1925 
 
Every  goshala  or  pinjrapol  should have a tannery adequate to its needs 
attached to it. In other words, the manager in char ge of every such institution 
should have a thorough knowledge of the immediate s teps necessary for 
utilizing the remains of dead cattle. If this is do ne, the question, viz. how many 
heads of cattle should a particular  goshala  contain, would not arise at all. 
I do not know what the rate of mortality of cattle in  goshalas  is nor is it 
relevant to my proposition. So long as there is a s ingle head of cattle in a 
goshala  its manager ought to know how to dispose of its re mains after it is 
dead, just as he is expected to know how to look af ter it while it is alive. 
Such humanitarian institutions for the protection o f cattle as I have described 
should normally take charge of the remains of the c attle that might die in the 
village. Therein lies the interest of the cattle, t he depressed classes and the 
general public alike. In villages where there are n o  goshalas  or the concomitant 
tanneries, some local person who believes in cow pr otection should take it 
upon himself to get the carcasses removed to the ne arest tannery or get the 
preliminary processes performed upon it and send th e useful parts there. 
The establishment of such tanneries as I have descr ibed does not require much 
capital outlay. Only some initial expenditure would  be needed to train up 
workers for this work. 
Young India,  3-11-1927 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25   
CHAPTER 10 
GUR AND KHANDSARI 
Take the sugar industry. The largest major industry  next to the textile is that of 
the manufacture of sugar. It stands in no need of o ur assistance. Sugar factories 
are fast multiplying. Popular agencies have done li ttle to help the growth of 
this industry. It is indebted for its growth to fav ourable legislation. And today 
the industry is so prosperous and expanding that th e production of jaggery is 
becoming a thing of the past. It is admittedly supe rior to refined sugar in 
nutritive value. It is this very valuable cottage i ndustry that cries out for your 
help. This by itself furnishes large scope for rese arch and substantial help. We 
have to investigate the ways and means of keeping i t alive. This is but an 
illustration of what I mean. 
Harijan,  10-8-1934 
 
The advantages, attributed to  tadi,  are all available from other foodstuffs.  Tadi 
is made out of  khajuri  juice. Fresh  khajuri  juice is not an intoxicant. It is 
known as  nira  in Hindustani and many people have been cured of t heir 
constipation as a result of drinking  nira.  I have taken it myself though it did not 
act as a laxative with me. I found that it had the same food value as sugar-cane 
juice. If one drinks a glass of  nira  in the morning instead of drinking tea etc., 
he should not need anything else for breakfast. As in the case of sugar-cane 
juice, palm juice can be boiled to make palm jagger y.  Khajuri  is a variety of 
palm tree. Several varieties of palm grow spontaneo usly in our country. All of 
them yield drinkable juice. As  nira gets fermented very quickly, it has to be 
used up immediately and therefore on the spot. Sinc e this condition is difficult 
to fulfill except to a limited extent, in practice,  the best use of  nira  is to 
convert it into palm jaggery. Palm jaggery can well  replace sugar-cane jaggery. 
In fact some people prefer it to the latter. One ad vantage of palm jaggery over 
sugar-cane jaggery is that it is less sweet and the refore one can eat more of it. 
The All India Village Industries Association has do ne a great deal to popularize Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  palm jaggery, but much remains to be done. If the p alms that are used for 
making  tadi are used for making jaggery, India will never lack  sugar and the 
poor will be able to get good jaggery for very litt le money. Palm jaggery can be 
converted into molasses and refined sugar. But the jaggery is much more useful 
than refined sugar. The salts present in the jagger y are lost in the process of 
refining. Just as refined wheat flour and polished rice lose some of their 
nutritive value because of the loss of the pericarp , refined sugar also loses 
some of the nutritive value of the jaggery. One may  generalize that all 
foodstuffs are richer if taken in their natural sta te as far as possible. 
Key to Health,  pp. 33-34, Edn. 1956 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27   
CHAPTER 11 
OTHER VILLAGE INDUSTRIES  
Compost Manure 
The excreta of animals and human beings mixed with refuse can be turned into 
golden manure, itself a valuable commodity. It incr eases the productivity of the 
soil which receives it. Preparation of this manure is itself a village industry. But 
this, like all village industries, cannot give tang ible results unless the crores of 
India co-operated in reviving them and thus making India prosperous. 
Delhi Diary,  pp. 270-71 
 
Given the willing co-operation of the masses of Ind ia, this country can not only 
drive out shortage of food, but can provide India w ith more than enough. This 
organic manure ever enriches, never impoverishes th e soil. The daily waste, 
judiciously composted, returns to the soil in the f orm of golden manure causing 
a saving of millions of rupees and increasing manif old, the total yield of grains 
and pulses. In addition, the judicious use of waste  keeps the surroundings 
clean. And cleanliness is not only next to godlines s, it promotes health. 
Harijan,  28-12-1947 
 
Hand-made Paper 
I was told that, if there were enough orders, the p aper could be supplied at the 
same cost as the mill-made article. I know that han d-made paper can never 
supply the daily growing demand for paper. But love rs of the seven hundred 
thousand villages and their handicrafts will always  want to use handmade 
paper, if it is easily procurable. Those who use ha nd-made paper know that it 
has a charm of its own. Who does not know the famou s Ahmedabad paper? 
What mill-made paper can beat it in durability or p olish? Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28  The account-books of the old style are still made o f that paper. But it is 
probably a perishing industry like many such others . With a little 
encouragement, it ought never to perish. If there w as supervision, the 
processes might be improved and the defects that ar e to be noticed with some 
of this hand-made paper may be easily removed. The economic condition of the 
numberless people engaged in these little known tra des is well worth 
investigating. They will surely allow themselves to  be guided and advised and 
feel thankful to those who would take interest in t hem. 
Harijan,  14-9-1934 
 
Machine Oil and Ghani Oil 
Shri Jhaverbhai has also examined the cause of the decline of the village  ghani.  
The most potent cause is the inability of the oilma n to command a regular 
supply of seeds. The villages are practically denud ed of seeds after the season. 
The oilman has no money to store the seeds, much le ss to buy them in the 
cities. Therefore he has disappeared or is fast dis appearing. Lakhs of  ghanis  are 
today lying idle causing a tremendous waste of the country's resources. Surely it 
is the function of the State to resuscitate the exi sting  ghanis by conserving 
seeds in the places of their origin and making them  available to the village 
oilman at reasonable rates. The Government loses no thing by giving this aid. It 
can be given, so Shri Jhaverbhai contends, through co-operative societies or 
Panchayats. If this is done, Shri Jhaverbhai is of opinion, based on research, 
that  ghani oil can compete with the machine product and villa ger can be 
spared the infliction of the adulterated oil he get s today. It should be borne in 
mind that the only fat the villager gets, when he g ets any, is what the oils can 
give him. To  ghee  he is generally a stranger.  
He (Shri Jhaverbhai) has found out why this machine  oil is at all cheaper than 
the  ghani oil. He gives three reasons, two of which are unav oidable. They are 
capital and the ability of the machine to extract t he last drop of oil and that 
too in a shorter time than the  ghani.  These advantages are neutralized by the 
commission the owner of this oil mill has to pay to  the middleman. But Shri Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  Jhaverbhai cannot cope with the third reason, adult eration, unless he also 
takes to it. This naturally he will not do. He ther efore suggests that 
adulteration should be dealt with the law. This can  be done by enforcing the 
Anti- Adulteration Act if there is one or by enacti ng it by licensing oil mills. 
Harijan,  2-9-1939 
 
Bee-keeping 
Bee-keeping seems to me to possess immense possibil ities. Apart from its 
village value, it may be cultivated as a hobby by m oneyed young men and 
women. They will add to the wealth of the country a nd produce the finest 
health-giving sugar for themselves. If they are phi lanthropically inclined, they 
can distribute it as health-giving food among sickl y Harijan children. There is no 
reason why it should be a luxury of the rich or an expensive medicinal vehicle 
in the hands of the  hakims  and  vaidyas.  No doubt, my hope is based on 
inferences drawn from meagre data. Experiments that  may be made in villages 
and in cities by young men and women should show wh ether honey can become 
a common article of food or has to remain an uncomm on article, which it is 
today. 
Harijan,  1-2-1935 
 
Hand-pounding of Rice 
In my writing on cent per cent Swadeshi, I have sho wn how some aspects of it 
can be tackled immediately with benefit to the star ving millions both 
economically and hygienically. The richest in the l and can share the benefit. 
Thus if rice can be pounded in the villages after t he old fashion, the wages will 
fill the pockets of the rice-pounding sisters and t he rice-eating millions will get 
some sustenance from, the unpolished rice instead o f pure starch which the 
polished rice provides. Human greed, which takes no  account of the health or 
the wealth of the people who come under its heels, is responsible for the 
hideous rice-mills one sees in all the rice-produci ng tracts. If public opinion was Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  strong, it will make rice-mills impossibility by si mply insisting on unpolished 
rice and appealing to the owners of rice-mills to s top a traffic that undermines 
the health of a whole nation and robs the poor peop le of an honest means of 
livelihood. 
Harijan,  26-10-1934 
 
I regard the existence of power wheels for the grin ding of corn in thousands of 
villages as the limit of our helplessness. I suppos e India does not produce all the 
engines or grinding machines.... The planting of su ch machinery and engines on 
a large scale in villages is also a sign of greed. Is it proper to fill one's pockets 
in this manner at the expense of the poor? Every su ch machinery puts thousands 
of hand -chakkis out of work and takes away employment from thousand s of 
housewives and artisans who make these chakkis.  Moreover, the process is 
infective and will spread to every village industry . The decay of the latter 
spells too the decay of art. If it meant replacemen t of old crafts by new ones, 
one might not have much to say against it. But this  is not what is happening. In 
the thousands of villages where power machinery exi sts, one misses the sweet 
music in the early morning of the grinders at work.  
Harijan,  10-3-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31   
CHAPTER 12 
VILLAGE EXHIBITIONS 
If we want and believe that the village should not only survive but also become 
strong and flourishing, then the village perspectiv e is the only correct view-
point. If this is true then in our exhibitions ther e can be no place for the 
glamour and pomp of the cities. There should be no necessity for games and 
other entertainments that belong to the cities. An exhibition should not 
become a "Tamasha", nor a source of income; it shou ld never become the 
advertising medium for traders. No sales should be allowed there. Even Khadi 
and village industry products should not be sold. A n exhibition should be a 
medium of education, should be attractive and it sh ould be such as to in fuse in 
the villager the impulse to take to some industry o r the other. It should bring 
out the glaring defects, and drawbacks in the prese nt day village life, and show 
methods to be adopted to set them right. It should also be able to indicate the 
extent of achievement in that direction ever since the idea of village uplift was 
sponsored. It should also teach how to make village  life artistic. 
Now let us see what an exhibition will be like if i t is to conform to the above 
conditions. 
1. There should be two models of villages—one as is ex isting today and the 
other an improved one. The improved village will be  clean all throughout. 
Its houses, its roads, its surroundings and its fie lds will be all clean. The 
condition of the cattle should also improve. Books,  charts, and pictures 
should be used to show what industries give increas ed income and how. 
2. It must show how to conduct the various village ind ustries, wherefrom to 
obtain the needed implements, how to make them. The  actual working of 
each industry should be demonstrated. Along with th ese the following 
should also find place: 
a) Ideal village diet 
b) Comparison between village industry and machine ind ustry 
c) Model lessons on rearing animals Village Industries 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32  d) Art section 
e) Model of village latrine 
f) Farm-yard manure,  v.  chemical manure 
g) Utilization of hides, bones, etc. of animals 
h) Village music, musical instruments, village dramas 
i) Village games, village  akhadas  and forms of exercise 
j) Nai Talim 
k) Village medicine 
l) Village maternity home  
Subject to the policy enunciated in the beginning, this list may be further 
expanded. What I have indicated is by way of exampl e only, it should not be 
taken to be exhaustive. I have not made any mention  of the Gharkha and other 
village industries as they are taken for granted. W ithout them the exhibition 
will be absolutely useless. 
Gram Udyog Patrika,  July, 1946 