 
The Voice of Truth 
      
 
By : M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
 
General Editor : Shriman Narayan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2  
Foreword 
In this volume, we have tried to select Gandhiji’s c hoicest writings and 
speeches on a variety of topics. The first part of the Volume contains some of 
the important speeches delivered by Mahatma Gandhi on historic occasions. 
The second part includes selections of his thoughts on philosophy, religion, 
culture, art, literature, science, economics, politics, sociology and education. 
An attempt has been made to present Gandhiji’s views on different subjects 
under suitable chapters for the convenience of the reader. To maintain 
uniformity, indirect narration has been changed to direct speech at a few 
places. But for slight editing, the original texts have been faithfully adhered to. 
I do hope that this collection of speeches and writings will help the reader in 
understanding Gandhiji’s views on almost all important subjects which affect 
the lives of individuals, groups and nations. 
Raj Bhavan 
Ahmedabad, 
October, 16-68        Shriman Narayan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART ONE 
(
SOME FAMOUS SPEECHES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4  
01. BENARAS HINDU UNIVERSITY SPEECH 
(4-2-1916) 
[Pandit Malaviya had invited Gandhiji to speak on th e occasion of the opening 
of the Benaras Hindu University. Lord Hardinge, the Viceroy, had come 
specially to lay the foundation-stone of the University. To protect his life extra 
precautions were taken by the police. They were omnipresent and all houses 
along the route were guarded. Benaras was, so to say, in a state of siege. 
Eminent persons from all over India had come. Many of them delivered 
addresses. On February 4, 1916 it was Gandhiji’s turn to address the audience, 
mostly consisting of impressionable youths. A galaxy of princes, bedecked and 
bejewelled, had occupied the dais. The Maharaja of Darbhanga was in the 
chair. 
Gandhiji who was clad in a short, coarse dhoti 1, Kathiawadi cloak and turban 
rose of speak. The police precautions and the luxury around him hurt him 
deeply. Turning to the audience, Gandhiji said that he wanted to think 
audibly—speak without reserve :] 
I wish to tender my humble apology for the long delay that took place before I 
was able to reach this place. And you will readily accept the apology when I tell 
you that I am not responsible for the delay nor is any human agency responsible 
for it. The fact is that I am like an animal on show, and my keepers in their 
over kindness always manage to neglect a necessary chapter in this life, and 
that is, pure accident. In this case, they did not provide for the series of 
accidents that happened to us—to me, keepers, and my carriers. Hence this 
delay. 
Friends, under the influence of the matchless eloquence of Mrs Besant who has 
just sat down, pray, do not believe that our University has become a finished 
product, and that all the young men who are to come to the University, that 
has yet to rise and come into existence, have also come and returned from it 
finished citizens of a great empire. Do not go away with any such impression, The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5 and if you, the student world to which my remarks are supposed to be 
addressed this evening, consider for one moment that the spiritual life, for 
which this country is noted and for which this country has no rival, can be 
transmitted through the lip, pray, believe me, you are wrong. You will never be 
able merely through the lip, to give the message that India, I hope, will one day 
deliver to the world. I myself have been fed up with speeches and lectures. I 
except the lectures that have been delivered here during the last two days 
from this category, because they are necessary. But I do venture to suggest to 
you that we have now reached almost the end of our resources in speech-
making; it is not enough that our ears are feasted, that our eyes are feasted , 
but it is necessary that our hearts have got to be touched and that our hands 
and feet have got to be moved. 
We have been told during the last two days how necessary it is, if we are to 
retain our hold upon the simplicity of Indian character that our hands and feet 
should move in unison with our hearts. But this is only by way of preface. I 
wanted to say it is a matter of deep humiliation and shame for us that I am 
compelled this evening under the shadow of this great college, in this sacred 
city, to address my countrymen in a language that is foreign to me. I know that 
if I was appointed an examiner, to examine all those who have been attending 
during these two days this series of lectures, most of those who might be 
examined upon these lectures would fail. And why? Because they have not been 
touched. 
I was present at the sessions of the great Congress in the month of December. 
There was a much vaster audience, and will you believe me when I tell you that 
the only speeches that touched the huge audience in Bombay were the 
speeches that were delivered in Hindustani? In Bombay, mind you, not in 
Beneras where everybody speaks Hindi. But between the vernaculars of Bombay 
Presidency on the one hand and Hindi on the other , no such great dividing line 
exists as there does between English and the sister languages of India; and the 
Congress audience was better able to follow the speakers in Hindi. I am hoping 
that this University will see to it that the youths who come to it will receive The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6 their instruction through the medium of their vernaculars. Our language is the 
reflection of ourselves, and if you tell me that our languages are too poor to 
express the best thought, then say that the sooner we are wiped out of 
existence the better for us. Is there a man who dreams that English can ever 
become the national language of India? Why this handicap on the nation? Just 
consider for one moment what an unequal race our lads have to run with every 
English lad. 
I had the privilege of a close conversation with some Poona professors. They 
assured me that every Indian youth, because he reached his knowledge through 
the English language, lost at least six precious years of life. Multiply that by the 
number of students turned out by schools and colleges, and find out for 
yourselves how many thousand years have been lost to the nation. The charge 
against us is that we have no initiative. How can we have any, if we are to 
devote the precious years of life to the mastery of a foreign tongue? We fail in 
this attempt also. Was it possible for any speaker yesterday and today to 
impress his audience as was possible for Mr. Higginbotham? It was not the fault 
of the previous speakers that they could not engage the audience. They had 
more than substance enough for us in their addresses. But their addresses could 
not go home to us. I have heard it said that after all it is English educated India 
which is leading and which is doing all the things for the nation. It would be 
monstrous if it were otherwise. The only education we receive is English 
education. Surely we must show something for it. But suppose that we had 
been receiving during the past fifty years education through our vernaculars, 
what should we have today? We should have today a free India, we should have 
our educated men, not as if they were foreigners in their own land but speaking 
to the heart of the nation; they would be working amongst the poorest of the 
poor, and whatever they would have gained during these fifty years would be a 
heritage for the nation. Today even our wives are not the sharers in our best 
thought. Look at Professor Bose and Professor Ray and their brilliant 
researches. Is it not a shame that their researches are not the common 
property of the masses? The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7 Let us now turn to another subject. The Congress has passed a resolution about 
self-government, and I have no doubt that the All India Congress Committee 
and the Muslim League will do their duty and come forward with some tangible 
suggestions. But I, for one, must frankly confess that I am not so much 
interested in what they will be able to produce as I am interested in anything 
that the student world is going to produce or the masses are going to produce. 
No paper contribution will ever give us self-government. No amount of 
speeches will ever make us fit for self-government. It is only our conduct that 
will fit us for it. And how are we trying to govern ourselves? 
I want to think audibly this evening. I do not want to make a speech and if you 
find me this evening speaking without reserve, pray, consider that you are only 
sharing the thoughts of a man who allow himself to think audibly, and if you 
think that I seem to transgress the limits that courtesy imposes upon me, 
pardon me for the Liberty I may be taking. I visited the Vishwanath temple last 
evening, and as I was walking through those lanes, these were the thoughts 
that touched me. If a stranger dropped from above on to this great temple, and 
he had to consider what we as Hindu were, would he not be justified in 
condemning us? Is not this great temple a reflection of our own character? I 
speak feelingly, as a Hindu. Is it right that the lanes of our sacred temple 
should be as dirty as they are? The houses round about are built anyhow. The 
lanes are tortuous and narrow. If even our temples are not models of roominess 
and cleanliness, what can our self-government be?Shall our temples be abodes 
of holiness, cleanliness and peace as soon as the English have retired from 
India, either of their own pleasure or by compulsion, bag and baggage? 
 I entirely agree with the President of the Congress that before we think of self-
government, we shall have to do the necessary plodding. In every city there are 
two divisions, the cantonment and the city proper. The city mostly is a stinking 
den. But we are a people unused to city life. But if we want city life, we cannot 
reproduce the easy-going hamlet life. It is not comforting to think that the 
people walk about the streets of Indian Bombay under the perpetual fear of 
dwellers in the storied buildings spitting upon them. I do a great deal of railway The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8 travelling. I observe the difficulty of third-class passengers. But the railway 
administration is by no means to blame for all their hard lot. We do not know 
the elementary laws of cleanliness. We spit anywhere on the carriage floor, 
irrespective of the thought that it is often used as sleeping space. We do not 
trouble ourselves as to how we use it; the result is undesirable filth in the 
compartment. The so-called better class passengers overawe their less 
fortunate brethren. Among them I have seen the student world also; sometimes 
they behave no better. They can speak English and they have worn Norfolk 
Jackets and, therefore, claim the right to force their way in and command 
seating accommodation. 
I have turned the searchlight all over, and as you have given me the privilege of 
speaking to you, I am laying my heart bare. Surely we must set these things 
right in our progress towards self-government. I now introduce you to another 
scene. His Highness the Maharaja who presided yesterday over our deliberations 
spoke about the poverty of India. Other speakers laid great stress upon it. But 
what did we witness in the great pandal in which the foundation ceremony was 
performed by the Viceroy? Certainly a most gorgeous show, an exhibition of 
jewellery, which made a splendid feast for the eyes of the greatest jeweller 
who chose to come from Paris. I compare with the richly bedecked noble men 
the millions of the poor. And I feel like saying these noble men, “There is no 
salvation for India unless you strip yourselves of this jewellery and hold it in 
trust for your countrymen in India.”I am sure it is not the desire of the King-
Emperor or Lord Hardinge that in order to show the truest loyalty to our King 
Emperor, it is necessary for us to ransack our jewellery boxes and to appear 
bedecked from top to toe. I would undertake, at the peril of my life, to bring 
to you a message from King George himself that he expects nothing of the kind. 
Sir, whenever I hear of a great palace rising in any great city of India, be it in 
British India or be it in India which is ruled by our great chiefs, I become 
jealous at once, and say, “Oh, it is the money that has come from the 
agriculturists.” Over seventy five percent of the population is agriculturists and 
Mr. Higginbotham told us last night in his own felicitous language, that they are The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9 the men who grow two blades of grass in the place of one. But there cannot be 
much spirit of self-government about us, if we take away or allow others to 
take away from them almost the whole of the results of their labour. Our 
salvation can only come through the farmer. Neither the lawyers, nor the 
doctors, nor the rich landlords are going to secure it. 
Now, last but not the least, it is my bounden duty to refer to what agitated our 
minds during these two or three days. All of us have had many anxious moments 
while the Viceroy was going through the streets of Benaras. There were 
detectives stationed in many places. We are horrified. We asked ourselves, 
“Why this distrust?” It is not better that even Lord Hardinge should die than live 
a living death? But a representative of a mighty sovereign may not. He might 
find it necessary even to live a living death. But why was it necessary to impose 
these detectives on us? We may foam, we may fret, we may resent, but let us 
not forget that India of today in her impatience has produced an army of 
anarchists. I myself am an anarchist but of another type. But there is a class of 
anarchists amongst us, and if I was able to reach this class, I would say to them 
that their anarchism has no room in India, If India is to conquer the conqueror. 
It is a sign of fear. If we trust and fear God, we shall have to fear no one, not 
the Maharajas, not the Viceroys, not the detectives, not even King George. 
I honour the anarchist for his love of the country. I honour him for his bravery 
in being willing to die for his country; but I ask him—is killing honourable? Is the 
dagger of an assassin a fit precursor of an honourable death? I deny it. There is 
no warrant for such methods in any scriptures. If I found it necessary for the 
salvation of India that the English should retire, that they should be driven out, 
I would not hesitate to declare that they would have to go, and I hope I would 
be prepared to die in defence of that belief. That would, in my opinion, be an 
honourable death. The bomb-thrower creates secret plots, is afraid to come 
out into the open, and when caught pays the penalty of misdirected zeal.  
I have been told, “Had we not done this, had some people not thrown bombs, 
we should never have gained what we have got with reference to the partition 
movement.” (Mrs. Besant: ‘Please stop it.’) This was what I said in Bengal when The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10 Mr. Lyon presided at the meeting. I think what I Am saying is necessary. If I am 
told to stop I shall obey. (Turning to the Chairman) I await your orders. If you 
consider that by my speaking as I am, I am not serving the country and the 
empire I shall certainly stop. (Cries of ‘Go on.’) (The Chairman : ‘Please, 
explain your object.’) I am simply….(another interruption). My friends, please 
do not resent this interruption. If Mrs Besant this evening suggests that I should 
stop, she does so because she loves India so well, and she considers that I am 
erring in thinking audibly before you young men. But even so, I simply say this, 
that I want to purge India of this atmosphere of suspicion on either side, if we 
are to reach our goal; we should have an empire which is to be based upon 
mutual love and mutual trust. It is not better that we talk under the shadow of 
this college than that we should be talking irresponsibly in our homes? I 
consider that it is much better that we talk these things openly. I have done so 
with excellent results before now. I know that there is nothing that the 
students are not discussing. There is nothing that the students do not know. I 
am therefore, turning the searchlight towards ourselves. I hold the name of my 
country so dear to me that I exchange these thoughts with you, and submit to 
you that there is no room for anarchism in India. Let us frankly and openly say 
whatever we want to say to our rulers, and face the consequences if what we 
have to say does not please them. But let us not abuse. 
I was talking the other day to a member of the much-abused Civil Service. I 
have not very much in common with the members of that Service, but I could 
not help admiring the manner in which he was speaking to me. He said: “Mr. 
Gandhi, do you for one moment suppose that all we, Civil Servants, are a bad 
lot, that we want to oppress the people whom we have come to govern?” “No,” 
I said. “Then if you get an opportunity put in a word for the much abused Civil 
Service.” And I am here to put in that word. Yes, many members of the Indian 
Civil Service are most decidedly overbearing; they are tyrannical, at times 
thoughtless. Many other adjectives may be used. I grant all these things and I 
grant also that after having lived in India for a certain number of years some of 
them become somewhat degraded. But what does that signify? They were The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11 gentlemen before they came here, and if they have lost some of the moral 
fibre, it is a reflection upon ourselves. 
Just think out for yourselves, if a man who was good yesterday has become bad 
after having come in contact with me, is he responsible that he has 
deteriorated or am I? The atmosphere of sycophancy and falsity that surrounds 
them on their coming to India demoralizes them, as it would many of us. It is 
well to take the blame sometimes. If we are to receive self-government, we 
shall have to take it. We shall never be granted self-government. Look at the 
history of the British Empire and the British nation; freedom loving as it is, it 
will not be a party to give freedom to a people who will not take it themselves. 
Learn your lesson if you wish to from the Boer War. Those who were enemies of 
that empire only a few years ago have now become friends. 
(At this point there was an interruption and a movement on the platform to 
leave. The speech, therefore, ended here abruptly.) 
Mahatma, pp. 179-84, Edn. 1960. 
 
1. A long piece of cloth worn as lower garment by men in India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  
02. STATEMENT IN THE GREAT TRIAL OF 1922 
(18-3-1922) 
(The historical trial of Mahatma Gandhi and Shri Sha nkarlal Ghelabhai Banker, 
editor, and printer and publisher respectively of Young India , on charges under 
Section 124 A of the Indian Penal Code, was held on Saturday, 18th March 1922, 
before Mr. C.N. Broomfield, I. C.S., District and Session judge, Ahmedabad. 
Sir J. T. Strangman, Advocate General, with Rao Bahadur Girdharlal Uttamram, 
Public prosecutor of Ahmedabad, appeared for the Crown. Mr. A. C. Wild, 
Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, was also present, Mahatma Gandhi and Shri 
Shankarlal banker were undefended. 
Among the members of the public who were present on the occasion were : 
Kasturba Gandhi, Sarojini Naidu, Pandit M. M. Malaviya, Shri N. C. Kelkar, Smt. 
J. B. Petit, and Smt. Anasuyabahen Sarabhai. 
The judge, who took his seat at 12 noon, said that there was slight mistake in 
the charges framed, which he corrected. The charges were then read out by 
the Registrar. These charges were of “bringing or attempting to bring in to 
hatred or contempt or exciting or attempting to excite disaffection towards His 
majesty’s Government established by law in British India, and thereby 
committing offences punishable under Section 124 A of the Indian Penal Code,” 
the offences being in three articles published in Young India  of September 29 
and December 15 of 1921, and February 23 of 1922. The offending articles were 
then read out: first of them was, “Tampering with Loyalty”; and second, “The 
Puzzle and its Solution”, and the last was “Shaking the Manes”. 
The Judge said that the law required that the charges should not only be read 
out but explained. In this case it would not be necessary for him to say much by 
way of explanation. The charge in each case was that of bringing or attempting 
to bring into hatred or contempt or exciting or attempting to excite 
disaffection towards His Majesty’s Government, established by law in British 
India. Both the accused were charged with the three offences under Section The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13 124 A, contained in the articles read out, written by Mahatma Gandhi and 
printed by Shri Banker. 
The charges having been read out, the Judge called upon the accused to plead 
to the charges. He asked Gandhiji whether he pleaded guilty or claimed to be 
tried. 
Gandhiji said : “I plead guilty to all the charges. I observe that the King’s name 
has been omitted from the charge, and it has been properly omitted.” 
The Judge asked Shri Banker the same question and he too readily pleaded 
guilty. 
The Judge wished to give his verdict immediately after Gandhiji had pleaded 
guilty, but Sir Strangman insisted that the procedure should be carried out in 
full. The Advocate General requested the Judge to take into account “The 
Advocate-General requested the Judge to take into account “the occurrences in 
Bombay, Malabar and Chauri Chaura, leading to rioting and murder”. He 
admitted, indeed, that “in these articles you find that non-violence is insisted 
upon as an item of the campaign and of the creed,” but he added “of what 
value is it to insist on non-violence, if incessantly you preach disaffection 
towards the Government and hold it up as a treacherous Government, and if 
you openly and deliberately seek to instigate others to overthrow it?” These 
were the circumstances which he asked the Judge to take into account in 
passing sentence on the accused. 
As regards Shri Banker, the second accused, the offence was lesser. He did the 
publication but did not write. Sir Strangman’s instructions were that Shri 
Banker was a man of means and he requested the court to impose a substantial 
fine in addition to such term of imprisonment as might be inflicted upon. 
Court : Mr. Gandhi, do you wish to make any statement on the question of 
sentence? 
Gandhiji : I would like to make a statement. 
Court : Could you give me in writing to put it on record? The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14 Gandhiji : I shall give it as soon as I finish it. 
Gandhiji then made the following oral statement followed by a written 
statement that he read. 
Before I read this statement I would like to state that I entirely endorse the 
learned Advocate-General’s remarks in connection with my humble self. I think 
that he was entirely fair to me in all the statements that he has made, because 
it is very true and I have no desire whatsoever to conceal from this court the 
fact that to preach disaffection towards the existing system of Government has 
become almost a passion with me, and the Advocate General is entirely in the 
right when he says that my preaching of disaffection did not commence with 
my connection with Young India  but that it commenced much earlier, and in 
the statement that I am about to read, it will be my painful duty to admit 
before this court that it commenced much earlier than the period stated by the 
Advocate General. It is a painful duty with me but I have to discharge that duty 
knowing the responsibility that rests upon my shoulders, and I wish to endorse 
all the blame that the learned Advocate-General has thrown on my shoulders in 
connection with the Bombay occurrences, Madras occurrences and the Chauri 
Chaura occurrences. Thinking over these things deeply and sleeping over them 
night after night, it is impossible for me to dissociate myself from the diabolical 
crimes of Chauri Chaura or the mad outrages of Bombay. He is quite right when 
he says, that as a man of responsibility, a man having received a fair share of 
education, having had a fair share of experience of this world, I should have 
known the consequences of every one of my acts. I know them. I knew that I 
was playing with fire. I ran the risk and if I was set free I would still do the 
same. I have felt it this morning that I would have failed in my duty, if I did not 
say what I said here just now. 
I wanted to avoid violence. Non-violence is the first article of my faith. It is 
also the last article of my creed. But I had to make my choice. I had either to 
submit to a system which I considered had done an irreparable harm to my 
country, or incur the risk of the mad fury of my people bursting forth when 
they understood the truth from my lips. I know that my people have sometimes The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15 gone mad. I am deeply sorry for it and I am, therefore, here to submit not to a 
light penalty but to the highest penalty. I do not ask for mercy. I do not plead 
any extenuating act. I am here, therefore, to invite and cheerfully submit to 
the highest penalty that can be inflicted upon me for what in law is a 
deliberate crime, and what appears to me to be the highest duty of a citizen. 
The only course open to you, the Judge, is, as I am going to say in my 
statement, either to resign your post, or inflict on me the severest penalty if 
you believe that the system and law you are assisting to administer are good for 
the people. I do not expect that kind of conversion. But by the time I have 
finished with my statement you will have a glimpse of what is raging within my 
breast to run this maddest risk which a sane man can run. 
(He then read out the written statement: ) 
I owe it perhaps to the Indian public and to the public in England, to placate 
which this prosecution is mainly taken up, that I should explain why from a 
staunch loyalist and co-operator, I have become an uncompromising 
disaffectionist and non-co-operator. To the court too I should say why I plead 
guilty to the charge of promoting disaffection towards the Government 
established by law in India.  
My public life began in 1893 in South Africa in troubled weather. My first 
contact with British authority in that country was not of a happy character. I 
discovered that as a man and an Indian, I had no rights. More correctly I 
discovered that I had no rights as a man because I was an Indian. 
But I was not baffled. I thought that this treatment of Indians was an 
excrescence upon a system that was intrinsically and mainly good. I gave the 
Government my voluntary and hearty co-operation, criticizing it freely where I 
felt it was faulty but never wishing its destruction. 
Consequently when the existence of the Empire was threatened in 1899 by the 
Boer challenge, I offered my services to it, raised a volunteer ambulance corps 
and served at several actions that took place for the relief of Ladysmith. 
Similarly in 1906, at the time of the Zulu ‘revolt’, I raised a stretcher-bearer 
party and served till the end the ‘rebellion’. On the both occasions I received The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16 medals and was even mentioned in dispatches. For my work in South Africa I 
was given by Lord Hardinge a Kaisar-i-Hind gold medal. When the war broke out 
in 1914 between England and Germany, I raised a volunteer ambulance corps in 
London, consisting of the then resident Indians in London, chiefly students. Its 
work was acknowledged by the authorities to be valuable. Lastly, in India when 
a special appeal was made at the War Conference in Delhi in 1918 by Lord 
Chelmsford for recruits, I struggled at the cost of my health to raise a corps in 
Kheda, and the response was being made when the hostilities ceased and 
orders were received that no more recruits were wanted. In all these efforts at 
service, I was actuated by the belief that it was possible by such services to 
gain a status of full equality in the Empire for my countrymen. 
The first shock came in the shape of the Rowlatt Act—a law designed to rob the 
people of all real freedom. I felt called upon to lead an intensive agitation 
against it. Then followed the Punjab horrors beginning with the massacre at 
Jallianwala Baug and culminating in crawling orders, public floggings and other 
indescribable humiliations. I discovered too that the plighted word of the Prime 
Minister to the Musalmans of India regarding the integrity of Turkey and the 
holy places of Islam was not likely to be fulfilled. But in spite of the 
forebodings and the grave warnings of friends, at the Amritsar Congress in 
1919, I fought for co-operation and working of the Montagu-Chelmsford 
reforms, hoping that the Prime Minister would redeem his promise to the Indian 
Musalmans, that the Punjab wound would be healed, and that the reforms, 
inadequate and unsatisfactory though they were, marked a new era of hope in 
the life of India. 
But all that hope was shattered. The Khilafat promise was not be redeemed. 
The Punjab crime was whitewashed and most culprits went not only unpunished 
but remained in service, and some continued to draw pensions from the Indian 
revenue and in some cases were even rewarded. I saw too that not only did the 
reforms not mark a change of heart, but they were only a method of further 
draining India of her wealth and of prolonging her servitude. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17 I came reluctantly to the conclusion that the British connection had made India 
more helpless than she ever was before, politically and economically. A 
disarmed India has no power of resistance against any aggressor if she wanted 
to engage, in an armed conflict with him. So much is this the case that some of 
our best men consider that India must take generations, before she can achieve 
Dominion Status. She has become so poor that the she has little power of 
resisting famines. Before the British advent India spun and wove in her millions 
of cottages, just the supplement she needed for adding to her meager 
agricultural resources. This cottage industry, so vital for India’s existence, has 
been ruined by incredibly heartless and inhuman processes as described by 
English witnesses. Little do town dwellers know how the semi-starved masses of 
India are slowly sinking to lifelessness. Little do they know that their miserable 
comfort represents the brokerage they get for their work they do for the 
foreign exploiter, that the profits and the brokerage are sucked from the 
masses. Little do they realize that the Government established by law in British 
India is carried on for this exploitation of the masses. No sophistry, no jugglery 
in figures, can explain away the evidence that the skeletons in many villages 
present to the naked eye. I have no doubt whatsoever that both England and 
the town dewellers of India will have to answer, if there is a God above, for 
this crime against humanity, which is perhaps unequalled in history. The law 
itself in this country has been used to serve the foreign exploiter. My unbiased 
examination of the Punjab Martial law cases has led me to believe that at least 
ninety-five per cent of convictions were wholly bad. My experience of political 
cases in India leads me to the conclusion, in nine out of every ten, the 
condemned men were totally innocent. Their crime consisted in the love of 
their country. In ninety-nine cases out of hundred, justice has been denied to 
Indians as against Europeans in the courts of India. This is not an exaggerated 
picture. It is the experience of almost every Indian who has had anything to do 
with such cases. In my opinion, the administration of the law is thus 
prostituted, consciously or unconsciously, for the benefit of the exploiter. 
The greater misfortune is that Englishmen and their Indian associates in the 
administration of the country do not know that they are engaged in the crime I The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18 have attempted to describe. I am satisfied that many Englishmen and Indian 
officials honestly believe that they are administering one of the best systems 
devised in the world, and that India is making steady, though, slow progress. 
They do not know, a subtle but effective system of terrorism and an organized 
display of force on the one hand, and the deprivation of all powers of 
retaliation or self-defence on the other, has emasculated the people and 
induced in them the habit of simulation. This awful habit has added to the 
ignorance and the self-deception of the administrators. Section 124 A, under 
which I am happily charged, is perhaps the prince among the political sections 
of the Indian Penal Code designed to suppress the liberty of the citizen. 
Affection cannot be manufactured or regulated by law. If one has no affection 
for a person or system, one should be free to give the fullest expression to his 
disaffection, so long as he does not contemplate, promote, or incite to 
violence. But the section under which Mr. Banker and I are charged is one under 
which mere promotion of disaffection is a crime. I have studied some of the 
cases tried under it; I know that some of the most loved of India’s patriots have 
been convicted under it. I consider it a privilege, therefore, to be charged 
under that section. I have endeavored to give in their briefest outline the 
reasons for my disaffection. I have no personal ill-will against any single 
administrator, much less can I have any disaffection towards the King’s person. 
But I hold it to be a virtue to be disaffected towards a Government which in its 
totality has done more harm to India than any previous system. India is less 
manly under the British rule than she ever was before. Holding such a belief, I 
consider it to be a sin to have affection for the system. And it has been a 
precious privilege for me to be able to write what I have in the various articles 
tendered in evidence against me.  
In fact, I believe that I have rendered a service to India and England by showing 
in non-co-operation the way out of the unnatural state in which both are living. 
In my opinion, non-co-operation with evil is as much a duty as is co-operation 
with good. But in the past, non-co-operation has been deliberately expressed in 
violence to the evil-doer. I am endeavoring to show to my countrymen that 
violent non-co-operation only multiplies evil, and that as evil can only be The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19 sustained by violence, withdrawal of support of evil requires complete 
abstention from violence. Non-violence implies voluntary submission to the 
penalty for non-co-operation with evil. I am here, therefore, to invite and 
submit cheerfully to the highest penalty that can be inflicted upon me for what 
in law is deliberate crime, and what appears to me to be the highest duty of a 
citizen. The only course open to you, the judge and the assessors, is either to 
resign your posts and thus dissociate yourselves from evil, if you feel that the 
law you are called upon to administer is an evil, and that in reality I am 
innocent, or to inflict on me the severest penalty, if you believe that the 
system and the law you are assisting to administer are good for the people of 
this country, and that my activity is, therefore, injurious to the common weal.  
Mahatma, Vol. II (1951) pp. 129-33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20  
03. ON THE EVE OF HISTORIC DANDI MARCH 
(11-3-1930) 
(
On the 11th March 1930, the crowd swelled to 10,000 at the evening prayer 
held on the Sabarmati sands at the Ahmedabad. At the end, Gandhiji delivered 
a memorable speech on the eve of his historic March :) 
In all probability this will be my last speech to you. Even if the Government 
allow me to march tomorrow morning, this will be my last speech on the sacred 
banks of the Sabarmati. Possibly these may be the last words of my life here. 
I have already told you yesterday what I had to say. Today I shall confine myself 
to what you should do after my companions and I are arrested. The programme 
of the march to Jalalpur must be fulfilled as originally settled. The enlistment 
of the volunteers for this purpose should be confined to Gujarat only. From 
what I have seen and heard during the last fortnight. I am inclined to believe 
that the stream of civil resisters will flow unbroken. 
But let there be not a semblance of breach of peace even after all of us have 
been arrested. We have resolved to utilize all our resources in the pursuit of an 
exclusively non-violent struggle. Let no one commit a wrong in anger. This is 
my hope and prayer. I wish these words of mine reached every nook and corner 
of the land. My task shall be done if I perish and so do my comrades. It will 
then be for the Working Committee of the Congress to show you the way and it 
will be up to you to follow its lead. So long as I have not reached Jalalpur, let 
nothing be done in contravention to the authority vested in me by the 
Congress. But once I am arrested, the whole responsibility shifts to the 
Congress. No one who believes in non-violence, as a creed, need, therefore, sit 
still. My compact with the Congress ends as soon as I am arrested. In that case 
there should be no slackness in the enrolment of volunteers. Wherever possible, 
civil disobedience of salt laws should be started. These laws can be violated in 
three ways. It is an offence to manufacture salt whenever there are facilities 
for doing so. The possession and sale of contraband salt, which includes natural The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21 salt or salt earth is also an offence. The purchase of such salt will be equally 
guilty. To carry away the natural salt deposits on the seashore is likewise 
violation of law. So is the hawking of such salt. In short, you may choose and 
one or all of these devices to break the salt monopoly. 
We are, however, not to be content with this alone. There is no ban by the 
Congress and whether the local workers have self-confidence other suitable 
measures may be adopted. I stress only one condition, namely, let our pledge 
of truth and non-violence as the only means for the attainment of Swaraj be 
faithfully kept. For the rest, everyone has a free hand. But, that does not give 
a license to all and sundry to carry on their own responsibility. Wherever there 
are local leaders, their orders should be obeyed by the people. Where there are 
no leaders and only a handful of men have faith in the programme, they may do 
what they can, if they have enough self-confidence. They have a right, may it is 
their duty, to do so. The history of the world is full of instances of men who 
rose to leadership, by sheer force of self-confidence, bravery and tenacity. We 
too, if we sincerely aspire to Swaraj and are impatient to attain it, should have 
similar self-confidence. Our ranks will swell and our hearts strengthen, as the 
number of our arrests by the Government increases. 
Much can be done in many other ways besides these. The Liquor and foreign 
cloth shops can be picketed. We can refuse to pay taxes if we have the 
requisite strength. The lawyers can give up practice. The public can boycott 
the law courts by refraining from litigation. Government servants can resign 
their posts. In the midst of the despair reigning all round people quake with 
fear of losing employment. Such men are unfit for Swaraj. But why this despair? 
The number of Government servants in the country does not exceed a few 
hundred thousand. What about the rest? Where are they to go? Even free India 
will not be able to accommodate a greater number of public servants.A 
Collector then will not need the number of servants, he has got today. He will 
be his own servant. Our starving millions can by no means afford this enormous 
expenditure. If, therefore, we are sensible enough, let us bid good-bye to 
Government employment, no matter if it is the post of a judge or a peon. Let The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22 all who are co-operating with the Government in one way or another, be it by 
paying taxes, keeping titles, or sending children to official schools, etc. 
withdraw their co-operation in all or as many ways as possible. Then there are 
women who can stand shoulder to shoulder with men in this struggle. 
You may take it as my will. It was the message that I desired to impart to you 
before starting on the march or for the jail. I wish that there should be no 
suspension or abandonment of the war that commences tomorrow morning or 
earlier, if I am arrested before that time. I shall eagerly await the news that 
ten batches are ready as soon as my batch is arrested. I believe there are men 
in India to complete the work begun by me. I have faith in the righteousness of 
our cause and the purity of our weapons. And where the means are clean, there 
God is undoubtedly present with His blessings. And where these three combine, 
there defeat is impossibility. A Satyagrahi , whether free or incarcerated, is 
ever victorious. He is vanquished only, when he forsakes truth and non-violence 
and turns a deaf ear to the inner voice. If, therefore, there is such a thing as 
defeat for even a Satyagrahi , he alone in the cause of it. God bless you all and 
keep off all obstacles from the path in the struggle that begins tomorrow.  
Mahatma, Vol. III (1952), pp. 28-30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23  
04. SPEECH AT THE ROUND TABLE CONFERENCE 
(30-11-1931) 
(The following is the text of the speech that Mahatma Gandhi delivered at the plenary 
session of the Round Table Conference in London on November 30, 1931.)  
 
Rule of Majority 
I do not think that anything that I can say this eve ning can possibly influence 
the decision of the Cabinet. Probably the decision has been already taken. 
Matters of liberty of practically a whole Continent can hardly be decided by 
mere argumentation, or even negotiations. Negotiation has its purpose and has 
its play, but only under certain conditions. Without those conditions, 
negotiations are a fruitless task. But I do not want to go into all these matters. 
I want as far as possible to confine myself within the four corners of the 
conditions that you, Prime Minister, read to this Conference at its opening 
meeting. I would, therefore, first of all say a few words in connection with the 
Reports that have been submitted to this Conference. You will find in these 
Reports that generally it has been stated that such and such is the opinion of a 
large majority, some, however, have expressed an opinion to the contrary, and 
so on. Parties who have dissented have not been stated. I had heard when I was 
in India, and I was told when I came here, that no decision or decisions will be 
taken by the ordinary rule of majority, and I do not want to mention this fact 
here by way of complaint that the reports have been so framed as if the 
proceedings were governed by the test of majority. 
But it was necessary for me to mention this fact, because to most of these 
Reports you will find that there is a dissenting opinion, and in most of the cases 
that dissent unfortunately happens to belong to me. It was not a matter of joy 
to have to dissent from fellow delegates. But I felt that I could not truly 
represent the Congress unless I notified that dissent. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24 There is another thing which I want to bring to the notice of this Conference 
namely, what is the meaning of the dissent of the Congress? I said at one of the 
preliminary meetings of the Federal Structure committee that the Congress 
claimed to represent over 85 percent of the population of India, that is to say 
the dumb, toiling, semi-starved millions. But I went further: that the Congress 
claimed also, by right of service, to represent even the Princes, if they would 
pardon my putting forth that claim, and the landed gentry, and the educated 
class. I wish to repeat that claim and I wish this evening to emphasize that 
claim. 
 
Congress Represents India 
All the other Parties at this meeting represent sect ional interests. Congress 
alone claims to represent the whole of India and all interests. It is no communal 
organization; it is a determined enemy of communalism in any shape or form. 
Congress knows no distinction of race, color or creed; its platform is universal. 
It may not always have lived up to the creed. I do not know a single human 
organization that lives up to its creed. Congress has failed very often to my 
knowledge. It may have failed more often to the knowledge of its critics. But 
the worst critic will have to recognize, as it has been recognized, that the 
Indian National Congress is a daily growing organization, that its message 
penetrates the remotest village of India, that on given occasions the Congress 
has been able to demonstrate its influence over and among these masses who 
inhabit its 700,000 villages.  
And yet, here I see that the Congress is treated as one of the Parties. I do not 
mind it; I do not regard it a calamity for the Congress; but I do regard it as a 
calamity for the purpose of doing the work for which we have gathered 
together here. I wish I could convince all the British public men, the British 
Ministers, that the Congress is capable of delivering the goods. The Congress is 
the only all-India wide national organization, bereft of any communal bias: that 
it does represent all minorities which have lodged their claim—I hold The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25 unjustifiably—to represent 46 percent of the population of India. The Congress, 
I say, claims to represent all these minorities. 
What a great difference it would be today if this claim on behalf of the 
congress was recognized. I feel that I have to state this claim with some degree 
of emphasis on behalf of peace, for the sake of achieving the purpose which is 
common to all of us, to you Englishmen who sit at this Table and to us the 
Indian men and women who also sit at this Table. I say so for this reason: 
Congress is a powerful organization: Congress is an organization which has been 
accused of running or desiring to run a parallel Government; and in a way I 
have endorsed the charge. If you could understand the working of the Congress 
you would welcome an organization which could run a parallel Government and 
show that it is possible for an organization, voluntary, without any force at its 
command, to run the machinery of Government even under adverse 
circumstances. 
But no. Although you have invited the Congress, you distrust the Congress. 
Although you have invited the Congress, you reject its claim to represent the 
whole of India. Of course it is possible at this end of the world to dispute that 
claim, and it is not possible for me to prove this claim; but, all the same, if you 
find me asserting that claim, I do so because a tremendous responsibility rests 
upon my shoulders. 
 
The Way of Negotiation 
The Congress represents the spirit of rebellion. I k now that the word ‘rebellion’ 
must not be whispered at a Conference which has been summoned in order to 
arrive at agreed solutions of India’s troubles through negotiation. Speaker after 
speaker has got up and said that India should achieve her liberty through 
negotiation, by argument, and that it will be the greatest glory of Great Britain 
if Great Britain yields to India’s demands by argument. But the Congress does 
not hold quite that view. The Congress has an alternative which is unpleasant 
to you. 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26 The Old Way 
I heard several speakers—I have tried to follow ever y speaker with the utmost 
attention and with all the respect that I could possibly give to these speakers—
saying what a dire calamity it would be if India was fired with the spirit of 
lawlessness, rebellion, terrorism and so on. I do not pretend to have read 
history, but as a schoolboy I had to pass a paper in history also, and I read that 
the page of history is soiled red with the blood of those who have fought for 
freedom. I do not know an instance in which nations have attained their own 
without having to go through an incredible measure of travail. The dagger of 
the assassin, the poison bowl, the bullet of the rifleman, the spear and all 
these weapons and methods of destruction have been up to now used by, what I 
consider, blind lovers of liberty and freedom. And the historian has not 
condemned them. I hold no brief for the terrorists. Mr. Ghuznavi brought in the 
terrorists and he brought in the Calcutta Corporation. I felt hurt when he 
mentioned an incident that took place at the Calcutta Corporation. He forgot to 
mention that the Mayor of that Corporation made handsome reparation for the 
error into which he himself was betrayed, and the error into which the Calcutta 
corporation was betrayed, through the instrumentality of those members of the 
Corporation who were Congressmen.  
I hold no brief for Congressmen who directly or indirectly would encourage 
terrorism. As soon as this incident was brought to the notice of the Congress 
the Congress set about putting it in order. It immediately called upon the Mayor 
of the Calcutta Corporation to give an account of what was done and the 
Mayor, the gentleman that he is, immediately admitted his mistake and made 
all the reparation that it was then legally possible to make. I must not detain 
this Assembly over this incident for any length of time. He mentioned also a 
verse which the children of the forty schools conducted by the Calcutta 
Corporation are supposed to have recited. There were many other miss-
statements in that speech which I could dwell upon, but I have no desire to do 
so. It is only out of regard for the great Calcutta Corporation, and out of regard 
for truth, and on behalf of those who are not here tonight to put in their The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27 defence, that I mention these two glaring instances. I do not for one moment 
believe that this was taught in the Calcutta Corporation schools with the 
knowledge of the Calcutta Corporation. I do know that in those terrible days of 
last year several things were done for which we have regret, for which we have 
made reparation. 
If our boys in Calcutta were taught those verses which Mr. Ghuznavi has 
recited, I am here to tender an apology on their behalf, But I should want it 
proved that the boys were taught by the schoolmasters of these schools with 
the knowledge and encouragement of the Corporation. Charges of this nature 
have been brought against Congress times without number, and times without 
number these charges have also been refuted, but if I have mentioned these 
things at this juncture, it is again to show that for the sake of liberty people 
have fought, people have lost their lives, people have killed and have sought 
death at the hands of those whom they have sought to oust. 
 
The New Way 
The Congress then comes upon the scene and devises a  new method not known 
to history, namely, that of civil disobedience, and the Congress has been 
following up that method. But again, I am up against a stone wall and I am told 
that that is a method that no government in the world will tolerate. Well, of 
course, the Government may not tolerate, no Government has tolerated open 
rebellion. No Government may tolerate civil disobedience, but Governments 
have to succumb even to these forces, as the British Government has done 
before now, even as the great Dutch Government after eight years of trial had 
to yield to the logic of facts. General Smuts, a brave general a great statesman, 
and a very hard taskmaster also, but he himself recoiled with horror from even 
the contemplation of doing to death innocent men and women who were 
merely fighting for the preservation of their self-respect. Things which he had 
vowed he would never yield in the year 1908, reinforced as he was by General 
Botha, he had to do in the year 1914, after having tried these civil resisters 
through and through. And in India, Lord Chelmsford had to do the same thing: The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28 the Governor of Bombay had to do the same thing in Borsad and Bardoli. I 
suggest to you, Prime Minister, it is too late today to resist this, and it is this 
thing which weighs me down, this choice that lies before them, the parting of 
the ways probably. I shall hope against hope, I shall strain every nerve to 
achieve an honourable settlement for my country, if I can do so without having 
to put the millions of my countrymen and countrywomen, and even children, 
through this ordeal of fire. It can be matter of no joy and comfort to me to lead 
them again to a fight of that character, but if a further ordeal of fire has to be 
our lot, I shall approach that with the greatest joy and with the greatest 
consolation that I was doing what I felt to be right, the country was doing what 
it felt to be right, and the country will have the additional satisfaction of 
knowing that it was not at least taking lives, it was giving lives: It was not 
making the British people directly suffer, it was suffering. Professor Gilbert 
Murray told me—I shall never forget that, I am paraphrasing his inimitable 
language—“Do you not consider for one moment that we Englishmen do not 
suffer when thousands of your countrymen suffer, that we are so heartless?” I 
do not think so. I do know that you will suffer but I want you to suffer because I 
want to touch your hearts; and when your hearts have been touched then will 
come the psychological moment for negotiation. Negotiation there always will 
be; and if this time I have travelled all these miles in order to enter upon 
negotiation, I thought that your countrymen, Lord Irwin, had sufficiently tried 
us through his ordinances, that he had sufficient evidence that thousands of 
men and women of India and thousands of children had suffered; and that, 
ordinance or no ordinance, lathis2 or no lathis, nothing would avail to stem the 
tide that was onrushing and to stem the passions that were rising in the breasts 
of the men and women of India who were thirsting for liberty. 
 
The Price 
Whilst there is yet a little sand left in the glass,  I want you to understand what 
this Congress stands for. My life is at your disposal. The lives of all the members 
of the Working Committee, the All-India Congress Committee, are at your The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29 disposal. But remember that you have at your disposal the lives of all these 
dump millions. I do not want to sacrifice those lives if I can possibly help it. 
Therefore, please remember, that I will count no sacrifice too great if, by 
chance, I can pull through an honourable settlement. You will find me always 
having the greatest spirit of compromise If I can but fire you with the spirit that 
is working in the Congress, namely, that India must have real liberty. Call it by 
any name you like; a rose will smell as sweet by any other name, but it must be 
the rose of liberty that I want and not the artificial product. If your mind and 
the Congress mind, the mind of this Conference and the mind of the British 
people, means the same thing by the same word, then you will find the amplest 
room for compromise, and you will find the Congress itself always in a 
compromising spirit. But so long as there is not that one mind, that one 
definition, not one implication for the same word that you and I and we may be 
using. It is impossible, Prime Minister, I want to suggest to you in all humility, 
that it is utterly impossible then to find a meeting ground, to find a ground 
where you can apply the spirit to compromise. And I am very grieved to have to 
say up to now I have not been able to discover a common definition for the 
terms that we have been exchanging during all these weary weeks. 
 
Our Goal 
I was shown last week the Statute of West minister b y a sceptic, and he said, 
“Have you seen the definition of Dominion?” I read the definition of “Dominion” 
and naturally I was not at all perplexed or shocked to see that the word 
“Dominion” was exhaustively defined and it had not a general definition but a 
particular definition. It simply said: the word ‘Dominion’ shall include Australia, 
South Africa, Canada and so on ending with the Irish Free State. I do not think I 
noticed Egypt there. Then he said, “Do you see what your Dominion means?” It 
did not make any impression upon me. I do not mind what my Dominion means 
or what complete independence means. In a way I was relieved. 
I said, I am now relieved from having to quarrel about the word ‘Dominion’, 
because I am out of it. But I want complete independence, and even so, so The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30 many Englishmen have said, “Yes, you can have complete independence, but 
what is the meaning of complete independence?”, and again we come to 
different definitions. 
One of your great statesmen was debating with me, and said: “Honestly I did 
not know that you meant this by complete independence.” He ought to have 
known but he did not know, and I shall tell you what he did not know. When I 
said to him: “I cannot be a partner in an Empire”, he said: “Of course, that is 
logical.” I replied: “But I want to become that. It is not as if I shall be if I am 
compelled to, but I want to become a partner with Great Britain. I want to 
become a partner with the English people; but I want to enjoy precisely the 
same liberty that your people enjoy, and I want to seek this partnership not 
merely for the benefit of India, and not merely for mutual benefit; I want to 
seek partnership in order that the great weight that is crushing the world to 
atoms may be lifted from its shoulders.” 
This took place ten or twelve days ago. Strange as it may appear, I got a note 
from another Englishman, whom also you know, and whom also you respect. 
Among many things, he writes: “I believe profoundly that the peace and 
happiness of mankind depend on our friendship”; and, as If I would not 
understand that, he says: “Your people and mine.” I must read to you what he 
also says: “And of all Indians you are the one that the real Englishman likes and 
understands.” 
He does not waste any words on flattery, and I do not think he has intended 
this last expression to flatter me. It will not flatter me in the slightest degree. 
There are many things in this note which, if I could share them with you, would 
perhaps make you understand better the significance of this expression, but let 
me tell you that when he writes this last sentence he does not mean me 
personally. I personally signify nothing, and I know I would mean nothing to any 
single Englishman; but I mean something to some Englishmen because I 
represent a cause, because I seek to represent a nation, a great organization 
which has made itself felt. That is the reason why he says this. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31 But then, if I could possible find that working basis, Prime Minister, there is 
ample room for compromise. It is for friendship I crave. My business is not to 
throw overboard the slave-holder and tyrant. My philosophy forbids me to do 
so, and today the Congress has accepted that philosophy, not as a creed, as it is 
to me, but as a policy, because the Congress believes that is the right and the 
best thing for India, a nation of 350 millions to do. 
 
Our Weapon 
A nation of 350 million people does not need the dag ger of the assassin, it does 
not need the poison bowl, it does not need the sword, the spear or the bullet. 
It needs simply a will of its own, an ability to say ‘no’ and that nation is today 
learning to say ‘no’. 
But what is it that that nation does? To summarily, or at all, dismiss 
Englishmen? No. Its mission is today to convert Englishmen. I do not want to 
break the bond between England and India, but I do want to transform that 
bond. I want to transform that slavery into complete freedom for my country. 
Call it complete independence or whatever you like, I will not quarrel about 
that word, and even though my countrymen may dispute with me for having 
taken some other word, I shall able to bear down that opposition so long as the 
content of the word that you may suggest to me bears the same meaning. 
Hence, I have times without number to urge upon your attention that the 
safeguards that have been suggested are completely unsatisfactory. They are 
not in the interests of India. 
 
Financial Cramp 
Three experts from Federation of Commerce and Indust ry have, in their own 
way, each in his different manner, told out of their expert experiences how 
utterly impossible it is for anybody of responsible Ministers to tackle the 
problem of administration when 30 percent of her resources are mortgaged 
irretrievably. Better than I could have shown to you, they have shown out of 
the amplitude of their knowledge what these financial safeguards mean for The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32 India. These mean the complete cramping of India. They have discussed at this 
Table financial safeguards but that includes necessarily the question of Defence 
and the question of the Army. Yet while I say that the safeguards are 
unsatisfactory as they have been presented, I have not hesitated to say, and I 
do not hesitate to repeat that the Congress is pledged to giving safeguards, 
endorsing safeguards which may be demonstrated to be in the interest of India. 
At one of the sittings of the Federal Structure Committee I had no hesitation in 
amplifying the admission and saying that those safeguards must be also of 
benefit to Great Britain. I do not want safeguards which are merely beneficial 
to India and prejudicial to the real interests of Great Britain. The fancied 
interests of India will have to be sacrificed. The fancied interests of Great 
Britain will have to be sacrificed. The illegitimate interests of India will have to 
be sacrificed. The illegitimate interests of Great Britain will also have to be 
sacrificed. Therefore, again I repeat, if we have the same meaning for the 
same word, I will agree with Mr. Jayakar, with Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and other 
distinguished speakers who have spoken at this Conference. 
I will agree with them all that we have, after all these labours, reached a 
substantial measure of agreement, but my despair, my grief, is that I do not 
read the same words in the same light. The implications of the safeguards of 
Mr. Jayakar, I very much fear, are different from my implications, and the 
implications of Mr. Jayakar and myself are perhaps only different from the 
implications that Sir Samuel Hoare, for instance, has in mind; I do not know. 
We have never really come to grips. We have never got down to brass tacks, as 
you put it, and I am anxious—I have been pining—to come to real grips and to 
get down to brass tacks all these days and all these nights, and I have felt: why 
are not we not coming nearer and nearer together, and why are we wasting our 
time in eloquence, in oratory, in debating, and in scoring points? Heaven 
knows, I have no desire to hear my own voice. Heaven knows, I have no desire 
to take part in any debating. I know that liberty is made of sterner stuff, and I 
know that the freedom of India is made of much sterner stuff. We have 
problems that would baffle any statesman. We have problems that other The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33 nations have not to tackle. But they do not baffle me; they cannot baffle those 
who have been brought up in the Indian climate. Those problems are there with 
us. Just as we have to tackle bubonic plague, we have to tackle the problem of 
malaria. We have to tackle, as you have not, the problem of snakes and 
scorpions, monkeys, tigers and lions. We have to tackle these problems because 
we have been brought up under them.  
They do not baffle us. Somehow or other we have survived the ravages of these 
venomous reptiles and various creatures. So also shall we survive our problems 
and find a way out of those problems. But today you and we have come 
together at a Round Table and we want to find a common formula which will 
work. Please believe me that whilst I abate not a little of the claim that I have 
registered on behalf of the Congress, which I do not propose to repeat here, 
While I withdraw not one word of the speeches that I had to make at the 
Federal Structure Committee, I am here to compromise; I am here to consider 
every formula that British ingenuity can prepare, every formula that the 
ingenuity of such constitutionalists as Mr. Sastri, Dr. Tej Bahadur Sapru, Mr. 
Jayakar, Mr. Jinnah, Sir Muhammad Shafi and a host of others can weave into 
being. 
 
Mutual Trust 
I will not be baffled. I shall be here as long as I am required because I do not 
want to revive civil disobedience. I want to turn the truce that was arrived at 
in Delhi in to a permanent settlement. But for heaven’s sake give me, a frail 
man 62 years gone, a little bit of a chance. Find a little corner for him and the 
organization that he represents. You distrust that organization though you may 
seemingly trust me. Not for one moment differentiate me from the 
organization of which I am but a drop in the ocean. I am no greater than the 
organization to which I belong. I am infinitely smaller than that organization; 
and if you find me a place, if you trust me, I invite you to trust the Congress 
also. Your trust in me otherwise is a broken reed. I have no authority save what 
I derive from the Congress. If you will work the Congress for all it is worth, then The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34 you will say good-bye to terrorism; then you will not need terrorism. Today you 
have to fight the school of terrorists which is there with your disciplined and 
organized terrorism, because you will be blind to the facts or the writing on the 
wall. Will you not see the writing that these terrorists are writing with their 
blood? Will you not see that we do not want bread of wheat, but we want the 
bread of liberty; and without that liberty there are thousands today who are 
sworn not to give themselves peace or to give the country peace.  
I urge you then to read that writing on the wall. I ask you not to try the 
patience of a people known to be proverbially patient. We speak of the mild 
Hindu, and the Musalman also by contact good or evil with the Hindu has 
himself become mild. And the mention of the Musalman brings me to the 
baffling problem of minorities. Believe me, that problem exists here, and I 
repeat what I used to say in India—I have not forgotten those words—that 
without the problem of minorities being solved there is no Swaraj for India, 
there is no freedom for India. I know and I realize it; and yet I came here in the 
hope ‘perchance’ that I might be able to pull through a solution here. But I do 
not despair of some day or other finding a real and living solution in connection 
with the minorities problem. I repeat what I have said elsewhere that so long as 
the wedge in the shape of foreign rules divides community from community and 
class from class, there will be no real living solution, there will be no real living 
friendship between these communities. 
It will be after all and at best a paper solution. But immediately you withdraw 
that wedge, the domestic ties, the domestic affection, the knowledge of 
common birth—do you suppose that all these will count for nothing? 
Were Hindus and Musalmans and Sikhs always at war with one another when 
there was no British rule, when there was no English face seen there? We have 
chapter and verse given to us by Hindu historians and by Musalman historians to 
say that we were living in comparative peace even then. And Hindus and 
Musalmans in the villages are not even today quarrelling. In those days they 
were not known to quarrel at all. The late Maulana Muhammad Ali often used 
to tell me, and he was himself a bit of an historian. He said: ‘If God—‘Allah’ as The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35 he called out—‘give me life, I propose to write the history of Musalman rule in 
India; and then I will show, through documents that British people have 
preserved, that Aurangzeb was not so vile as he has been painted by the British 
historian; that the Mogul rule was not so bad as it has been shown to us in 
British History; and so on. And so have Hindu historians written. This quarrel is 
not old; this quarrel is coeval with this acute shame. I dare to say, it is coeval 
with the British advent, and immediately this relationship, the unfortunate, 
artificial, unnatural relationship between Great Britain and India is transformed 
into a natural relationship, when it becomes, if it does become, a voluntary 
partnership to be given up, to be dissolved at the will of either party, when it 
becomes that you will find that Hindus and Musalmans, Sikhs, Europeans, Anglo-
Indians, Christians, Untouchables, will all live together as one man.  
I do not intend to say much tonight about the Princes, but I should be wronging 
them and should be wronging the congress if I did not register my claim, not 
with the Round Table conference but with the Princes. It is open to the Princes 
to give their terms on which they will join the federation. I have appealed to 
them to make the path easy for those who inhabit the other part of India, and 
therefore, I can only make these suggestions for their favourable consideration, 
for their earnest consideration. I think that if they accepted, no matter what 
they are, but some fundamental rights as the common property of all India, and 
if they accepted that position and allowed those rights to be tested by the 
Court, which will be again of their own creation, and if they introduced 
elements—only elements—of representation on behalf of their subjects, I think 
that they would have gone a long way to conciliate their subjects. They would 
have gone a long way to show to the world and to show to the whole of India 
that they are also fired with a democratic spirit, that they do not want to 
remain undiluted autocrats, but that they want to become constitutional 
monarchs even as King George of Great Britain is. 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36 An autonomous Frontier Province 
Let India get what she is entitled to and what she c an really take, but whatever 
she gets, and whenever she gets, and whenever she gets it, let the Frontier 
Province get complete autonomy today. That Frontier will then be a standing 
demonstration to the whole of India, and therefore, the whole vote of the 
Congress will be given in favour of the Frontier Province getting Provincial 
Autonomy tomorrow. Prime Minister, if you can possibly get your Cabinet to 
endorse the proposition that from tomorrow the Frontier Province becomes a 
full-fledged autonomous province, I shall then have a proper footing amongst 
the Frontier tribes and convene them to my assistance when those over the 
border cast an evil eye on India. 
 
Thanks 
Last of all, my last is a pleasant task for me. This  is perhaps the last time that I 
shall be sitting with you at negotiations. It is not that I want that. I want to sit 
the same table with you in your closets and to negotiate and to plead with you 
and to go down on bended knees before I take the final lead and final plunge. 
But whether I have the good fortune to continue to tender my co-operation or 
not does not depend upon me. It largely depends upon you. But it may not even 
depend upon you. It depends upon so many circumstances over which neither 
you nor we may have any control whatsoever. Then, let me perform this 
pleasant task of giving my thanks to all from their Majesties down to the 
poorest men in the East End where I have taken up my habitation. 
In that settlement, which represents the poor people of the East End of 
London, I have become one of them. They have accepted me as a member, and 
as a favoured member of their family. It will be one of the richest treasures 
that I shall carry with me. Here, too, I have found nothing but courtesy and 
nothing but a genuine affection from all with whom I have come in touch. I 
have come in touch with so many Englishmen. It has been a priceless privilege 
to me. They have listened to what must have often appeared to them to be 
unpleasant, although it was true. Although I have often been obliged to say The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37 these things to them they have never shown the slightest impatience or 
irritation. It is impossible for me to forget these things. No matter what befalls 
me, no matter what the fortunes may be of this Round Table Conference, one 
thing I shall certainly carry with me, that is, that from high to low I have found 
nothing but the utmost courtesy and the utmost affection. I consider that it was 
well worth my paying this visit to England in order to find this human affection. 
It has enhanced, it has deepened my irrepressible faith in human in nature that 
although Englishmen and Englishwomen have been fed upon lies that I see so 
often disfiguring your Press, that although in Lancashire, the Lancashire people 
had perhaps some reason for becoming irritated against me, I found no 
irritation and no resentment even in the operatives. The operatives, men and 
women, hugged me. They treated me as one of their own. I shall never forget 
that.  
I am carrying with me thousands upon thousands of English friendships. I do not 
know them but I read that affection in their eyes as early in the morning I walk 
through your streets. All this hospitality, all this kindness will never be effaced 
from my memory, no matter what befalls my unhappy land. I thank you for your 
forbearance. 
The Nation’s Voice  (1958), Pp. 74-78
 
1Staff 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38  
05. THE ‘QUIT INDIA’ SPEECHES 
(
8-8-1942) 
I 
(Gandhiji addressed the A. I. C. C. at Bombay on 8-8 -‘42 outlining his plan of 
action, in Hindustani, as follow :) 
Before you discuss the resolution, let me place before you one or two things. I 
want you to understand two things very clearly and to consider them from the 
same point of view from which I am placing them before you. I ask you to 
consider it from my point of view, because if you approve of it, you will be 
enjoined to carry out all I say. It will be a great responsibility. There are people 
who ask me whether I am the same man that I was in 1920, or whether there 
has been any change in me. You are right in asking that question.  
Let me, however, hasten to assure that I am the same Gandhi as I was in 1920. I 
have not changed in any fundamental respect. I attach the same importance to 
non-violence that I did then. If at all, my emphasis on it has grown stronger. 
There is no real contradiction between the present resolution and my previous 
writings and utterances. 
Occasions like the present do not occur in everybody’s and but rarely in 
anybody’s life. I want you to know and feel that there is nothing but purest 
Ahimsa1 in all that I am saying and doing today. The draft resolution of the 
Working Committee is based on Ahimsa, the contemplated struggle similarly 
has its roots in Ahimsa. If, therefore, there is any among you who has lost faith 
in Ahimsa or is wearied of it, let him not vote for this resolution. 
Let me explain my position clearly. God has vouchsafed to me a priceless gift in 
the weapons of Ahimsa. I and my Ahimsa are on our trial today. If in the 
present crisis, when the earth is being scorched by the flames of Himsa2 and 
crying for deliverance, I failed to make use of the God given talent, God will 
not forgive me and I shall be judged unworthy of the great gift. I must act now. 
I may not hesitate and merely look on, when Russia and China are threatened.  The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39 Ours is not drive for power, but purely a non-violent fight for India’s 
independence. In a violent struggle, a successful general has been often known 
to effect a military coup and to set up a dictatorship. But under the Congress 
scheme of things, essentially non-violent as it is, there can be no room for 
dictatorship. A non-violent soldier of freedom will covet nothing for himself, he 
fights only for the freedom of his country. The Congress is unconcerned as to 
who will rule, when freedom is attained. The power, when it will belong to the 
people of India, and it will be for them to decide to whom it should be 
entrusted. May be that the reins will be placed in the hands of the Parsis, for 
instance—as I would love to see happen—or they may be handed to some others 
whose names are not heard in the Congress today. It will not be for you then to 
object saying, “This community is microscopic. That party did not play its due 
part in the freedom’s struggle; why should it have all the power?” Ever since its 
inception the Congress has kept itself meticulously free of the communal taint. 
It has thought always in terms of the whole nation and has acted accordingly…. 
I know how imperfect our Ahimsa is and how far away we are still from the 
ideal, but in Ahimsa there is no final failure or defeat. I have faith, therefore, 
that if, in spite of our shortcomings, the big thing does happen, it will be 
because God wanted to help us by crowning with success our silent, unremitting 
Sadhana3 for the last twenty-two years. 
I believe that in the history of the world, there has not been a more genuinely 
democratic struggle for freedom than ours. I read Carlyle’s French Revolution  
while I was in prison, and Pandit Jawaharlal has told me something about the 
Russian revolution. But it is my conviction that inasmuch as these struggles 
were fought with the weapon of violence they failed to realize the democratic 
ideal. In the democracy which I have envisaged, a democracy established by 
non-violence, there will be equal freedom for all. Everybody will be his own 
master. It is to join a struggle for such democracy that I invite you today. Once 
you realize this you will forget the differences between the Hindus and 
Muslims, and think of yourselves as Indians only, engaged in the common 
struggle for independence. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40 Then, there is the question of your attitude towards the British. I have noticed 
that there is hatred towards the British among the people. The people say they 
are disgusted with their behavior. The people make no distinction between 
British imperialism and the British people. To them, the two are one. This 
hatred would even make them welcome the Japanese. It is most dangerous. It 
means that they will exchange one slavery for another. We must get rid of this 
feeling. Our quarrel is not with the British people, we fight their imperialism. 
The proposal for the withdrawal of British power did not come out of anger. It 
came to enable India to play its due part at the present critical juncture. It is 
not a happy position for a big country like India to be merely helping with 
money and material obtained willy-nilly from her while the United Nations are 
conducting the war. We cannot evoke the true spirit of sacrifice and valour, so 
long as we do not feel that it is our war, so long as we are not free. I know the 
British Government will not be able to withhold freedom from us, when we 
have made enough self sacrifice. We must, therefore, purge ourselves of 
hatred. Speaking for myself, I can say that I have never felt any hatred. As a 
matter of fact, I feel myself to be a greater friend of the British now than ever 
before. One reason is that they are today in distress. My very friendship, 
therefore, demands that I should try to save them from their mistakes. As I 
view the situation, they are on the brink of an abyss. It, therefore, becomes my 
duty to warn them of their danger even though it may, for the time being, 
anger them to the point of cutting off the friendly hand that is stretched out to 
help them. People may laugh, nevertheless that is my claim. At a time when I 
may have to launch the biggest struggle of my life, I may not harbor hatred 
against anybody. 
 
II 
{Gandhiji address before the A. I.C. C. at Bombay on 8-8-’42 delivered in Hindustani :} 
I congratulate you on the resolution that you have just passed. I also 
congratulate the three comrades on the courage they have shown in pressing 
their amendments to a division, even though they knew that there was an The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41 overwhelming majority in favour of the resolution, and I congratulate the 
thirteen friends who voted against the resolution. In doing so, they had nothing 
to be ashamed of. For the last twenty years we have tried to learn not to lose 
courage even when we are in a hopeless minority and are laughed at. We have 
learned to hold on to our beliefs in the confidence that we are in the right. It 
behoves us to cultivate this courage of conviction, for it ennobles man and 
raises his moral stature. I was, therefore, glad to see that these friends had 
imbibed the principle which I have tried to follow for the last fifty years and 
more. 
Having congratulated them on their courage, let me say that what they asked 
this Committee to accept through their amendments was not the correct 
representation of the situation. These friends ought to have pondered over the 
appeal made to them by the Maulana to withdraw their amendments; they 
should have carefully followed the explanations given by Jawaharlal. Had they 
done so, it would have been clear to them that the right which they now want 
the Congress to concede has already been conceded by the Congress. 
Time was when every Musalman claimed the whole of India as his motherland. 
During the years that the Ali brothers were with me, the assumption underlying 
all their talks and discussions was that India belonged as much to the 
Musalmans as to the Hindus. I can testify to the fact that this was their 
innermost conviction and not a mask; I lived with them for years. I spent days 
and nights in their company. And I make bold to say that their utterances were 
the honest expression of their beliefs. I know there are some who say that I 
take things too readily at their face value, that I am gullible. I do not think I am 
such a simpleton, nor am I so gullible as these friends take me to be. But their 
criticism does not hurt me. I should prefer to be considered gullible rather than 
deceitful. 
What these Communist friends proposed through their amendments is nothing 
new. It has been repeated from thousands of platforms. Thousands of 
Musalmans have told me, that if Hindu-Muslim question was to be solved 
satisfactorily, it must be done in my lifetime. I should feel flattered at this; but The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42 how can I agree to a proposal which does not appeal to my reason? Hindu-
Muslim unity is not a new thing. Millions of Hindus and Musalmans have sought 
after it. I consciously strove for its achievement from my boyhood. While at 
school, I made it a point to cultivate the friendship of Muslim and Parsi co-
students. I believed even at that tender age that the Hindus in India, if they 
wished to live in peace and amity with the whole communities, should 
assiduously cultivate the virtue of neighbourliness. It did not matter, I felt, If I 
made no special effort to cultivate the friendship with Hindus, but I must make 
friends with at least a few Musalmans. It was as counsel for a Musalman 
merchant that I went to South Africa. I made friends with other Musalmans 
there, even with the opponents of my client, and gained a reputation for 
integrity and good faith. I had among my friends and co-workers Muslims as well 
as Parsis. I captured their hearts and when I left finally for India, I left them 
sad and shedding tears of grief at the separation. 
In India too I continued my efforts and left no stone unturned to achieve that 
unity. It was my lifelong aspiration for it that made me offer my fullest co-
operation to the Musalmans in the Khilafat movement. Muslims throughout the 
country accepted me as their true friend. 
How then is it that I have now come to be regarded as so evil and detestable? 
Had I any axe to grind in supporting the Khilifat movement? True, I did in my 
heart of hearts cherish a hope that It might enable me to save the cow. I am a 
worshipper of the cow. I believe the cow and myself to be the creation of the 
same God, and I am prepared to sacrifice my life in order to save the cow. But, 
whatever my philosophy of life and my ultimate hopes, I joined the movement 
in no spirit of bargain. I co-operated in the struggle for the Khilafat solely in 
order to discharge my obligation to my neighbour who, I saw, was in distress. 
The Ali brothers, had they been alive today, would have testified to the truth 
of this assertion. And so would many others bear me out in that it was not a 
bargain on my part for saving the cow. The cow like the Khilafat, stood on her 
own merits. As an honest man, a true neighbour and a faithful friend, it was 
incumbent on me to stand by the Musalmans in the hour of their trial.  The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43 In those days, I shocked the Hindus by dining with the musalmans, though with 
the passage of time they have now got used to it. Maulana Bari told me, 
however, that though he would not allow me to dine with him, lest some day 
he should be accused of a sinister motive. And so, whenever I had occasion to 
stay with him, he called a Brahmana cook and made special arrangements for 
separate cooking. Firangi Mahal, his residence, was an old-styled structure with 
limited accommodation; yet he cheerfully bore all hardships and carried out his 
resolve from which I could not dislodge him. It was the spirit of courtesy, 
dignity and nobility that inspired us in those days. The members of each 
community vied with one another in accommodating members of sister 
communities. They respected one another’s religious feelings, and considered it 
a privilege to do so. Not a trace of suspicion lurked in anybody’s heart. Where 
has all that dignity, that nobility of spirit, disappeared now? I should ask all 
Musalmans, including Quaid-i-Azam Jinnah, to recall those glorious days and to 
find out what has brought us to the present impasse. Quaid-i-Azam Jinnah 
himself was at one time a Congressman. If today the Congress has incurred his 
wrath, it is because the canker of suspicion has entered his heart. May God 
bless him with long life, but when I am gone, he will realize and admit that I 
had no designs on Musalmans and that I had never betrayed their interests. 
Where is the escape for me, if I injure their cause or betray their interests? My 
life is entirely at their disposal. They are free to put an end to it, whenever 
they wish to do so. Assaults have been made on my life in the past, but God has 
spared me till now, and the assailants have repented for their action. But if 
someone were to shoot me in the belief that he was getting rid of a rascal, he 
would kill not the real Gandhi, but the one that appeared to him a rascal. 
To those who have been indulging in a campaign of abuse and vilification I 
would say, “Islam enjoins you not to revile even an enemy. The Prophet treated 
even enemies with kindness and tried to win them over by his fairness and 
generosity. Are you followers of that Islam or of any other? If you are followers 
of the true Islam, does it behove you to distrust the words of one who makes a 
public declaration of his faith? You may take it from me that one day you will 
regret the fact that you distrusted and killed one who was a true and devoted The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44 friend of yours.”It cuts me to the quick to see that the more I appeal and the 
more the Maulana importunes, the more intense does the campaign of 
vilification grow. To me, these abuses are like bullets. They can kill me, even 
as a bullet can put an end to my life. You may kill me. That will not hurt me. 
But what of those who indulge in abusing? They bring discredit to Islam. For the 
fair name of Islam, I appeal to you to resist this unceasing campaign of abuse 
and vilification. 
Maulana Saheb is being made a target for the filthiest abuse. Why? Because he 
refuses to exert on me the pressure of his friendship. He realizes that it is a 
misuse of friendship to seek to compel a friend to accept as truth what he 
knows is an untruth. 
To the Quaid-i-Azam I would say: “Whatever is true and valid in the claim for 
Pakistan is already in your hands. What is wrong and untenable is in nobody’s 
gift, so that it can be made over to you. Even if someone were to succeed in 
imposing an untruth on others, he would not be able to enjoy for long the fruits 
of such a coercion. God dislikes pride and keeps away from it. God would not 
tolerate a forcible imposition of an untruth.” 
The Quaid-i-Azam says that he is compelled to say bitter things but that he 
cannot help giving expression to his thoughts and his feelings. Similarly I would 
say: “I consider myself a friend of Musalmans. Why should I then not give 
expression to the things nearest to my heart, even at the cost of displeasing 
them? How can I conceal my innermost thoughts from them? I should 
congratulate the Quaid-i-Azam on his frankness in giving expression to his 
thoughts and feelings, even if they sound bitter to his hearers. But even so why 
should the Musalmans sitting here be reviled, if they do not see eye to eye with 
him? If millions of Musalmans are with you can you not afford to ignore the 
handful of Musalmans who may appear to you to be misguided? Why should one 
with the following of several millions be afraid of a majority community, or of 
the minority being swamped by the majority? How did the Prophet work among 
the Arabs and the Musalmans? How did he propagate Islam? Did he say he would 
propagate Islam only when he commanded a majority? I appeal to you for the The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45 sake of Islam to ponder over what I say. There is neither fair play nor justice in 
saying that the congress must accept a thing, even if it does not believe in it 
and even if it goes counter to principles it holds dear. 
Rajaji said: “I do not believe in Pakistan. But Musalmans ask for it, Mr. Jinnah 
asks for it, and it has become an obsession with them. Why not then say “yes” 
to them just now? The same Mr. Jinnah will later on realize the disadvantages 
of Pakistan and will forgo the demands.” I said : “It is not fair to accept as true 
a thing which I hold to be untrue, and ask others to do so in the belief that the 
demand will not be pressed when the time comes for setting it finally. If I hold 
the demand to be just, I should concede it this very day. I should not agree to 
it merely in order to placate Jinnah Saheb. Many friends have come and asked 
me to agree to it merely for the time being to placate Mr. Jinnah, disarm his 
suspicions and to see how he reacts to it. But I cannot be party to a course of 
action with a false promise. At any rate, it is not my method.” 
The congress has no sanction but the moral one for enforcing its decisions. It 
believes that true democracy can only be the outcome of non-violence. The 
structure of a world federation can be raised only on a foundation of non-
violence, and violence will have to be totally abjured from world affairs. If this 
is true, the solution of Hindu-Muslim question, too, cannot be achieved by a 
resort to violence. If the Hindus tyrannize over the Musalmans, with what face 
will they talk of a world federation? It is for the same reason that I do not 
believe in the possibility of establishing world peace through violence as the 
English and American statesmen propose to do. The Congress has agreed to 
submitting all the differences to an impartial international tribunal and to 
abide by its decisions. If even this fairest of proposal is unacceptable, the only 
course that remains open is that of the sword, of violence. How can I persuade 
myself to agree to an impossibility? To demand the vivisection of a living 
organism is to ask for its very life. It is a call to war. The Congress cannot be 
party to such a fratricidal war. Those Hindus who, like Dr. Moonje and Shri 
Savarkar, believe in the doctrine of the sword may seek to keep the Musalmans 
under Hindu domination. I do not represent that section. I represent the The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46 Congress. You want to kill the Congress which is the goose that lays golden 
eggs. If you distrust the Congress, you may rest assured that there is to be 
perpetual war between the Hindus and the Musalmans, and the country will be 
doomed to continue warfare and bloodshed. If such warfare is to be our lot, I 
shall not live to witness it. 
It is for that reason that I say to Jinnah saheb, “You may take it from me that 
whatever in your demand for Pakistan accords with considerations of justice 
and equity is lying in your pocket; whatever in the demand is contrary to 
justice and equity you can take only by the sword and in no other manner.” 
There is much in my heart that I would like to pour out before this assembly. 
One thing which was uppermost in my heart I have already dealt with. You may 
take it from me that it is with me a matter of life and death. If we Hindus and 
Musalmans mean to achieve a heart unity, without the slightest mental 
reservation on the part of either, we must first unite in the effort to be free 
from the shackles of this empire. If Pakistan after all is to be a portion of India, 
what objection can there be for Musalmans against joining this struggle for 
India’s freedom? The Hindus and Musalmans must, therefore, unite in the first 
instance on the issue of fighting for freedom. Jinnah saheb thinks the war will 
last long. I do not agree with him. If war goes on for six months more, how shall 
we be able to save China? 
I, therefore, want freedom immediately, this very night, before dawn, if it can 
be had. Freedom cannot now wait for the realization of communal unity. If that 
unity is not achieved, sacrifices necessary for it will have to be much greater 
than would have otherwise sufficed. But the congress must win freedom or be 
wiped out in the effort. And forget not that the freedom which the congress is 
struggling to achieve will not be for the congressmen alone but for all the forty 
crores of the Indian people. Congressmen must for ever remain humble servants 
of the people. 
The Quaid-i-azam has said that the Muslim League is prepared to take over the 
rule from the Britishers if they are prepared to hand it over the Muslim Leaue, 
for the British took over the empire from the hands of the Muslims. This, The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47 however, will be Muslim Raj. The offer made by Maulana Saheb and by me does 
not imply establishment of Muslim Raj or Muslim domination. The Congress does 
not believe in the domination of any group or any community. It believes in 
democracy which includes in its orbit Muslims, Hindus, Christians, Parsis, Jews—
every one of the communities inhabiting this vast country. If Muslim Raj is 
inevitable, then let it be; but how can we give it the stamp of our assent? How 
can we agree to the domination of one community over the others? 
Millions of Musalmans in this country come from Hindu stock. How can their 
homeland be any other than India? My eldest son embraced Islam some years 
back. What would his home land be—Porbandar or the Punjab? I ask the 
Musalmans : “If India is not your homeland, what other country do you belong 
to? In what separate homeland would you put my son who embraced Islam?” His 
mother wrote him a letter after his conversion, asking him if he had on 
embracing Islam given up drinking which Islam forbids to its followers. To those 
who gloated over the conversion, she wrote to say: “I do not mind his becoming 
a Musalman so much as his drinking. Will you as pious Musalmans, tolerate his 
drinking even after his conversion? He has reduced himself to the state of a 
rake by drinking. If you are going to make a man of him again, his conversion 
will have been turned to good account. You will, therefore, please see that he 
as a Musalman abjures wine and woman. If that change does not come about, 
his conversion goes in vain and our non-co-operation with him will have to 
continue.”  
India is without doubt the homeland of all the Musalmans inhabiting this 
country. Every Musalmans should therefore co-operate in the fight for India’s 
freedom. The Congress does not belong to any one class or community; it 
belongs to the whole nation. It is open to Musalmans to take possession of the 
Congress. They can, if they like, swamp the Congress by their numbers, and can 
steer it along the course which appeals to them. The Congress is fighting not on 
behalf of the Hindus but on behalf of the whole nation, including the 
minorities. It would hurt me to hear of a single instance of a Musalman being 
killed by a Congressman. In the coming revolution, Congressmen will sacrifice The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48 their lives in order to protect the Musalmans against a Hindu’s attack and vice 
versa. It is a part of their creed, and is one of the essentials of non-violence. 
You will be expected on occasions like these not to lose your heads. Every 
Congressman, whether a Hindu or a Musalman, owes this duty to the 
organization to which he belongs. The Musalman who will act in this manner 
will render a service to Islam. Mutual trust is essential for success in the final 
nation-wide struggle that is to come. 
I have said that much greater sacrifice will have to be made this time in the 
wake of our struggle because of the opposition from the Muslim League and 
from Englishmen. You have seen the secret circular issued by Sir Frederick 
Puckle. It is a suicidal course that he has taken. It contains an open incitement 
to organizations which crop up like mushrooms to combine to fight the 
Congress. We have thus to deal with an empire whose ways are crooked. Ours is 
a straight path which we can tread even with our eyes closed. That is the 
beauty of Satyagraha. 
In Satyagraha, there is no place for fraud or falsehood or any kind of untruth. 
Fraud and untruth today are stalking the world. I cannot be helpless witness to 
such a situation. I have travelled all over India as perhaps nobody in the present 
age has. The voiceless millions of the land saw in me their friend and 
representative, and I identified myself with them to an extent it was possible 
for a human being to do. I saw trust in their eyes, which I now want to turn to 
good account in fighting this empire upheld on untruth and violence. However 
gigantic the preparations that the empire has made, we must get out of its 
clutches. How can I remain silent at this supreme hour and hide my light under 
the bushel? Shall I ask the Japanese to tarry awhile? If today I sit quite and 
inactive, God will take me to task for not using up the treasure He had given 
me, in the midst of the conflagration that is enveloping the whole world. Had 
the condition been different, I should have asked you to wait yet awhile. But 
the situation now has become intolerable, and the Congress has no other course 
left for it. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49 Nevertheless the actual struggle does not commence this moment. You have 
only placed all your powers in my hands. I will now wait upon the Viceroy and 
plead with him for the acceptance of the Congress demand. That process is 
likely to take two or three weeks. What would you do in the meanwhile? What 
is the programme, for the interval, in which all can participate? As you know, 
the spinning wheel is the first thing that occurs to me. I made the same answer 
to the Maulana. He would have none of it, though he understood its import 
later. The fourteenfold constructive programme is, of course, there for you to 
carry out. What more should you do? I will tell you. Everyone of you should, 
from this moment onwards, consider yourself a free man or woman, and act as 
if you are free and are no longer under the heel of this imperialism. 
It is not a make-believe that I am suggesting to you. It is the very essence of 
freedom. The bond of the slave is snapped the moment he considers himself to 
be a free being. He will plainly tell the master: “I was your bondslave till this 
moment, but I am a slave no longer. You may kill me if you like, but if you keep 
me alive, I wish to tell you that if you release me from the bondage, of your 
own accord, I will ask for nothing more from you. You used to feed and clothe 
me, though I could have provided food and clothing for myself by my labour. I 
hitherto depended on you instead of on God, for food and raiment. But God has 
now inspired me with an urge for freedom and I am today a free man, and will 
no longer depend on you.” 
You make take it from me that I am not going to strike a bargain with the 
Viceroy for ministries and the like. I am not going to be satisfied with anything 
short of complete freedom. May be, he will propose the abolition of salt tax, 
the drink evil, etc. But I will say, “Nothing less than freedom.” 
Here is a mantra,1 a short one, that I give you. You may imprint it on your 
hearts and let every breath of yours give expression to it. The mantra is : ‘Do or 
Die’. We shall either free India or die in the attempt; we shall not live to see 
the perpetuation of our slavery. Every true Congressman or woman will join the 
struggle with an inflexible determination not to remain alive to see the country 
in bondage and slavery. Let that be your pledge. Keep jails out of your The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50 consideration. If the Government keep me free, I will spare you to the trouble 
of filling the jails. I will not put on the Government the strain of maintaining a 
large number of prisoners at a time, when it is in trouble. Let every man and 
woman live every moment of his or her life hereafter in the consciousness that 
he or she eats or lives for achieving freedom and will die, if need be, to attain 
that goal. Take a pledge, with God and your own conscience as witness, that 
you will no longer rest till freedom is achieved and will be prepared to lay 
down your lives in the attempt to achieve it. He who loses his life will gain it; 
he who will seek to save it shall lose it. Freedom is not for the coward or the 
fainthearted. 
A word to the journalists. I congratulate you on the support you have hitherto 
given to the national demand. I know the restrictions and handicaps under 
which you have to labour. But I would now ask you to snap the chains that bind 
you. It should be the proud privilege of the newspapers to lead and set an 
example in laying down one’s life for freedom. You have the pen which the 
Government can’t suppress I know you have large properties in the form of 
printing presses, etc., and you would be afraid lest the Government should 
attach them. I do not ask you to invite an attachment of the printing press 
voluntarily. For myself, I would not suppress my pen, even if the press was to 
be attached. As you know my press was attached in the past and returned later 
on. But I do not ask from you that final sacrifice. I suggest a middle way. You 
should now wind up your standing committee, and you may declare that you 
will give up writing under the present restrictions and take up the pen only 
when India has won her freedom. You may tell Sir Frederick Puckle that he 
can’t expect from you a command performance, that his press notes are full of 
untruth, and that you will refuse to publish them. You will openly declare that 
you are wholeheartedly with the Congress. If you do this, you will have changed 
the atmosphere before the fight actually begins. 
From the Princes I ask with all respect due to them a very small thing. I am a 
well-wisher of the Princes. I was born in a State. My grandfather refused to 
salute with his right hand any Prince other than his own. But he did not say to The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51 the Prince, as I feel he ought to have said, that even his own master could not 
compel him, his minister, to act against his conscience. I have eaten the 
Prince’s salt and I would not be false to it. As a faithful servant, it is my duty to 
warn the Princes that if they will act while I am still alive, the Princes may 
come to occupy an honourable place in free India. In Jawaharlal’s scheme of 
free India, no privileges or the privileged classes have a place. Jawaharlal 
considers all property to be State-owned. He wants planned economy. He wants 
to reconstruct India according to plan. He likes to fly; I do not. I have kept a 
place for the Princes and the Zamindars2 in India that I envisage. I would ask 
the Princes in all humility to enjoy through renunciation. The Princes may 
renounce ownership over their properties and become their trustees in the true 
sense of the term. I visualize God in the assemblage of people. The Princes may 
say to their people: “You are the owners and masters of the State and we are 
your servants.” I would ask the Princes to become servants of the people and 
render to them an account of their own services. The empire too bestows 
power on the Princes, but they should prefer to derive power from their own 
people; and if they want to indulge in some innocent pleasures, they may seek 
do so as servants of the people. I do not want the Princes to live as paupers. 
But I would ask them: “Do you want to remain slaves for all time? Why should 
you, instead of paying homage to a foreign power, not accept this sovereignty 
of your own people?” You may write to the Political Department: “The people 
are now awake. How are we to withstand an avalanche before which even the 
large empires are crumbling? We, therefore, shall belong to the people from 
today onwards. We shall sink or swim with them.” Believe me, there is nothing 
unconstitutional in the course I am suggesting. There are, so far as I know no 
treaties enabling the empire to coerce the Princes. The people of the States 
will also declare that though they are the Princes’ subjects, they are part of 
the Indian nation and that they will accept the leadership of the Princes, if the 
latter cast their lot with the people but not otherwise. If this declaration 
enrages the Princes and they choose to kill the people, the latter will meet 
death bravely and unflinchingly, but will not go back on their word. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52 Nothing, however, should be done secretly. This is an open rebellion. In this 
struggle secrecy is a sin. A free man would not engage in a secret movement. It 
is likely that when you gain freedom you will have a C.I.D. of your own, in spite 
of my advice to the contrary. But in the present struggle, we have to work 
openly and to receive bullets on our chest, without taking to heels. 
I have a word to say to Government servants also. They may not, if they like, 
resign their posts yet. The late Justice Ranade did not resign his post, but he 
openly declared that he belonged to the Congress. He said to the Government 
that though he was a judge, he was a Congressman and would openly attend 
the sessions of the Congress, but that at the same time he would not let his 
political views warp his impartiality on the bench. He held Social Reform 
Conference in the very Pandal3 of the Congress. I would ask all the Government 
servants to follow in the footsteps of Ranade and to declare their allegiance to 
the Congress as an answer to the secret circular issued by Sir Frederick Puckle. 
This is all that I ask of you just now. I will now write to the Viceroy. You will be 
able to read the correspondence not just now but when I publish it with the 
Viceroy’s consent. But you are free to aver that you support the demand to be 
put forth in my letter. A judge came to me and said: “We get secret circulars 
from high quarters. What are we to do?” I replied, “If I were in your place, I 
would ignore the circulars. You may openly say to the government: ‘I have 
received your secret circular. I am, however, with the Congress. Though I serve 
the Government for my livelihood, I am not going to obey these secret circulars 
or to employ underhand methods.” 
Soldiers too are covered by the present programme. I do not ask them just now 
to resign their posts and to leave the army. The soldiers come to me, 
Jawaharlal and the Maulana and say: “We are wholly with you. We are tired of 
the Government tyranny.” To these soldiers I would say: You may say to the 
Government, “Our hearts are with the Congress. We are not going to leave our 
posts. We will serve you so long as we receive your salaries. We will obey your 
just orders, but will refuse to fire on our own people.” The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53 To those who lack the courage to do this much I have nothing to say. They will 
go their own way. But if you can do this much, you may take it from me that 
the whole atmosphere will be electrified. Let the Government then shower 
bombs, if they like. But no power on the earth will then be able to keep you in 
bondage any longer. 
If the students want to join the struggle only to go back to their studies after a 
while, I would not invite them to it. For the present, however, till the time 
that I frame a programme for the struggle, I would ask the students to say to 
their professors: “We belong to the Congress. Do you belong to congress, you 
need not vacate your posts. You will remain at your posts but teach us and lead 
us unto freedom.” In all fights for freedom, the world over, the students have 
made very large contributions. 
If in the interval that is left to us before the actual fight begins, you do even 
the little I have suggested to you, you will have changed the atmosphere and 
will have prepared the ground for the next step. 
There is much I should yet like to say. But my heart is heavy. I have already 
taken up much of your time. I have yet to say a few words in English also. I 
thank you for the patience and attention with which you have listened to me 
even at this late hour. It is just what true soldiers would do. For the last 
twenty-two years, I have controlled my speech and pen and have stored up my 
energy. He is a true Brahmachari4 who does not fritter away his energy. He 
will, therefore, always control his speech. That has been my conscious effort 
all these years. But today the occasion has come when I had to unburden my 
heart before you. I have done so, even though it meant putting a strain on your 
patience; and I do not regret having done it. I have given you my message and 
through you I have delivered it to the whole of India. 
 
1. A sacred formula 
2. Landlords 
3. A Canopy The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54 4. A Celibate
 
III 
[The following is the concluding portion of Gandhiji’s speech before the A.I.C.C. at 
Bombay on 8-8-‘42 which was delivered in English:] 
I have taken such an inordinately long time over pouring out, what was 
agitating my soul, to those whom I had just now the privilege of serving. I have 
been called their leader or, in the military language, their commander. But I do 
not look at my position in that light. I have no weapon but love to wield my 
authority over any one. I do sport a stick which you can break into bits without 
the slightest exertion. It is simply my staff with the help of which I walk. Such a 
cripple is not elated, when he has been called upon to bear the greatest 
burden. You can share that burden only when I appear before you not as your 
commander but as a humble servant. And he who serves best is the chief among 
equals. 
Therefore, I was bound to share with you such thoughts as were welling up in 
my breast and tell you, in as summary a manner as I can, what I expect you to 
do as the first step. 
Let me tell you at the outset that the real struggle does not commence today. I 
have yet to go through much ceremonial as I always do. The burden, I confess, 
would be almost unbearable. I have to continue to reason in those circles with 
whom I have lost my credit and who have no trust left in me. I know that in the 
course of the last few weeks I have forfeited my credit with a large number of 
friends, so much so, that they have begun to doubt not only my wisdom but 
even my honesty. Now I hold my wisdom in not such a treasure which I cannot 
afford to lose; but my honesty is a precious treasure to me and I can ill-afford 
to lose it. I seem however to have lost it for the time being. 
 
Friend of the Empire 
Such occasions arise in the life of the man who is p ure seeker after truth and 
who would seek to serve the humanity and his country to the best of his lights The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55 without fear or hypocrisy. For the last fifty years I have known no other way, I 
have been a humble servant of humanity and have rendered on more than one 
occasion such service as I could to the empire, and here let me say without fear 
of challenge that throughout my career never have asked for any personal 
favour. I have enjoyed the privilege of friendship as I enjoy it today with Lord 
Linlithgow. It is a friendship which has outgrown official relationship. Whether 
Lord Linlithgow will bear me out, I do not know, but there is a personal bond 
between him and myself. He introduced me to his daughter. His son-in law, the 
A.D. C. was drawn towards me. He fell in love with Mahadev more than with me 
and Lady Anna and he came to me. She is an obedient and favorite daughter. I 
take interest in their welfare. I take the liberty to give out these personal and 
sacred tit-bits only to give you an earnest of the personal bond which exists 
between us; and yet let me declare here that that personal bond will never 
interfere with the stubborn struggle on which, if it falls to my lot, I may have 
to launch against Lord Linlithgow, as the representative of the Empire. I will 
have to resist the might of that Empire with the might of the dumb millions 
with no limit but of non-violence as policy confined to this struggle. It is a 
terrible job to have to offer resistance to a Viceroy with whom I enjoy such 
relations. He has more than once trusted my word, often about my people. I 
would love to repeat that experiment, as it stands to his credit. I mention this 
with great pride and pleasure. I mention it as an earnest of my desire to be 
true to the empire when the Empire forfeited my trust and the Englishman who 
was its Viceroy came to know it. 
 
Charlie Andrews 
Then there is the sacred memory of Charlie Andrews w hich wells up within me. 
At this moment the spirit of Andrews hovers me. For me he sums up the 
brightest traditions of English culture. I enjoyed his confidence. There were no 
secrets between us. We exchanged our hearts every day. Whatever was in his 
heart, he would blurt out without the slightest hesitation or reservation. It is 
true he was a friend of Gurude-4 but he looked upon Gurudev with awe. He had The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56 that peculiar humility. But with me he became the closest friend. Years ago he 
came to me with a note of introduction from Gokhale. Pearson and he were the 
first rank specimens of Englishjman. I know that his spirit is listening to me. 
 
Voice of Conscience 
With all this background, I want to declare to the w orld, although I may have 
forfeited the regard of many friends in the West and I must bow my head low; 
but even for their friendship or love I must not suppress the voice of conscience 
the promptings of my inner basic nature today. There is something within me 
impelling me to cry out my agony. I have known humanity. I have studied 
something of psychology. Such a man knows exactly what it is. I do not mind 
how you describe it. That voice within tells me, “You have to stand against the 
whole world although you may have to stand alone. You have to stare in the 
face the whole world although the world may look at you with bloodshot eyes. 
Do not fear. Trust the little voice residing within your hearts.” It says: “Forsake 
friends, wife and all; but testify to that for which you have lived and for which 
you have to die.” I want to live my full span of life. And for me I put my span of 
life at 120 years. By that time India will be free, the world will be free. 
 
Real Freedom 
Let me tell you too that I do not regard England or for that matter America as 
free countries. They are free after their own fashion, free to hold in bondage 
coloured races of the earth. Are England and America fighting for the liberty of 
these races today? If not, do not ask me to wait until after the war. You shall 
not limit my concept of freedom. The English and American teachers, their 
history, their magnificent poetry have not said that you shall not broaden the 
interpretation of freedom. And according to my interpretation of that freedom 
I am constrained to say they are strangers to that freedom which their teachers 
and poets have described. If they will know the real freedom they should come 
to India. They have come not with pride or arrogance but in the spirit of real 
earnest seekers of truth. It is a fundamental truth which India has been The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57 experimenting with for 22 years. 
 
Congress and Non-violence 
Unconsciously from its very foundations long ago the  congress has been building 
on non-violence known as constitutional methods. Dadabhai and Pherozeshah 
who had held the congress India in the palm of their hands became rebels. They 
were lovers of the Congress. They were its masters. But above all they were 
real servants. They never countenanced murder, secrecy and the like. I confess 
there are many black sheep amongst us Congressmen. But I trust the whole of 
India today to launch upon a non-violent struggle. I trust because of my nature 
to rely upon the innate goodness of human nature which perceives the truth 
and prevails during the crisis as if by instinct. But even if I am deceived in this I 
shall not swerve. I shall not flinch. From its very inception the Congress based 
its policy on peaceful methods, including Swaraj and the subsequent 
generations added non-violence. When Dadabhai entered the British 
Parliament, Salisbury dubbed him as a black man; but the English people 
defeated Salisbury and Dadabhai went to the Parliament by their vote. India 
was delirious with joy. These things however India has outgrown. 
 
I will go Ahead 
It is, however, with all these things as the black g round that I want Englishmen, 
Europeans and all the United Nations to examine in their hearts what crime had 
India committed in demanding Independence. I ask, is it right for you to distrust 
such an organization with all its blackground, tradition and record of over half 
a century and misrepresent its endeavours before all the world by every means 
at your command? It is right that by hook or by crook, aided by the foreign 
press, aided by the President of the U.S.A., or even by the Generalissimo of 
China who has yet to win his laurels, you should present India’s struggle in 
shocking caricature? I have known him through Madame Shek who was my 
interpreter; and though he seemed inscrutable to me, not so Madame Shek; and 
he allowed me to read his mind through her. There is a chorus of disapproval The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58 and righteous protest all over the world against us. They say we are erring, the 
move is inopportune. I had great regard for British diplomacy which has enabled 
them to hold the Empire so long. Now it stinks in my nostrils, and others have 
studied that diplomacy and are putting it into practice. They may succeed in 
getting, through these methods, world opinion on their side for a time; but 
India will speak against all the organized propaganda. I will speak against it. 
Even if all the United Nations opposed me, even if the whole of India forsakes 
me, I will say, “You are wrong. India will wrench with non-violence her liberty 
from unwilling hands.” I will go ahead not for India’s sake alone, but for the 
sake of the world. Even if my eyes close before there is freedom, non-violence 
will not end. They will be dealing a mortal blow to China and to Russia if they 
oppose the freedom of non-violent India which is pleading with bended knees 
for the fulfillment of debt long overdue. Does a creditor ever go to the debtor 
like that? And even when, India is met with such angry opposition, she says, 
“We won’t hit below the belt, we have learnt sufficient gentlemanliness. We 
are pledged non-violence.” I have been the author of non-embarrassment 
policy of the Congress and yet today you find me talking this strong language. I 
say it is consistent talking this strong language. If a man holds me by the neck 
and wants to drown me, may I not struggle to free myself directly? There is no 
inconsistency in our position today. 
 
Appeal to United Nations 
There are representatives of the foreign press assem bled here today. Through 
them I wish to say to the world that the United Powers who somehow or other 
say that they have need for India, have the opportunity now to declare India 
free and prove their bona fides. If they miss it, they will be missing the 
opportunity of their lifetime, and history will record that they did not discharge 
their obligations to India in time, and lost the battle. I want the blessings of the 
whole world so that I may succeed with them. I do not want the united Powers 
to go beyond their obvious limitations. I do not want them to accept non-
violence and disarm today. There is a fundamental difference between fascism The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59 and this imperialism which I am fighting. Do the British get from India all they 
want? What they get today is from India which they hold in bondage. Think 
what difference it would make if India was to participate as a free ally. That 
freedom, if it is to come, must come today. It will have no taste left in it if 
today come today. It will have no taste left in it if today you who have the 
power to help cannot exercise it. If you can exercise it, under the glow of 
freedom what seems impossible, today will become possible tomorrow. If India 
feels that freedom, she will command that freedom for China. The road for 
running to Russia’s help will be open. The Englishmen did not die in Malaya or 
on Burma soil. What shall I go, and where shall I take the forty crores of India? 
How is this vast mass of humanity to be aglow in the cause of world 
deliverance, unless and until it has touched and felt freedom. Today they have 
no touch of life left. It has been crushed out of them. If luster is to be put into 
their eyes, freedom has to come not tomorrow, but today. 
 
Do or Die  
I have pledged the Congress and the Congress will do  or die.  
My Non-Violence (1960), pp. 183-205
 
1. Nonviolence  
2. Violence 
3. Discipline, practice, persistent effort. 
4. A sacred formula 
5. Landlords 
6. A Canopy 
7. A celibate 
8. Ravindranath Tagore 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60  
06. SPEECH BEFORE INTER-ASIAN RELATIONS CONFERENCE 
(
2-4-1947) 
(The clothing session of the Inter-Asian Relations c onference on April-2, 1947 
was a great finale to the intense activity which marked the proceedings during 
the past ten days. Over 20,000 visitors and delegates and observers gave a 
great ovation to Gandhiji when Mrs. Naidu introduced him as ‘one of the 
greatest Asians of the age’. Gandhiji who followed Dr. Sjahriar, the premier of 
Indonesia, made the following speech: ) 
I do not think that I should apologize to you for having to speak in a foreign 
tongue. I wonder if this loud speaker carries my voice to the farthest end of 
this vast audience. If some of those who are far away are unable to listen to 
what I may say, it will be the fault of the loud speaker. 
I was going to tell you that I do not wish to apologize. I dare not. You cannot 
understand the provincial language, which is my mother tongue. I do not want 
to insult you by speaking my own language (Gujarati). Our national speech is 
Hindustani. I know that it will be a long time before it can be made into an 
international speech. For international commerce, undoubtedly , English 
occupies the first place. I used to hear that French was the language of 
diplomacy. I was told, when I was young, that if I wanted to go from one end of 
Europe to the other, I must try to pick up French. I tried to learn French, in 
order that I may be able to make myself understood. There is a rivalry between 
the French and the English. Having been taught English, I have naturally to 
resort to it. 
I was wondering, as to what I was to speak to you. I wanted to collect my 
thoughts, but let me confess to you that I had no time. Yet I had promised 
yesterday that I would try to say a few words. While I was coming with Badshah 
Khan, I asked for a little piece of paper and pencil. I got a pen, instead of a 
pencil. I tried to scribble a few words. You will be sorry to hear that piece of 
paper is not by side, though I remember what I wanted to say. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61 You, friends, have not seen the real India and you are not meeting in 
conference in the midst of real India, Delhi, Bombay, Madras, Calcutta, Lahore 
all these are big cities and are, therefore, influenced by the west. 
I then thought of a story. It was in French and was translated for me by Anglo-
French philosopher. He was an unselfish man. He befriended me without having 
known me, because he always sided with the minorities. I was not then in my 
own country. I was not only I a hopeless minority, but in a despised minority, if 
the Europeans in South Africa will forgive me for saying so. I was a coolie 
lawyer. At the time, we had no coolie doctors, and we had no coolie lawyers. I 
was the first in the field. You know, perhaps, what is meant by the word 
‘coolie’. 
This friend his mother was a French woman and his father was an Englishman 
said: “I want to translate for you a French story. There were three scientists 
who went out from France in search of truth. They went to different parts of 
Asia. One of them found his way to India. He begun to search. He went to the 
so called cities of those times naturally this was before British occupation, 
before even the Mogul period. He saw the so-called high caste people, men, 
women, till he felt at a loss. Finally, he went to one humble cottage in a 
humble village. That cottage was a bhangi-1 cottage and there he found the 
truth that he was in search of.” 
If you really went to see India at its best, you have to find it in the humble 
bhangi homes of such villages. There are seven lakhs of such villages, and thirty 
eight crores of people inhabit them. 
If some of you see the Indian villages, you will not be fascinated by the sight. 
You will have to scratch below the dung heap. I do not pretend to say that they 
were places of paradise. Today, they are really dung heaps. They were not like 
that before. What I say is not from history, but from what I have seen myself. I 
have travelled from one end of India to the other, and I have seen the 
miserable specimens of humanity with the lusterless eyes. They are India. In 
these humble cottages, in the midst of these dung heaps, are to be found 
humble bhangis, in whom you find the concentrated essence of wisdom. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62 Again, I have learnt from books written by English historians. We read books 
written in English historians, but we do not write in our own mother tongue, or 
in the national language Hindustani. We study our history through English 
books, rather than through originals. That is the cultural conquest which India 
has undergone. 
The first of these wise men was Zoroaster. He belonged to the East. He was 
followed by Buddha who belonged to the East India. Who followed Buddha? 
Jesus, who came from the East. Before Jesus was Moses who belonged to 
Palestine, though he was born in Egypt. And after Jesus came Mahomed. I omit 
my reference to Krishna and Rama and other lights. I do not call them lesser 
lights but they are less known to a literary world. All the same, I do not know a 
single person in the world to match these men of Asia. And then what 
happened? Christianity became disfigured, when it went to the West. I am sorry 
to have to say that I would not talk any further. 
I have told you the story, in order to make you understand that what you see in 
the big cities is not the real India. Certainly, the carnage that is going on 
before our very eyes is a shameful thing. As I said yesterday, do not carry the 
memory of that carnage beyond the confines of India.  
What I want you to understand is the message of Asia. It is not be learnt 
through the western spectacles or by imitating the atom bomb. If you want to 
give a message to the west, it must be the message of love and the message of 
the truth. I did not want merely to appeal to your head. I want to capture your 
heart. 
In this age of democracy, in this age of awakening of the poorest of the poor, 
you can redeliver this message with the greatest emphasis. You will complete 
the conquest of the West, not through vengeance, because you have been 
exploited, but with the real understanding. I am sanguine, if all of you put your 
hearts together not merely heads to understand the secret of the message 
these wise men of the East have left to us, and if really become worthy of that 
great message, the conquest of the West will be completed. This conquest will 
be loved by the West itself. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63 The West is today pinning the wisdom. It is despairing of a multiplication of the 
West, but of the whole world, as if the prophecy of the Bible is going to be 
fulfilled and there is to be a perfect deluge. It is up to you to tell the world of 
its teachers and my teachers have taught Asia. 
Harijan, -20.4.1947, pp. 116-17
 
1. A Sweeper 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64  
07. SPEECH ON THE EVE OF THE LAST FAST 
(12.1.1948) 
My Fast As a Protest 
One fasts for health’s sake under laws governing hea lth, as a penance for a 
wrong done and felt as such. In these fasts, the fasting one need not believe in 
Ahimsa. There is, however, a fast which a votary of non-violence sometimes 
feels impelled to undertake by way of protest against some wrong done by 
society, and this he does when he as a votary of Ahimsa has no other remedy 
left. Such an occasion has come my way. 
When on September 9th, I returned to Delhi from Calcutta, it was to proceed to 
the west Punjab. But that was not to be. Gay Delhi looked a city of the dead. 
As I alighted from the train I observed gloom on every face I saw. Even the 
Sardar, whom humour and the joy that humour gives never desert, was no 
exception this time. The cause of it I did not know. He was on the platform to 
receive me. He lost no time in giving me the sad news of the disturbances that 
had taken place in the Metropolis of the Union. At once I saw that I had to be in 
Delhi and ‘do or die’. There is a apparent calm brought about by prompt 
military and police action. But there is storm within the breast. It may burst 
forth any day. This I count as no fulfillment of the vow to ‘do’ which alone can 
keep me from death, the incomparable friend. I yearn for heart friendship 
between the Hindus, the Sikhs and the Muslims. It subsisted between them the 
other day. Today it is non-existent. It is a state that no Indian patriot worthy of 
the name can contemplate with equanimity. Though the Voice within has been 
beckoning for a long time, I have been shutting my ears to it, lest it may be the 
voice of satan otherwise called my weakness. I never like to feel remorseless, a 
Satyagrahi never should. Fasting is his last resort in the place of the sword his 
or others. I have no answer to return to the Muslim friends who see me from 
day to day as to what they should do. My impotence has been gnawing at me of 
late. It will go immediately the fast is undertaken. I have been brooding over it 
for the last three days. The final conclusion has flashed upon me and it makes The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65 me happy. No man, if he is pure, has anything more precious to give than his 
life. I hope and pray that I have that purity in me to justify the step. 
 
Worthy of Blessing 
I ask you all to bless the effort and to pray for me  and with me. The fast begins 
from the first meal tomorrow. The period is indefinite and I may drink water 
with or without salts and sour limes. It will end when and if I am satisfied that 
there is a reunion of hearts of all the communities brought about without any 
outside pressure, but from an awakened sense of duty. The reward will be the 
regaining of India’s dwindling prestige and her fast fading sovereignty over the 
heart of Asia and there through the world. I flatter myself with belief that the 
loss of her soul by India will mean the loss of the hope of the aching, storm 
tossed and hungry world. Let no friend, or foe if there be one, be angry with 
me. There are friends who do not believe in the method of the fast for the 
reclamation of the human mind. They will bear with me and extend to me the 
same liberty of action that they claim for themselves. With God as my supreme 
and sole counselor, I felt that I must take the decision without any other 
adviser. I I have made a mistake and discover it, I shall have no hesitation in 
proclaiming it from the housetop and retracing my faulty step. There is little 
chance of making such a discovery. If there is clear indication, as I claim there 
is, of the Inner Voice, it will not be gainsaid. I plead for all absence of 
argument and inevitable endorsement of the step. If the whole of India 
responds or at least Delhi does, the fast might be soon ended. 
 
No softness 
But whether it ends soon or late or never, let there  be no softness in dealing 
with what may be termed as a crisis. Critics have regarded some of my previous 
fasts as coercive and held that on merits the verdict would have gone against 
my stand but for the pressure exercised by the fasts. What value can an 
adverse verdict have when the purpose is demonstrably sound? A pure fast, like 
duty, is its own reward. I do not embark upon it for the sake of the results it The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66 may bring. I do so because I must. Hence, I urge everybody dispassionately to 
examine the purpose and let me die, if I must, in peace which I hope is 
ensured. Death for me would be a glorious deliverance rather than that I should 
be a helpless witness of the destruction of India, Hinduism, Sikhism and Islam. 
That destruction is certain if Pakistan ensures no equality of status and security 
of life and property for all professing the various faiths of the world, and if 
India copies her. Only then Islam dies in the two India’s, not in the world. But 
Hinduism and Sikhism have no world outside India. Those who differ from me 
will be honoured by me for their resistance however implacable. Let my fast 
quicken conscience, not deaden it. Just contemplate the rot that has set in 
beloved India and you will rejoice to think that there is a humble son of hers 
who is strong enough and possibly pure enough to take the happy step. If he is 
neither, he is a burden on earth. The sooner he disappears and clears the 
Indian atmosphere of the burden the better for him and all concerned. 
I would beg of all friends not to rush to Birla House nor try to dissuade me or be 
anxious for me. I am in God’s hands. Rather, they should turn the searchlights 
inwards, for this is essentially a testing time for all of us. Those who remain at 
their post of duty and perform it diligently and well, now more so than 
hitherto, will help me and the cause in every way. The fast is a process of self-
purification. 
Harijan, 18.1.1948, p. 523 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
ART TWO 
(Selections) 
I do not claim to have originated any new principle or doctrine, I have simply tried in my 
own way to apply the eternal truths to our daily life and problems… Well all my 
philosophy, if it may be called by that pretentious name, is contained in what I have said. 
You will not call it ‘Gandhism’; there is no ism about it. And no elaborate literature or 
propaganda is needed about it. 
M. K. Gandhi 
Harijan, 28-3-‘36, p. 49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68  
SECTIONI: TRUTH, WORLD AND MAN 
C
HAPTER 1 
TRUTH AND GOD 
For me, Truth is the sovereign principle, which incl udes numerous other 
principles. This truth is not only truthfulness in word, but truthfulness in 
thought also, and not only the relative truth of our conception, but the 
Absolute Truth, the Eternal principle, that is God. There are innumerable 
definitions of God, because His manifestations are innumerable. They 
overwhelm me with wonder and awe and for a moment stun me. But I worship 
God as Truth only. I have not yet found Him, but I am seeking after Him. I am 
prepared to sacrifice the things dearest to me in pursuit of this quest. Even if 
the sacrifice demanded be my very life, I hope I may be prepared to give it. 
But as long as I have not realized this Absolute truth, so long must I hold by the 
relative truth as I have conceived it. That relative truth must, meanwhile, be 
my beacon, my shield and buckler. Though this path is straight and narrow and 
sharp as the razor’s edge, for me it has been the quickest and easiest. Even my 
Himalayan blunders have seemed trifling to me because I have kept strictly to 
this path. For the path has saved me from coming to grief, and I have gone 
forward according to my light. Often in my progress I have had faint glimpses of 
the Absolute Truth, God and daily the conviction is growing upon me that He 
alone is real and all else is unreal.  
Introduction to An Autobiography , (1966), p. 11
 
The word Satya (Truth) is derived from Sat, which means ‘being’. Nothing is or 
exists in reality except Truth. That is why Sat or Truth is perhaps the most 
important name of God. In fact it is more correct to say that Truth is God, than 
to say that God is Truth. But as we cannot do without a ruler or a general, such 
names of God as ‘King of Kings’ or ‘The Amighty’ are and will remain generally The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69 current. On deeper thinking, however, it will be realized, that Sat or Satya is 
the only correct and fully significant name for God. 
And where there is Truth, there also is knowledge which is true. Where there is 
no Truth, there can be no true knowledge. That is why word Chit or knowledge 
is associated with the name of God. And where there is true knowledge, there 
is always bliss ( Ananda). Their sorrow has no place. And even as Truth is 
eternal, so is the bliss derived from it. Hence we know God as sat-chit-ananda , 
one who combines in Himself Truth, knowledge and Bliss. 
From Yeravada Mandir  (1957), pp. 1-2
 
It is That which alone is, which constitutes the stuff of which all things are 
made, which subsists by virtue of its own power, which is not supported by 
anything else but supports everything that exists. Truth alone is eternal, 
everything else is momentary. It need not assume shape or form. It is pure 
intelligence as well as pure bliss. We call It Ishwara1 because everything is 
regulated by Its will. It and the law it promulgates are one. Therefore, it is not 
a blind law. It governs the entire universe. 
Ashram Observance in Action  (1959), p. 37
 
Truth is God—nothing else, nothing less… The nearest word answering to Truth 
in Sanskrit is Sat. Sat means ‘being’. God alone is Sat. He alone is; nothing and 
no one else is. Everything else is illusion. Satya means sat. Truth alone is in the 
world, nothing else is. This is easy enough to understand. Then what is truth? 
For us it is a relative term. Absolute Truth is God. Whatever we understand by 
God is implied in Truth…. It alone really sustains us. For a time many other 
things may sustain us, but this alone sustains us for all time. 
Truth gives perennial joy. In Sanskrit we have the word Sat, Chit, Ananda . It is 
a fine combination. The three together make one word. Truth is knowledge 
also. It is life. You feel vitality in you when you have got Truth in you. Again it 
gives bliss. It is a permanent thing of which you cannot be robbed. You may be The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70 sent to the gallows, or put to torture; but if you have Truth in you, you will 
experience an inner joy. 
Conversations of Gandhiji  (1949), pp. 35-36
 
In my early youth I was taught to repeat what in Hindu scriptures are known as 
one thousand names of God. But these one thousand names of God were by no 
means exhaustive. We believe—and I think it is the truth—that God has as many 
names as there are creatures and, therefore we also say that God is nameless 
and, since God has many forms we also consider Him formless, and since He 
speaks to us through many tongues, we consider Him to be speechless and so 
on. And so when I came to study Islam I found that Islam too had many names 
for God. I would say with those who say God is Love, God is Love. But deep 
down in me I used to say that though God may be Love, God is Truth, above all. 
If it is possible for the human tongue to give the fullest description of god, I 
have come to the conclusion that for myself, God is Truth. 
But two years ago, I went a step further and said that Truth is God. You will see 
the fine distinction between the two statements, viz. that God is Truth and 
Truth is God. And I came to that conclusion after a continuous and relentless 
search after Truth which began nearly fifty years ago. I then found that the 
nearest approach to Truth was through Love. But I also found that the love has 
many meanings in the English language at least and that human love in the 
sense of passion could become a degrading thing also. I found too that love in 
the sense of Ahimsa 2, had only a limited number of votaries in the world. But I 
never found a double meaning in connection with Truth and even atheists had 
not demurred to the necessity or power of Truth. But in their passion for 
discovering Truth the atheists have not hesitated to deny the very existence of 
God—from their own point of view rightly. And it was because of this reasoning 
that I saw that rather than say that God is Truth I should say that Truth is God. 
I recall the name of Charles Bradlaugh who delighted to call himself an atheist, 
but knowing as I do something of Him, I would never regard him as an atheist. I 
would call him a God fearing man, though I know that he would reject the The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71 claim. His face would redden if I would say that “Mr. Bradlaugh, you are a 
Truth-fearing man, and so a God-fearing man.” I would automatically disarm his 
criticism by saying that Truth is God, as I have disarmed criticisms of many a 
young man. Add to this the great difficulty that millions have taken the name 
of God and in His name committed nameless atrocities. Not that scientists very 
often do not commit cruelties in the name of Truth. I know how in the name of 
Truth and science inhuman cruelties are perpetrated on animals when men 
perform vivisection. There are thus a number of difficulties in the way, no 
matter how you describe God. But the human mind is a limited thing, and you 
have to labour under limitations when you think of a being or an entity who is 
beyond the power of man to grasp. 
And when we another thing in Hindu philosophy, viz. God alone is and nothing 
else exists, and the same truth you find emphasized and exemplified in the 
Kalma3 of Islam. There you find it clearly stated that God alone is and nothing 
else exists. In fact Sanskrit word for Truth is a word which literally means that 
which exists— Sat. For these and several other reasons that I can give you I have 
come to the conclusion that the definition, ‘Truth is God’, gives me the 
greatest satisfaction. And when you want to find Truth as God the only 
inevitable means is Love, i.e., non-violence, and since I believe that ultimately 
the means and end are convertible terms, I should not hesitate to say that God 
is Love. 
Young India , 31-12-‘31, pp. 427-28
 
The seers have described God as ‘Neti’, ‘Neti’  (‘Not this’, Not this’). Truth will 
elude you. The sum total of all that is true is Truth. But you can’t sum up all 
that is true…. There are things that can’t be analyzed. God who can be 
analyzed by my poor intellect won’t satisfy me. Therefore I do not try to 
analyze Him. I go behind the relative to the absolute and I get my peace of 
mind. 
An ashiest with Gandhi  (1958), p. 30
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72 God is not a person…. The truth is that God is the force. He is the essence of 
life. He is pure and undefiled consciousness. He is eternal. And yet, strangely 
enough, all are not able to derive either benefit from or shelter in the all-
pervading living presence. 
Harijan, 22-6-‘47, p. 200
 
God is not some person outside ourselves or away from the universe. He 
pervades everything, and is omniscient as well as omnipotent. He does not 
need any praise or petitions. Being immanent in all beings, He hears everything 
and reads our innermost thoughts. He abides in our hearts and is nearer to us 
than the nails are to the fingers. 
Ashram Observances in Action  (1959), p. 36
 
He is the greatest democrat the world knows, for He leaves us ‘unfettered’ to 
make our own choice between evil and good. He is the greatest tyrant ever 
known, for He often dashes the cup from our lips and under cover of free will 
leaves us a margin so wholly inadequate as to provide only mirth for Himself at 
our expense. Therefore it is that Hinduism calls it all His sport— Lila, or calls it 
all an illusion— Maya. We are not, He alone Is. And if we will be, we must 
eternally sing His praise and do His will. Let us dance to the tune of His Bansi-
lute, and all would be well. 
Young India , 5-3-25, p. 81
 
God is good not in the same sense as X is good. X is comparatively good. He is 
more good than evil, but God is wholly good. There is no evil in Him. God made 
man in His own image. Unfortunately for us man fashioned Him in his own. This 
arrogation has landed mankind in a sea of troubles. God is the Supreme 
Alchemist. In His presence all iron and dross turn into pure gold. Similarly does 
all evil turn into good. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73 Again God lives but not as we. His creatures live but to die. But God is life. 
Therefore, goodness and all it connotes is not an attribute. Goodness is God. 
Goodness conceived as apart from Him is a lifeless thing and exists only whilst 
it is a paying policy. So are all morals. If they are to live in us they must be 
considered and cultivated in their relation to God. We try to become good 
because we want to reach and realize God. All the dry ethics of the world turn 
to dust because apart from God they are lifeless. Coming from God, they come 
with life in them. They become part of us and ennoble us. 
Conversely, God conceived without Goodness is without life. We give him life in 
our vain imaginings. 
Harijan, 24-8-47, p. 289
 
God is that indefinable something which we all feel but which we do not 
know…. To me God is Truth and Love; God is ethics and morality; God is 
fearlessness. God is the source of Light and Life and yet He is above and beyond 
all these. God is conscience. He is even the atheism of the atheist. For in His 
boundless love God permits the atheist to live. He is the searcher of hearts. He 
transcends speech and reason. He knows us and our hearts better than we do 
ourselves. He does not take us at our word for He knows that we often do not 
mean it, some knowingly and others unknowingly. He is a personal God to those 
who need His personal presence. He is embodied to those who need His touch. 
He is the purest essence. He simply is to those who have faith. He is all things 
to all men. He is in us and yet above and beyond us. One may banish the word 
‘God’, but one has no power to banish the Thing Itself. 
Young India, 5-3-‘25, pp. 80-81
 
There is an indefinable mysterious Power that pervades everything. I feel it, 
though I do not see it. It is this Unseen Power which makes itself felt and yet 
defies all proof, because it is so unlike all that I perceive through my senses. It 
transcends the senses. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74 But it is possible to reason out the existence of God to a limited extent. Even in 
ordinary affairs we know that people do not know who rules or why and how he 
rules. And yet they know that there is a power that certainly rules. In my tour 
last year in Mysore I met many poor villagers and I found upon inquiry that they 
did not know who ruled Mysore. They simply said some God ruled it. If the 
knowledge of these poor people was so limited about their ruler, I who am 
infinitely lesser than God, than they to their ruler, need not be surprised if I do 
not realize the presence of God, the King of Kings. Nevertheless I do feel as the 
poor villagers felt about Mysore that there is orderliness in the Universe, there 
is an unalterable Law governing everything and every being that exists or lives. 
It is not a blind law; for no blind law can govern the conduct of living beings 
and thanks to the marvelous researches of Sir J. C. Bose, it can now be proved 
that even matter is life. That Law then which governs all life is God. Law and 
the Lawgiver are one. I may not deny the law or the lawgiver, because I know 
so little about it or Him. Even as my denial or ignorance of the existence of an 
earthy power will avail me nothing, so will not my denial of God and His law 
liberate from it operation; whereas humble and mute acceptance of Divine 
Authority makes life’s journey easier even as the acceptance of earthly rules 
makes life under it easier. 
I do dimly perceive that whilst everything around me is ever-changing, ever-
dying, there is underlying all that change a Living Power that is changeless, 
that holds all together, that creates, dissolves, and re-creates. That informing 
Power or Spirit is God. And since nothing else I see merely through the senses 
can or will persist, He alone is. 
And is this Power benevolent or malevolent? I see it as purely benevolent. For I 
can see that in the midst of death life persists, in the midst of untruth truth 
persists, in the midst of darkness light persists. Hence I gather that God is Life, 
Truth, Light. He is Love. He is the Supreme Good. 
Young India, 11-10-‘28, p. 340
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75 But He is no God who merely satisfies the intellect, If He ever does. God to be 
God must rule the heart and transform it. He must express Himself in every 
smallest act of His votary. This can only be done through a definite realization 
more real than the five senses can ever produce. Sense perceptions can be, 
often are, false and deceptive, however real they may appear to us. Where 
there is realization outside the senses it is infallible. It is proved not by 
extraneous evidence but in the transformed conduct and character of those 
who have felt the real presence of God within. 
Such testimony is to be found in the experiences of an unbroken line of 
prophets and sages in all countries and climes. To reject this evidence is to 
deny oneself. 
This realization is preceded by an immovable faith. He who would in his own 
person test the fact of God’s presence can do so by a living faith. And since 
faith itself cannot be proved by extraneous evidence, the safest course is to 
believe in the moral government of the world and therefore in the supremacy 
of the moral law, the law of Truth and Love. Exercise of faith will be the safest 
where there is a clear determination summarily to reject all that is contrary to 
Truth and Love. 
I confess….that I have no argument to convince….through reason. Faith 
transcends reason. All I can advise is not to attempt the impossible.  
Young India, 11-10-‘28, pp. 340-41
 
If we exist, if our parents and their parents have existed, then it is proper to 
believe in the Parent of the whole creation. If He is not, we are nowhere…. He 
is one and yet many; He is smaller than an atom, and bigger than the 
Himalayas; He is contained even in a drop of the ocean, and yet not even the 
seven seas can compass Him. Reason is powerless to know Him. He is beyond 
the reach or grasp of Reason. But I need not labour the point. Faith is essential 
in this matter. My logic can make and unmake innumerable hypotheses. An 
atheist might floor me in a debate. But my faith runs so very much faster than The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76 my reason that I can challenge the whole world and say, “God is, was and ever 
shall be.” 
Young India, 21-1-‘26, p.30
 
Experience has humbled me enough to let me realize the specific limitations of 
Reason. Just as matter misplaced becomes dirt, Reason misused becomes 
lunacy. 
Rationalists are admirable beings, rationalism is a hideous monster when it 
claims for itself omnipotence. Attribution of omnipotence to Reason is as bad a 
piece of idolatry as is worship of stock and stone believing it to be God... 
I plead not for suppression of Reason, but for a due recognition of that in us 
which sanctifies Reason itself. 
Young India, 14-10-‘26, p. 359
 
There are subjects where Reason cannot take us far and we have to accept 
things on faith. Faith then does not contradict Reason but transcends it. Faith is 
a kind of sixth sense which works in cases which are without the purview of 
Reason. 
Harijan, 6-3-‘37, p. 26.  
 
1. God 
2. Non-violence 
3. Basic Muslim prayer 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77  
Chapter 2 
L
IFE AND GOD 
I am an A davaitist1 and yet I can support Dvaitism (dualism). The world is 
changing every moment, and is therefore unreal, it has no permanent 
existence. But though it is constantly changing, it has something about it which 
persists and it is therefore to that extent real. I have therefore no objection to 
calling it real and unreal, and thus being called an Anekantavadi2 or a 
Syadvadi3. But my Syadvad is not the Syadvad of the learned, it is peculiarly my 
own. I cannot engage in a debate with them. It has been my experience that I 
am always true from my point of view, and often wrong from the point of view 
of my honest critics. I know that we are both right from our respective points of 
view. And this knowledge saves me from attributing motives to my opponents 
or critics. The seven blind men who gave seven different descriptions of the 
elephant were all right from their respective points of view, and wrong from 
the point of view of one another, and right and wrong from the point of view of 
the man who knew the elephant. I very much like this doctrine of the manyness 
of reality. It is this doctrine that has taught me to judge a Musalman from his 
standpoint and a Christian from his. Formerly I used to resent the ignorance of 
my opponents. Today I can love them because I am gifted with the eye to see 
myself as others see me and vice versa . I want to take the whole world in the 
embrace of my love. My Anekantavad  is the result of the twin doctrine of Satya 
and Ahimsa.  
Young India, 21-1-‘26, p. 30
 
Life for me is real as I believe it to be a spark of the Divine. 
Art of Living (1961), p. 53
 
The world is the playground of God and a reflection of His glory. 
An Autobiography (1966), p. 153  The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78  
I recognize, that God manifests Himself in innumerable forms in this universe, 
and every such manifestation commands my spontaneous reverence. 
Young India, 26-9-29, p. 320
 
He who knows the Atman4 inhabiting the body and realizes Him to be a part of 
the supreme Atman will dedicate everything to Him. 
The Gita According to Gandhi 91956), p. 186
 
From the Imperishable Unmanifest down to the perishable atom everything in 
the universe is the Supreme and an expression of the Supreme. 
The Gita According to Gandhi (1956), p. 254
 
The world of sense… is every moment in a state of Flux. But even though it is 
perpetually changing, as its root is Brahman or the Supreme, it is imperishable. 
The Gita According to Gandhi (1956), p. 337
 
I believe in the immorality of the soul. I would like to give you the analogy of 
the ocean. The ocean is composed of drops of water; each drop is an entity and 
yet it is the part of the whole, ‘the one and the many’. In this ocean of life, we 
are little drops. My doctrine means that I must identify myself with life, with 
everything that lives, that I must share the majesty of life in the presence of 
God. The sum-total of this life is God. 
Harijan, 15-2-‘48, p. 33
 
1. A believer in non-duality 
2 & 3. A believer in manyness of reality 
4. Soul The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79  
CHAPTER 3 
GOD IN NATURE 
I was charmed with the natural scenery about Hrishik esh and the Lakshman 
Jhula, and bowed my head in reverence to our ancestors for their sense of the 
beautiful in Nature, and for their foresight in investing beautiful manifestations 
of Nature with a religious significance. 
An Autobiography (1966), p.296
 
I may gaze out upon the starry heavens overhead that stretch in an unending 
expanse of beauty. What conscious Art of man can give me the panoramic 
scenes that opens out before me, when I look up to the sky above with all its 
shinning stars…. I personally feel how inadequate these are compared with the 
eternal symbols of Beauty in Nature.  
Young India, 13-11-‘24, p. 377
 
‘Is there Truth in a sun-set or a crescent moon that shines amid the stars at 
night?’ 
Indeed. These beauties are truthful, inasmuch as they make me think of the 
Creator at the back of them. How also could these be beautiful, but for the 
Truth that is in the centre of creation? When I admire the wonder of a sunset or 
the beauty of the moon my soul expands in worship of the Creator. I try to see 
Him and His mercies in all these creations. 
Young India, 13-11-‘24, p. 378
 
I find in the practice of treeworship a thing instinct with a deep pathos and 
poetic beauty. It symbolizes true reverence for the entire vegetable kingdom, 
which with its endless panorama of beautiful shapes and forms, declares to us 
as it were with a million tongues the greatness and glory of God. 
Young India, 26-9-‘29, p. 320 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80  
CHAPTER 4 
M
AN AND HIS DESTINY 
“Is man a special creation of God?” 
M
an is a special creation of God precisely to the extent that he is distinct from 
the rest of His creation.  
Young India, 13-2-‘30, p. 56
 
In eating, sleeping and in the performance of other physical functions, man is 
not different from the brute. What distinguishes him from the brute is his 
ceaseless striving to rise above the brute on the moral plane. 
Harijan, 7-4-‘46, p. 74
 
Man is not a brute. He has risen to higher state after countless births in brute 
creation. He is born to stand, not to walk on all fours or crawl. Bestiality is as 
far removed from manhood, as matter from spirit. 
Young India, 29-4-‘26, p. 157
 
The brute by nature knows no self-restraint. Man is man because he is capable 
of, and only in so far as he exercises self-restraint. 
An Autobiography (1966), p. 238
 
Human nature will only find itself when it fully realizes that to be human it has 
to cease to be beastly or brutal. 
Harijan, 8-10-‘38, p. 282
 
Man is higher than the brute in his moral instincts and moral institutions. The 
law of nature as applied to the one is different from the law of nature as The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81 applied to the other. Man has reason, discrimination, and free will such as it is. 
The brute has no such thing. It is not a free agent, and knows no distinction 
between virtue and vice, good and evil. Man, being a free agent, knows these 
distinctions, and when he follows his higher nature shows himself far superior 
to the brute, but when he follows his baser nature can show himself lower than 
the brute. Even the races regarded as the most uncivilized on earth accept 
some restriction on sexual relations. If it be said that the restriction is itself 
barbarous, then freedom from all restraints should be the law of man. If all 
men were to act according to this lawless law, there would be perfect chaos 
within twenty-four hours. Man being by nature more passionate than the brute, 
the moment all restraint is withdrawn, the lava of unbridled passion would 
overspread the whole earth and destroy mankind. Man is superior to the brute 
inasmuch as he is capable of self-restraint and sacrifice, of which the brute is 
incapable. 
Young India, 3-6-‘26, p. 204
 
Progress is man’s distinction, man’s alone, not beast’s. Man has discrimination 
and reason. Man does not live by bread alone, as the brute does. He used his 
reason to worship God and to know Him, and regards the attainment of that 
knowledge as the summum bonum  of life. The brute, if he is said to worship 
god, does so involuntarily. The desire to worship god is inconceivable in the 
brute, while man can voluntarily worship even Satan. It must therefore be, and 
is, man’s nature to know and find God. When he worships Satan, he acts 
contrary to his nature. Of course, I will not carry conviction to one who makes 
no distinction between man and the brute. To him virtue and vice are 
convertible terms. While to the man whose end and aim is realization of God, 
even the functions of eating and drinking can be natural only within certain 
limits. For having knowledge of God as his end, he will not eat or drink for the 
sake of enjoyment, but solely for sustaining the body. Restraint and 
renunciation will therefore always be his watch-words even in respect of these 
functions. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82 Young India, 24-6-‘26, pp. 229-30
 
Atman is the same in every one of us. All souls possess equal potentialities; 
only some have developed their powers, while others have them in a dormant 
condition. These latter too will have a like experience, if only they try. 
Navjivan, 25-5-‘24, p. 306
 
The Divine powers within us are infinite.  
An Autobiography, (1966), p. 206
 
Man is neither mere intellect, nor the gross animal body, nor the heart or soul 
alone. A proper and harmonious combination of all the three is required for the 
making of the whole man.  
Harijan, 8-5-‘37, p. 104
 
It is not man’s duty to develop all his functions to perfection; his duty is to 
develop all his God-ward faculties to perfection and to suppress completely 
those of a contrary tendency. 
Young India, 24-6-‘26, p. 229
 
Unless the mind and the body and the soul are made to work in unison, they 
cannot be adequately used for the service of mankind. Physical, mental and 
spiritual purity is essential for their harmonious working. Therefore man should 
concentrate on developing, purifying and turning to the best use all his 
faculties. 
The Gita According to Gandhi, (1956), p. 208
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83 The aim of life is that we should serve the Power that has created us, and on 
Whose mercy or consent depends our very breath, by heartily serving Its 
creation. That means love, not hate, which one sees every here. 
Harijan, 6-4-‘47, pp. 98-99
 
The soul’s natural progress is towards selflessness and purity. 
The Gita according to Gandhi, (1956), p. 202
 
Man’s ultimate aim is the realization of God, and all his activities, social, 
political, religious, have to be guided by the ultimate aim of the vision of God. 
The immediate service of all human beings becomes a necessary part of the 
endeavor simply because the only way to find God is to see Him in His creation 
and be one with it. This can only be done by service of all.  
Harijan, 29-8-‘36, p. 226
 
Man is not at peace with himself till he has become like unto God. 
The Gita According to Gandhi, (1956), pp. 128-29
 
The purpose of life is undoubtedly to know oneself. We cannot do it unless we 
learn to identify ourselves with all that lives. The sum-total of that life is God. 
Hence the necessity of realizing God living within every one of us…. 
The instrument of this knowledge is boundless selfless service. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai-1, (1953), p. 184
 
Of all the animal creations of God, man is the only animal who has been 
created in order that he may know his Maker. Man’s aim in life is not therefore 
to add from day to day to his material prospects and to his material possessions 
but his predominant calling is from day to day to come nearer his own Maker. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84 Young India, 20-10-‘27, p. 355
 
Man is not born day after day to explore avenues for amassing riches and to 
explore different means of livelihood; on the contrary man is born in order that 
he may utilize every atom of his energy for the purpose of knowing his Maker. 
Young India, 27-10-‘27, p. 357
 
Adam is not God but he is a spark of the divine. And therefore he who is the 
most religiously behaved has most of the divine spark in him. 
The Gita According to Gandhi, (1956), p. 128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85  
CHAPTER 5 
S
ELF-DISCIPLINE 
Faith 
It is the faith that steers us through stormy seas, faith that moves mountains 
and faith that jumps across the ocean. That faith is nothing but a living, wide 
awake consciousness of God within. He who has achieved that faith wants 
nothing. Bodily diseased he is spiritually healthy, physically poor, he rolls in 
spiritual riches. 
Young India, 24-9-‘25, p. 331
 
Without faith this world would come to naught in a moment. True faith is 
appropriation of the reasoned experience of people whom we believe to have 
lived a life purified by prayer and penance. Belief therefore in prophets or 
incarnations who have lived in remote ages is not an idle superstition but a 
satisfaction of an inmost spiritual want. 
Young India, 14-4-‘27, p. 120
 
Faith is not a delicate flower which would wither under the slightest stormy 
weather. Faith is like the Himalaya mountains which cannot possibly change. 
No storm can possibly remove the Himalaya mountains from their foundations… 
And I want every one of you to cultivate that faith in God and religion. 
Harijan, 26-1-‘34, p. 8
 
A man without faith is like drop thrown out of the ocean bound to perish. Every 
drop in the ocean shares its majesty and has the honour of giving us the ozone 
of life. 
Harijan, 25-4-‘36, p. 84
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86 That faith is of little value which can flourish only in fair weather. Faith in 
order to be of any value has to survive the severest trials. Your faith is a whited 
sepulchre if it cannot stand against the calumny of the whole world.  
Young India, 25-4-‘29, p. 134
 
Prayer  
Prayer is the first and the last lesson in learning the noble and the brave art of 
sacrificing self in the various walks of life culminating the defence of one’s 
nations liberty and honour. Undoubtedly, prayer requires a living faith in God. 
Harijan , 14-4-‘46, p. 80
 
Prayer is impossibility without a living faith in the presence of God within. 
Young India, 20-12-‘28, p. 420
 
I believe that prayer is the very soul and essence of religion, and therefore 
prayer must be the very core of life of man, for no man can live without 
religion. There are some who in the egotism of their reason declare that they 
have nothing to do with religion. But it is like a man saying that he breathes but 
that he has no nose. Whether by reason, or by instinct, or by superstition, man 
acknowledges some sort of relationship with the divine. The rankest agnostic or 
atheist does acknowledge the need of a moral principle, and associates 
something good with its observance and something bad with its non-
observance. Bradlaugh, whose atheism is well known, always insisted on 
proclaiming his innermost conviction. He had to suffer a lot for thus speaking 
the truth, but he delighted in it and said that truth is its own reward. Not that 
he was quite insensible to the joy resulting from the observance of truth. This 
joy however is not at all worldly, but springs out of communion with the divine. 
That is why I have said that even a man who disowns religion cannot and does 
not live without religion. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87 Young India, 23-1-‘30 p. 25
 
Now I come to the next thing, viz. that prayer is the very core of man’s life, as 
it is the most vital part of religion. Prayer is either petitional or in its wider 
sense is inward communion. In either case the ultimate result is the same. Even 
when it is petitional, the petition should be for the cleansing and purification 
of the soul, for freeing it from the layers of ignorance and darkness that 
envelope it. He therefore who hungers for the awakening of the divine in him 
must fall back on prayer. But prayer is no mere exercise of words or of the 
ears, it is no mere repletion of empty formula. Any amount of repetition of 
Ramanama  is futile if it fails to stir the soul. It is better in prayer to have a 
heart without words than words without a heart. It must be in clear response to 
the spirit which hungers for it. And even as a hungry man relishes a hearty 
meal, a hungry soul will relish a heart-felt prayer. And I am giving you a bit of 
my experience and that of my companions when I say that he who has 
experienced the magic of prayer may do without food for days together but not 
a single moment without prayer. For without prayer there is no inward peace. 
Young India, 23-1-‘30, p. 25
 
I have talked of necessity for prayer, and there through I have dealt with the 
essence of prayer. We are born to serve our fellowmen, and we cannot properly 
do so unless we are wide awake. There is an eternal struggle raging in man’s 
breast between the powers of darkness and of light, and who has not the sheet 
anchor of prayer to rely upon will be victim to the powers of darkness. The man 
of the prayer will be at peace with himself and with the whole world, the man 
who goes about the affairs of the world without a prayerful heart will be 
miserable and will make the world also miserable. Apart therefore from its 
bearing on man’s condition after death, prayer has incalculable value for man 
in this world of the living. Prayer is the only means of bringing about 
orderliness and peace and repose in our daily acts. We inmates of the Ashram 
who came here in search of truth and for insistence on truth professed to The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88 believe in the efficacy of prayers but had never up to now made it a matter of 
vital concern. We did not bestow on it the care that we did on other matters. I 
awoke from my slumbers one day and realized that I had been woefully 
negligent of my duty in the matter. I have therefore suggested measures of 
stern discipline and far from being any the worse, I hope we are the better for 
it. For it is so obvious. Take care of the vital thing and other things will take 
care of themselves. Rectify on angle of a square, and the other angles will be 
automatically right. 
Young India, 23-1-‘30, p. 26
 
Prayer needs no speech. It is in itself independent of any sensuous effort. I 
have not the slightest doubt that prayer is an unfailing means of cleansing the 
heart of passions. But it must be combined with the utmost humility. 
An Autobiography, (1966), p. 54
 
As I believe that silent prayer is often a mightier (force) than any overt act, in 
my helplessness I continuously pray in the faith that the prayer of a pure heart 
never goes unanswered. 
Young India, 22-9-‘27, p. 321
 
Prayer is for remembering God, and for purifying the heart and can be offered 
even when observing silence. 
Harijan, 20-4-‘47, p. 118
 
I can give my own testimony and say that a heartfelt prayer is undoubtedly the 
most potent instrument that man possesses for overcoming cowardice and all 
other bad old habits. 
Young India, 20-12-‘28, p. 420
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89 As food is necessary for the body, prayer is necessary for the soul. A man may 
be able to do without food for a number of days—as MacSwiney did for over 70 
days—but believing in God, man cannot, should not, live a moment without 
prayer. 
Young India, 15-12-‘27, p. 424
 
True meditation consists in closing the eyes and ears of the mind to all else 
except the object of one’s devotion. Hence closing of eyes during the prayers is 
an aid to such concentration. Man’s conception of God is naturally limited. 
Each one has, therefore, to think of Him as best appeals to him, provided that 
the conception is pure and uplifting. 
Harijan, 18-8-‘46, p. 265
 
I have never found Him lacking in response. I have found Him nearest at hand 
when the horizon seemed darkest—in my ordeals in jails when it was not all 
smooth sailing for me. I cannot recall a moment in my life when I had a sense 
of desertion by God.  
Harijan, 24-12-‘38, p. 395
 
If you would ask Him to help you, you would go to Him in all your nakedness, 
approach Him without reservations, also without fear or doubts as to how He 
can help a fallen being like you. He who has helped millions, who have 
approached Him, is He going to desert you? He makes no exceptions whatsoever 
and you will find that every one of your prayers will be answered. The prayer of 
even the most impure will be answered. I am telling this out of my personal 
experience, I have gone through the purgatory. Seek first the Kingdom of 
Heaven and everything will be added unto you. 
Young India, 4-4-‘29, p. 111
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90 I agree that, if a man could practice the presence of God all the twenty-four 
hours, there would be no need for a separate time for prayer. But most people 
find this impossible. The sordid everyday world is too much with them. For 
them the practice of complete withdrawal of the mind from all outward things, 
even though it might be only for a few minutes every day, will be found to be 
of infinite use. Silent communion will help them to experience an undisturbed 
peace in the midst of turmoil, to curb anger and cultivate patience. 
Harijan 28-4-‘46, p. 109
 
Prayer is the key of the morning and the bolt of the evening. 
Young India, 23-1-‘30, p. 25
 
…I have given my personal testimony. Let everyone try and find that, as a result 
of daily prayer, he adds something new to his life, something with which 
nothing can be compared. 
Young India, 24-9-‘31, p. 274
 
No act of mine is done without prayer. Man is a fallible being. He can never be 
sure of his steps. What he may regard as answer to prayer may be an echo of 
his pride. For infallible guidance man has to have a perfectly innocent heart 
incapable of evil. I can lay no such claim. Mine is a struggling, striving, erring, 
imperfect soul. 
Young India, 25-9-‘24, p. 313
 
I claim to be man of faith and prayer, and even if I were cut to pieces, I trust 
God would give me the strength not to deny Him and to assert that He is. 
Young India, 8-12-‘27, p. 413
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91 Even if I am killed I will not give up repeating the names of Rama and Rahim, 
which mean to me the same God. With these names on my lips, I will die 
cheerfully. 
Harijan, 20-4-‘47, p. 118
 
God answers the prayer in His own way, not ours. His ways are different from 
the ways of mortals. Hence they are inscrutable. Prayer presupposes faith. No 
prayer goes in vain. Prayer is like any other action. It bears fruit whether we 
see it or not, and the fruit of heart, prayer is far more potent than action so 
called. 
Harijan, 29-6-‘47, p. 215
 
One with a wicked heart can never be conscious of the all-purifying presence of 
God. 
Harijan, 29-6-‘47, p. 209
 
When the mind is completely filled with His spirit one cannot harbor ill-will or 
hatred towards any one had reciprocally the enemy will shed his enmity and 
become a friend. It is not my claim that I have always succeeded in converting 
enemies into friends, but in numerous cases it has been my experience that 
when the mind is filled with His peace all hatred ceases. An unbroken 
succession of world teachers since the beginning of time have borne testimony 
to the same. I claim no merit for it. I know it is entirely due to God’s grace. 
Harijan, 28-4-‘46, p. 109
 
My uniform experience has convinced me that there is no other God than 
Truth… The only means for the realization of Truth is Ahimsa… The little 
fleeting glimpses, therefore, that I have been able to have of Truth can hardly 
convey an idea of the indescribable luster of Truth, a million times more 
intense than that of the sun we daily see with our eyes. In fact what I have The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 92 caught is only the faintest glimmer of that mighty effulgence. But this much I 
can say with assurance, as a result of all my experiments, that a perfect vision 
of Truth can only follow a complete realization of Ahimsa . 
To see the universal and all-pervading spirit of Truth face to face one must be 
able to love the meanest of creation as oneself. And man who aspires after that 
cannot afford to keep out of any field of life… 
Identification with everything that lives is impossible without self-purification; 
without self-purification the observance of the law of Ahimsa must remain an 
empty dream; God can never be realized by one who is not pure of heart. Self-
purification therefore must mean purification in all the walks of life. And 
purification being highly infectious, purification of oneself necessarily leads to 
the purification of one’s surroundings. 
But the path of self-purification is hard and steep. To attain to perfect purity 
one has to become absolutely passion-free in thought, speech and action; to 
rise above the opposing currents of love and hatred, attachment and repulsion. 
I know that I have not in me as yet that triple purity, in spite of constant 
ceaseless striving for it. That is why the world’s praise fails to move me, indeed 
it very often stings me. To conquer the subtle passions seems to me to be 
harder far than the physical conquest of the world by the force of arms. Ever 
since my return to India I have had experiences of the dormant passions lying 
hidden within me. The knowledge of them has made me feel humiliated though 
not defeated. The experiences and experiments have sustained me and given 
me the great joy. But I know that I have still before me a difficult path to 
traverse. I must reduce myself to zero. So long as a man does not of his own 
free will put himself last among his fellow creatures, there is no salvation for 
him. Ahimsa is the farthest limit of humility. 
An Autobiography, (1966), pp. 382-83
 
The instruments for the quest of truth are as simple as they are difficult. They 
may appear quite impossible to an arrogant person, and quite possible to an 
innocent child. The seeker after the truth should be humbler than the dust. The The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 93 world crushes the dust under its feet, but the seeker after truth should so 
humble himself that even the dust could crush him. Only then, and not till 
then, will he have a glimpse of Truth. 
Introduction to An Autobiography, (1966), p. 11
 
Who knows the perishable nature of flesh from the imperishable nature of the 
Spirit, instinctively knows that self-realization is impossible without self-
discipline and self-restraint. The body may either be a play-ground of passion, 
or a temple of self-realization. If it is the latter, there is no room there for 
libertinism. The Spirit needs must curb the flesh every moment. 
Young India, 3-6-‘26, p. 205
 
If the heart is pure, the grosser impulses of the body will have no scope. But 
what do we mean by the heart? And when may we believe the heart to be pure? 
The heart is nothing else but the Atman or the seat of the Atman. To imagine 
that it is pure is to imply perfect realization of the Atman and, in the presence 
of such realization, the cravings, of the senses are inconceivable. But ordinarily 
we attribute purity to the heart when we are but striving after such purity - 
Say, I love you. This only means that I try to cultivate such a feeling for you. If I 
have unceasing love, I should be a perfectly enlightened man, which, indeed, I 
am not. Anyone for whom I have true love will not misunderstand my intentions 
or words, nor will such a one bear ill-will to me. It follows from this that, when 
anyone looks upon us as his enemy, the fault is primarily ours… Perfect purity 
of heart, therefore, is the final stage. Before we have reached that stage, as 
we advance towards greater and greater purity, the cravings of the senses will 
subside in corresponding measure. 
Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. XII, p. 376
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 94 Not until we have reduced ourselves to nothingness can we conquer the evil in 
us. God demands nothing less than complete self-surrender as the price for the 
only real freedom that is worth having. 
Young India, 20-12-‘28, p. 420
 
Not truth simply as we ordinarily understand it, that as far as possible we ought 
not to resort to a lie; that is to say, not truth which merely answers the saying 
“Honesty is the best policy” implying that if it is not the best policy, we may 
depart from it. But truth, as it is conceived here, means that we have to rule 
our life by this law of Truth at any cost. In order to clarify the definition, I have 
drawn upon the celebrated illustration of the life of Prahlad. For the sake of 
Truth, he dared to oppose his own father, and he defended himself, not by 
retaliation, by paying his father back in his own coin, but in defence of Truth as 
he knew it, he was prepared to die without caring to return the blows that he 
received from his father or from those who were charged with his father’s 
instructions. Not only that; he would not even parry the blows. On the 
contrary, with a smile on his lips, he underwent the innumerable tortures to 
which he was subjected, with the result that at last Truth rose triumphant. Not 
that Prahlad suffered the tortures because he knew that some day or other in 
his very lifetime he would be able to demonstrate the infallibility of the law of 
Truth. The fact was there; but if he had died in the midst of tortures, he would 
still have adhered to Truth. That is the Truth which I would like to follow. 
There was an incident I noticed yesterday. It was trifling incident, but I think 
these trifling incidents are like straws which show which way the wind is 
blowing. It happened like this. I was talking to a friend who wanted to talk to 
me aside, and we were engaged in a private conversation. Another friend 
dropped in, and he politely asked whether he was intruding. The friend to 
whom I was talking said: “Oh, no there is nothing private here.” I felt taken 
aback a little, because as I was taken aside, I knew that so far as this friend 
was concerned, the conversation was private. But he immediately out of 
politeness, I would call it over-politeness, said that there was no private The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 95 conversation and that he (the other friend) could join. I suggest to you that this 
is a departure from my definition of Truth. I think that friend should have, in 
the gentlest manner possible, but still openly and frankly said, “Yes just now, 
as you rightly say, you would be intruding,” without givingthe slightest offence 
to the person if he was himself a gentleman and we are bound to consider 
everybody a gentleman unless he proves to be otherwise. But I may be told that 
the incident, after all, proves the genteelity of the nation. I think that it is 
over-proving the case. If we continue to say these things out of politeness, we 
really become a nation of hypocrites. I recall a conversation I had with an 
English friend. He was comparatively a stranger. He is principal of a college and 
has been in India for several years. He was comparing notes with me, and he 
asked me whether I would admit that we, unlike most Englishman, would not 
dare to say no when it was not that we meant. And I must confess that I 
immediately said yes; I agreed with that statement. We do hesitate to say no 
frankly and boldly, when we want to pay undue regard to the sentiment of the 
person whom we are addressing. In this Ashram1 we make it a rule that we 
must say no when we mean no, regardless of consequences. This then is the 
first rule.  
Ashram Observances in Action, (1959), pp. 127-30
 
Ahimsa 
Literally A himsa  means non-killing. But to me it has a world of meaning and 
takes me into realms much higher, infinitely higher, than the realm to which I 
would go if I merely understood by Ahimsa—non-killing. Ahimsa really means 
that you may not offend anybody, you may not harbor an uncharitable thought 
even in connection with one who may consider himself to be your enemy. Pray 
notice the guarded nature of this thought. I do not say “whom you consider 
your enemy,” but “who may consider himself your enemy.” For one who follows 
the doctrine of Ahimsa there is no room for an enemy; he denies the existence 
of an enemy. But there are people who consider themselves to be his enemies, 
and he cannot help it. So it is held that we may not harbor an evil thought even The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 96 in connection with such persons. If we return blow for blow, we depart from 
the doctrine of Ahimsa. But I go further. If we resent a friend’s action or the 
so-called enemy’s action, we still fall short of this doctrine. But when I say we 
should not resent, I do not say that we should acquiesce. By resenting I mean 
wishing that some harm should be done to the enemy, or that he should be put 
out of the way not even by any action of ours, but by the action of somebody 
else, or say by divine agency. If we harbor even this thought, we commit a 
breach of Ahimsa. Those who join the Ashram have literally to accept that 
meaning. That does not mean that we practice this doctrine in its entirety. Far 
from it. It is ideal which we have to reach, and it is an ideal to be reached even 
at this very moment I few were capable of doing so. But it is not a proposition 
in geometry to be learnt by heart; it is not even like solving difficult problems 
in higher mathematics; it is infinitely more difficult than that. Many of you 
have burnt midnight oil in solving those problems. If you want to follow out this 
doctrine, you will have to do much more than burn the midnight oil. You will 
have to pass many a sleepless night, and go through many a mental torture and 
agony before you can reach, before you can even be within measureable 
distance of this goal. It is goal, and nothing less than that, you and I have to 
reach, if we want to understand what religious life means. I will not say more 
on this doctrine than this; that a man who believes in the efficacy of this 
doctrine finds, in the ultimate stage when he is about to reach the goal, the 
whole world at his feet. Not that he wants the whole world at his feet, but it 
must be so. If you express your love— Ahimsa—in such a manner that it 
impresses itself indelibly upon your so-called enemy, he must return that love. 
Another thought which comes out of this is that under this rule there is no room 
for organized assassinations, and there is no room for murders even openly 
committed, and there is no room for any violence even for the sake of your 
country, and even for guarding the honour of precious ones that may be in your 
charge. After all that would be a poor defence of honour. The doctrine of 
Ahimsa tells us that we may guard the honour of those who are in our charge by 
delivering ourselves into the hands of the man who would commit the sacrilege. 
And that requires far greater physical and mental courage than the delivering The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 97 of blows. You may have some degree of physical power,—I do not say courage,—
and you may use that power. But after that is expended, what happens? The 
other man is filled with wrath and indignation, and you have made him more 
angry by matching your violence against his; and when he has done you to 
death, the rest of his violence is delivered against your charge. But if you do 
not retaliate but stand your ground between your charge and the opponent, 
simply receiving the blows without retaliating, what happens? I give you my 
promise that the whole of his violence will be expended on you, and your 
charge will be left unscathed. Under this plan of life there is no conception of 
patriotism which justifies such wars as you witness today in Europe. 
Ashram Observances in Action, (1959), pp. 130-134
 
Celibacy 
T
hose who want to perform national service, or those who want to have a 
glimpse of real religious life, must lead a celibate life, no matter whether 
married or unmarried. Marriage but brings a woman closer to the man, and they 
become friends in a special sense, never to be parted either in this life or in 
the lives that are to come. I do not think, that in our conception of marriage, 
our lust should necessarily enter. Be that as it may, this is what is placed 
before those who come to the Ashram . 
Ashram Observances in Action, (1959), p. 134
 
The world seems to be running after things of transitory value. It has no time 
for the other. And yet when one thinks a little deeper it becomes clear that it 
is the things eternal that count in the end. 
What is Brahmacharya1? It is the way of life which leads us to Brahma(God). It 
includes full control over the process of reproduction. The control must be in 
thought, word and deed. If the thought is not under control, the other two have 
no value. There is saying in Hindustani: “He whose heart is pure has the all 
purifying waters of the Ganges in his house.” For one whose thought is under The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 98 control, the other is mere child’s play. The Brahmachari2 of my conception will 
be healthy and will easily live long. He will not even suffer from so much as a 
headache. Mental and physical work will not cause fatigue. He is ever bright, 
never slothful. Outward neatness will be an exact reflection of the inner. He 
will exhibit all the attributes of the steadfast one described in the Gita. It need 
cause no worry if not one person is met with answering the description.  
Is it strange that one who is able completely to conserve and sublimate the 
vital fluid which has the potentiality of creating human beings, should exhibit 
all the attributes described above? Who can measure the creative strength of 
such sublimation, one drop of which has the potentiality of bringing into being 
a human life? Patanajali has described five disciplines. It is not possible to 
isolate any one of these and practice it. It may be posited in the case of Truth, 
because it really includes the other four. And for this age the five have been 
expanded into eleven. Acharya Vinoda has put them in the form of a Marathi 
verse: They are non-violence, truth, non-stealing, Brahmacharya , non-
possession, bread labour, control of the palate, fearlessness, equal regard for 
all religions, Swadeshi3 and removal of untouchability. 
All these can be derived from truth. But life is complex. It is not possible to 
enunciate one grand principle and leave the rest to follow of itself. Even when 
we know a proposition, its corollaries have to be worked out. 
It is well to bear in mind that all the disciplines are of equal importance. If one 
is broken all are. There seems to be a popular belief amongst us that breach of 
truth or non-violence is pardonable. Non-stealing and non-possession are rarely 
mentioned. We hardly recognize the necessity of observing them. But a fancied 
breach of Brahmacharya  excites wrath and worse. 
There must be something seriously wrong with a society in which values are 
exaggerated and underestimated. Moreover, to use the word Brahmacharya  in a 
narrow sense is to detract from its value. Such detraction increases the 
difficulty of proper observance. When it is isolated even the elementary 
observance becomes difficult, if not impossible. Therefore, it is essential that The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 99 all the disciplines should be taken as one. This enables one to realize the full 
meaning and significance of Brahmacharya . 
Harijan, 8-6-‘47, p. 180
 
Control of the Palate 
A man who wants to control animal passion does so mo re easily if he controls 
his palate. I am afraid this is a rather difficult observance. I am just now 
coming after having inspected the Victoria hostel. I saw there not to my 
dismay,—though it should be to my dismay,—but I am used to it now, that there 
are so many kitchens, not kitchens that are established in order to serve caste 
restrictions but kitchens that have become necessary in order that people can 
have the condiments and the exact weight of the condiments to which they are 
accustomed in the places from which they have come. And therefore we find 
that for the Brahmans themselves there are different compartments and 
different kitchens catering for the delicate tastes of all those different groups. 
I suggest that this is simply slavery to the palate, rather than mastery over it. I 
may say this. Unless we take our mind off from this habit, unless we shut our 
eyes to the tea shops and coffee shops and all these kitchens, unless we are 
satisfied with foods that are necessary for the maintenance of health, and 
unless we are prepared to rid ourselves of stimulating, heating and exciting 
condiments that we mix with our food, we shall certainly not be able to control 
the over-abundant and unnecessary stimulation that we may have. If we do not 
do that, the result naturally is that we abuse ourselves and we abuse even the 
sacred trust given to us, and we become inferior to animals. Eating, drinking 
and indulging in passion we share in common with the animals; but have you 
ever seen a horse or a cow indulging in the abuse of the palate as we do? Do 
you suppose that it is a sign of civilization, a sign of real life that we should 
multiply our eatables so far that we do not even know where we are and seek 
dish after dish until at last we have become absolutely mad and run after the 
newspaper sheets which give us advertisements about these dishes? The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 100  Ashram Observances in Action, (1959), pp. 134-35
 
Non-stealing 
I suggest that we are thieves in a way. If I take an ything that I do not need for 
my own immediate use and keep it, I steal it from somebody else. I venture to 
suggest that it is the fundamental law of Nature without exception, that she 
produces enough for our wants from day to day, and if everybody took enough 
for himself and nothing more, there would be no pauperism, there would be no 
man dying of starvation in this world. But so long as we have got this 
inequality, so long we are stealing, I am no socialist, and I do not want to 
dispossess those who have got possessions; but I do say that those of us who 
want to see light out of darkness have to follow this rule in their own lives. I do 
not want to dispossess anybody, for I should then be departing from the rule of 
Ahimsa. If somebody else possesses more than I do, let him. But so far as my 
own life has to be regulated, I do say that I dare not possess anything which I 
do not need. In India we have got millions of people living on one meal a day 
and that meal consisting of a Chapati4 with no fat spread on it and a pinch of 
salt. You and I have no right to anything more until these millions are clothed 
and fed better. You and I, who ought to know better, must adjust our wants, 
and even undergo voluntary starvation, in order that they may be fed and 
clothed. 
Ashram Observances in Action, (1959), pp. 136-7
 
Non-Possession 
This principle is really a part of Non-stealing. Jus t as one must not receive, so 
must one not possess anything which one does not really need. It would be a 
breach of this principle to possess unnecessary food-stuffs, clothing, or 
furniture. For instance, one must not keep a chair if one can do without it. In 
observing this principle one is led to a progressive simplification of one’s own 
life.  The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 101  Ashram Observances in Action, (1959), p. 113
 
Physical Labour 
Physical labour is essential for the observance of N on-stealing and Non-
possession. Man can be saved from injuring society, as well as himself, only if 
he sustains his physical existence by physical labour. Able-bodied adults must 
do all their personal work themselves, and must not be served by others, 
except for proper reasons. But they must at the same time, remember, that 
service of children, as well as of the disabled, the old and the sick, is a duty 
incumbent on every person who has the required strength. 
Ashram Observances in Action, (1959), p. 113
 
Swadeshi 
Swadeshi is an essential observance. I suggest that we are departing from one 
of the sacred laws of our being when we leave our neighbor and go out 
somewhere else in order to satisfy our wants. If a man comes from Bombay 
here and offers you wares, you are not justified in supporting the Bombay 
merchant so long as you have got a merchant at your very door, born and bred 
in Madras. That is my view of Swadeshi. In your village, so long as you have got 
your village barber, you are bound to support him to the exclusion of the 
finished barber who may come to you from Madras. If you find it necessary that 
your village barber should reach the attainments of the barber from Madras, 
you may train him to that. Send him to Madras by all means, if you wish, in 
order that he may learn his calling. Until you do that you are not justified in 
going to another barber. That is Swadeshi. So when we find that there are 
many things that we cannot get in India, we must try to do without them. We 
have to do without many things, which we may consider necessary; but believe 
me, when you are in that frame of mind, you will find a great burden taken off 
your shoulders, even as the Pilgrim did in the inimitable book, The Pilgrim’s 
Progress. There came a time when the mighty burden that the Pilgrim was 
carrying on his shoulders dropped from him, and he felt a freer man than he The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 102  was when he started on the journey. So will you feel freer men than you are 
now, immediately you adopt Swadeshi. 
Ashram Observances in Action, (1959), pp. 137-39
 
Fearlessness 
I found, throughout my wanderings in India, that Ind ia, educated India is seized 
with a paralyzing fear. We may not open our lips in public; we may not declare 
our confirmed opinions in public; we may hold those opinions and may talk 
about them secretly, but they are not for public consumption. If we had taken 
a vow of silence, I would have nothing to say. But when we open our lips in 
public, we say things we do not really believe in. I do not know whether this is 
not true of almost every public man who speaks in India. I then suggest to you 
that there is only one being,—if Being is the proper term to be used,—whom we 
have to fear, and that is God. When we fear  God, we shall fear no man, no 
matter how highly placed he may be. And if you want to follow the vow of 
Truth in any shape or form, you must be fearless. And so you find, in the 
Bhagwadgita , fearlessness is designated the first essential quality of a good 
man. We fear consequences, and therefore we are afraid to tell the truth. A 
man who fears God will certainly not fear any earthly consequence. Before we 
can aspire to understand what religion is, and before we can aspire to guide the 
destinies of India, do you not see that we should adopt this habit of 
fearlessness? Or shall we overawe our countrymen, even as we are overawed? 
We thus see how important fearlessness is. 
Ashram Observances in Action, (1959), pp. 139-40
 
Removing Untouchability 
Untouchability is a blot that Hinduism today carries  with it. I decline to believe 
that it has been handed to us from immemorial times. I think that this 
miserable, wretched, enslaving spirit of untouchability must have come to us 
when we were in the cycle of our lives at our lowest ebb, and that evil has still The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 103  stuck to us and it still remains with us. It is to my mind a curse that has come 
to us, and so long as that curse remains with us, so long I think we are bound to 
hold that every affliction that we labour under in this sacred land is a fit and 
proper punishment for this great crime that we are committing. That any 
person should be considered untouchable because of his calling passes one’s 
comprehension; and you, the student world who receive all this modern 
education, if you become a party to this crime, it were better that you 
received no education whatsoever. 
Ashram Observances in action, (1959), pp. 140-41
 
Silence 
I
t has often occurred to me that a seeker after Truth has to be silent. I know 
the wonderful efficacy of silence. I visited a Trappist monastery in South Africa. 
A beautiful place it was. Most of the inmates of that place were under a vow of 
silence. I inquired of the Father the motive of it and he said the motive is 
apparent : “We are frail human beings. We do not know very often what we 
say. If we want to listen to the still small voice that is always speaking within 
us, it will not be heard if we continually speak.” I understood that precious 
lesson. I know the secret of silence. 
Young India, 6-8-‘25, pp. 274-5
 
Experience has taught me that silence is part of the spiritual discipline of a 
votary of Truth. Proneness to exaggerate, to suppress or modify the truth, 
wittingly or unwittingly, is a natural weakness of man, and silence is necessary 
in order to surmount it. A man of few words will rarely be thoughtless in his 
speech; he will measure every word. 
An Autobiography, (1966), p. 46
 
Silence has now become both a physical and spiritual necessity for me. 
Originally it was taken to relieve the sense of pressure. Then I wanted time for The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 104  writing. After, however, I had practiced it for some time I saw the spiritual 
value of it. It suddenly flashed across my mind that that was the time when I 
could best hold communion with God. And now I feel as though I was naturally 
built for silence. 
Harijan, 10-12-‘38, pp. 373-74
 
Silence of the sewn-up lips is no silence. One may achieve the same result by 
chopping off one’s tongue, but that too would not be silence. He is truly silent 
who, having the capacity to speak, utters no idle word. 
Harijan, 24-6-‘33, p.5
 
Humility  
T
ruth is not to be found by anybody who has not got an abundant sense of 
humility. If you would swim on the bosom of the ocean of Truth you must 
reduce yourself to zero. 
Young India, 31-12-‘31, p. 428
 
The spirit of non-violence necessarily leads to humility. Non-violence means 
reliance on God, the Rock of Ages. If we would seek His aid, we must approach 
Him with a humble and contrite heart… We must act, even as the mango tree 
which droops as it bears fruit. Its grandeur lies in its majestic lowliness. 
Young India, 12-1-‘21, p. 13
 
Humility must not be here confounded with mere manners or etiquette. One 
man will sometimes prostrate himself before another, although his heart is full 
of bitterness against him. This is not humility, but cunning. A man may chant 
Ramanama6, or tell his beads all day long, and move in society like a sage; but 
if he is selfish at heart, he is not meek, but only hypocritical.  The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 105  A humble person is not himself conscious of his humility. Truth and the like 
perhaps admit of measurement, but not humility. Inborn humility can never 
remain hidden, and yet the possessor is unaware of its existence. The story of 
Vasistha and Vishvamitra furnishes a very good case in point. Humility should 
make the possessor realize, that he is as nothing. Directly we imagine ourselves 
to be something, there is egotism. If a man who keeps observances is proud of 
keeping them, they will lose much, if not all of their value. And a man who is 
proud of his virtue often becomes a curse to society. Society will not 
appreciate it, and he himself will fail to reap any benefit from it. Only a little 
thought will suffice to convince us, that all creatures are nothing more than 
mere atom in this universe. Our existence as embodied being is purely 
momentary; what are a hundred years in eternity? But if we shatter the chains 
of egotism, and melt into the ocean of humility, we share its dignity. To feel 
that we are something is to set up a barrier between God and ourselves; to 
cease feeling that we are something is to become one with god. A drop in the 
ocean partakes of the greatness of its parent, although it is unconscious of it. 
But it is dried up, as soon as it enters upon an existence independent of the 
ocean. We do not exaggerate, when we say that life on earth is a mere bubble. 
A life of service must be one of humility. He who would sacrifice his life for 
others has hardly time to reserve for himself a place in the sun. Inertia must 
not be mistaken for humility, as it has been in Hinduism. True humility means 
most strenuous and constant endeavor entirely directed towards the service of 
humanity. God is continuously in action without resting for a single moment. If 
we would serve Him or become one with Him, our activity must be as 
unwearied as His. There may be momentary rest in store for the drop which is 
separated from the ocean, but not for the drop in the ocean, which knows no 
rest. The same is the case with ourselves. As soon as we become one with the 
ocean in the shape of God, there is no more rest for us, nor indeed do we need 
rest any longer. Our very sleep is action. For we sleep with the thought of God 
in our hearts. This restlessness constitutes true rest. This never ceasing 
agitation holds the key to peace ineffable. This supreme state of total 
surrender is difficult to describe, but not beyond the bounds of human The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 106  experience. It has been attained by many dedicated souls, and may be attained 
by ourselves as well. 
From Yervada Mandir, (1957), pp. 45-48
 
1. A place for disciplined community living 
2. Celibacy; observance of chastity or continence in the quest of God. 
3. A celibate 
4. Literally of one’s own country; insistence on the use of goods made in one’s own 
country, preferably hand-made and those too of the neighbours first. 
5. Thin flat cake made of flour; unleavened bread. 
6. Literally, the name of Rama, recitation of God’s name 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 107   
CHAPTER 6 
A
N IDEAL MAN 
One who renounces all the cravings which torment the  heart and derives his 
contentment from within himself is said to be a Sthitprajna  or Samadhistha  
(one stable in spirit). He is unruffled in adversity, and he does not hanker after 
happiness. Pleasure and pain are felt through the five senses. Therefore this 
wise man draws his five senses away from sense objects even as a tortoise 
draws in his limbs. The tortoise withdraws into his shell when he apprehends 
danger. But in the case of human beings sense objects are ready to attack the 
senses at all times; therefore their senses must be always drawn in, and they 
should be ever ready to fight against sense objects. This is the real battle. 
Some people resort to self-mortification and fasting as weapons of defence 
against sense objects. These measures have their limited use. The senses do 
not make for sense objects so long as a man is fasting, but fasting alone does 
not destroy his relish for them. On the other hand that relish may be 
heightened when the fast is broken, and a man can get rid of it only with the 
grace of God. The senses are so powerful that they drag a man behind them by 
force if he is not on his guard. Therefore a man must always keep them under 
control. This end he can achieve only if he turns his eyes inward, realizes God 
Who resides in his heart and is devoted to Him. One who thus looks upon Him as 
his goal and surrenders his all to Him, keeping his senses in control, is a yogi 
stable in spirit. On the other hand if a man is not master of his senses, he is 
always musing on the objects of sense and conceives an attachment for them, 
so that he can hardly think of anything else. From this attachment arises 
desire; and when the desire is thwarted he gets angry. Anger drives him nearly 
mad. He cannot understand what he is about. He thus loses his memory, 
behaves in a disorderly manner and comes to an ignoble end. When a man’s 
senses rove at will, he is like a rudderless ship which is at the mercy of the gale 
and is broken to pieces on the rocks. Men should therefore abandon all desires 
and restrain their senses, so that these do not indulge in undesirable activity. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 108  The eyes then will look straight and that too only at holy objects; the ears will 
listen to hymns in praise of god or to cries of distress; hands and feet will be 
engaged in service. Indeed all the organs of sense and of action will be 
employed in helping a man to do his duty and making him a fit recipient of the 
grace of God. And once the grace of God has descended upon him, all his 
sorrows are at an end. As snow melts in the sunshine, all pain vanishes when 
the grace of God shines upon him and he is said to be stable in spirit. But if a 
man is not stable-minded, how can he think good thoughts? Without good 
thoughts there is no peace, and without peace there is no happiness. Where a 
stable-minded man sees things clear as daylight, the unstable man distracted 
by the turmoil of the world is as good as blind. On the other hand what is pure 
in the eyes of the worldly wise looks unclean to and repels the stable-minded 
man. Rivers continuously flow into the sea, but the sea remains unmoved; in 
the same way all sense objects come to the yogi, but he always remains calm 
like the sea. Thus one who abandons all desires, is free from pride and 
selfishness and behaves as one apart, finds peace. This is the condition of a 
perfect man of God, and he who is established therein even at the final hour is 
saved. 
Discourses on the Gita, (1960), pp. 11-13
 
The ideal of Sthitaprajna  (man whose understanding is secure), described in 
the Second Chapter of the Gita, is always before me and I am ceaseless in my 
efforts to reach that ideal. Whatever others might say of me, I know I am yet 
far from it. When one really reaches such a state, his very thought becomes 
charged with a power which transforms those around him. But where is that 
power in me now? I can only say that I am a common mortal, made of the same 
clay of which others are made, only ceaselessly striving to attain the lofty ideal 
which Gita holds before all mankind. 
Harijan, 23-3-‘47, p. 74
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 109  If we accept that ideal of a Sthitaprajna  i.e., “the man of steady wisdom” i.e., 
a Satyagrahi , we would not regard anybody as our enemy; we must shed all 
enmity and ill-will. That ideal is not meant for the select few—the saint or the 
seer only; it is meant for all. I have described myself as a scavenger having 
become one, not only in the name but in fact, while I was in Phoenix. It was 
there that I took up the bucket and the broom impelled by the inner urge to 
identify myself with the lowest of the low. As a humble fellow-toiler, then, let 
me bear witness that anyone, even a simple-minded villager who wants to and 
tries, can attain the state of mental equipoise described in the Gita verses. We 
all lose our sanity at times, though we may not care to admit it or be even 
aware of it. A man with a steady mind will never lose patience, even with a 
child, or indulge in anger or abuse. Religion, as taught in the Gita, is a thing to 
be practiced in this life. It is not a means for attaining merit in the next, 
irrespective of what you may do here. That would be a negation of religion. 
Harijan, 14-4-‘46, p. 78
 
The lesson of Bhagwad Gita  is meant not for those who have forsaken the 
world, but for every householder, irrespective of his birth and state. 
Everybody’s duty should be to attain the state described therein, and this can 
only be done if life is built on the rock of fearlessness. 
Harijan, 5-1-‘47, p. 479
 
Is it too difficult an ideal to follow? No. On the contrary, the conduct laid down 
in it is the only conduct worthy of the dignity of human beings. 
Harijan, 28-4-‘46, p. 111
 
I confess that, in spite of my trying to reach the state, I am far away from the 
condition of equipoise. 
Harijan, 10-8-‘47, p. 270
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 110  No one can attain perfection while he is in the body for the simple reason that 
the ideal state is impossible so long as one has not completely overcome his 
ego, and ego cannot be wholly got rid of so long as one is tied down by shackles 
of the flesh. 
Young India, 20-9-‘28, pp. 319
 
But it is impossible for us to realize perfect truth so long as we are imprisoned 
in this mortal frame.  
From Yervada Mandir, (1957), p. 5
 
The goal ever recedes from us. The greater the progress, the greater the 
recognition of our unworthiness. Satisfaction lies in the efforts not in the 
attainment. Full effort is full victory. 
Young India, 9-3-‘22, p. 141 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 111   
SECTION – II: MEANS AND ENDS 
C
HAPTER 7 
MEANS AND ENDS 
For me, it is enough to know the means. Means and en d are convertible terms 
in my philosophy of life. 
Young India, 26-12-‘24, p. 424
 
The means may be likened to a seed, the end to a tree, and there is just the 
same inviolable connection between there means and the end as there is 
between the seed and the tree. 
Hind Swaraj, (1952), p. 71
 
They say ‘means are after all means’. I would say ‘means are after all 
everything’. As the means so the end…… There is no wall of separation between 
means and end. Indeed the Creator has given us control (and that too very 
limited) over means, none over the end. Realization of the goal is in exact 
proportion to that of the means. This is a proposition that admits of no 
exception. 
Young India, 17-7-‘24, p. 236
 
Right conduct is not like Euclid’s right line. It is like a beautiful tree, not one of 
whose millions of leaves is like any other. Though therefore they are from one 
seed and belong to the same tree, there is none of the uniformity of a 
geometrical figure about any part of a tree. And yet we know that the seed, 
the branches and the leaves are one and the same. We know too that no 
geometrical figure can bear comparison with a full-blossomed tree in point of 
beauty and grandeur. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 112  Young India, 14-8-‘24, p. 267
 
Imagine a rectangular frame without a slate. The slightest rough handling of 
the frame would turn the right angles into acute and obtuse angles and if the 
frame was again rightly handled at one corner the other three would be a 
automatically turned into right angles. 
Harijan, 30-11-‘47, p. 447
 
Impure means result in an impure end….. One cannot reach truth by 
untruthfulness. Truthful conduct alone can reach Truth. Are not Non-violence 
and Truth twins? The answer is an emphatic ‘No’. Non-violence is embedded in 
Truth and vice versa . Hence has it been said that they are faces of the same 
coin. Either is inseparable from the other. Read the coin either way. The 
spelling of words will be different. The value is the same. This blessed state is 
unattainable without perfect purity. Harbors impurity of mind or body and you 
have untruth and violence in you. 
Harijan, 13-7-‘47, p. 232
 
“To work thou hast the right, never to the fruit thereof” is one of the golden 
precepts of the Gita. 
Harijan, 18-8-‘40 p. 254
 
We are merely the instruments of the almighty will and are therefore often 
ignorant of what helps us forward and what acts as an impediment. We must 
thus rest satisfied with a knowledge only of the means, and if these are pure, 
we can fearlessly leave the end to take care of itself. 
Satyagraha in South Africa, (1950), p. 318
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 113  The cleanest possible definition of the goal and its appreciation would fail to 
take us there, if we do not know and utilize the means of achieving it. I have 
therefore, concerned myself principally with the conservation of the means and 
their progressive use. I know if we can take care of them, attainment of the 
goal is assured. I feel too that our progress towards the goal will be in exact 
proportion to the purity of our means. 
This method may appear to be long, perhaps too long, but I am convinced that 
it is the shortest. 
Selections from Gandhi, (1957), pp. 36-7
 
However much I may sympathize with and admire worthy motives, I am an 
uncompromising opponent of violent methods even to serve the noblest of 
causes….. Experience convinces me that permanent good can never be the 
outcome of untruth and violence. Even if my belief is a fond delusion, it will be 
admitted that it is a fascinating delusion. 
Young India, 11-12-‘24, p. 406
 
I have often said that if one takes care of the means, the end will take will take 
care of itself. Non-violence is the means, the end for every nation Is complete 
independence. 
Harijan, 11-2-‘39, p. 8
 
My faith in the wise saying that what is gained by the sword will also be lost by 
the sword is imperishable. 
Harijan, 2-9-‘39, p. 260
 
By detachment I mean that you must not worry whether the desired result 
follows from your action or not, so long as your motive is pure, your means The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 114  correct. Really, it means that things will come right in the end if you take care 
of the means and leave the rest to Him. 
Harijan, 7-4-‘46, p. 72
 
Success or failure is not in our hands. It is enough we do our part well…. Ours is 
but to strive. In the end, it will be as He wishes. 
Harijan, 12-1-‘47, p. 490 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 115   
CHAPTER -8 
T
HE MEANING OF NON-VIOLENCE 
God can be found only through love, not earthly, but  divine. 
Harijan, 23-11-‘47, p. 425
 
Where love is, there God is also. 
Satyagraha in South Africa, (1950), p. 237
 
Ahimsa means Universal Love. 
From Yerwada Mandir, (1957), p. 10
 
Ahimsa means ‘Love’ in the Pauline sense, and yet something more than the 
‘Love’ defined by St. Paul, although I know St. Paul’s beautiful definition is 
good enough for all practical purposes. Ahimsa includes the whole creation, 
and not only human. Besides, ‘Love’ in the English language has other 
connotation too, and so I was compelled to use the negative word. But it does 
not, as I have told you, express a negative force, but a force superior to all the 
forces put together. One person who can express Ahimsa in life exercises a 
force superior to all the forces of brutality. 
Harijan, 14-3-‘36, p. 39
 
Non-violence is soul-force or the power of the Godhead within us. We become 
Godlike to the extent we realize non-violence. 
Harijan, 12-11-‘38, p. 326
 
 Ahimsa is merely a negative state of harmlessness, but it is a positive state of 
love, of doing good even to the evil-doer. But it does not mean helping the evil-The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 116  doer to continue the wrong or tolerating it by passive acquiescence. On the 
contrary, love—the active state of Ahimsa—requires you to resist the wrong 
doer by dissociating yourself from him, even though it may offend him or injure 
him physically. Thus if my Son lives a life of shame, I may not help him to do so 
by continuing to support him; on the contrary, my love for him requires me to 
withdraw all support from him although it may mean even his death. And the 
same love imposes on me the obligation of welcoming him to my bosom when 
he repents. But I may not by physical force compel my son to become good. 
That, in my opinion, is the moral of the story of The Prodigal son. 
Young India, 25-8-‘20, p. 2
 
In its positive form Ahimsa means the largest love, the greatest charity. If I am 
a follower of Ahimsa I must love my enemy. I must apply the same rules to the 
wrong-doer, who is my enemy or a stranger to me, as I would to my wrong-
doing father or son. This active Ahimsa necessarily includes Truth and 
fearlessness. As man cannot deceive the loved one, he does not fear or frighten 
him or her. Gift of life is the greatest of all gifts; a man who gives it in reality, 
disarms all hostility. He has paved the way for an honourable understanding. 
And none who is himself subject to fear can bestow that gift. He must, 
therefore, be himself fearless. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, (Fourth Edition).  
 
It is no non-violence if we merely love those that love us. It is non-violence only 
when we love those that hate us. I know how difficult it is to follow this grand 
Law of Love. But are not all great and good things difficult to do? Love of the 
hater is the most difficult of all. But, by the grace of God, even this most 
difficult thing becomes easy to accomplish if we want to do it. 
Selections from Gandhi, (1957), p. 17 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 117   
CHAPTER -9 
T
HE LAW OF HUMAN SPECIES 
The world is full of H imsa and Nature does appear to be ‘red in tooth and 
claw’. But if we bear in mind that man is higher than the brute, then is man 
superior to that nature. If man has a divine mission to fulfil, a mission that 
becomes him, it is that of Ahimsa. Standing as he does in the midst of Himsa, 
he can retire into the innermost depths of his heart and declare to the world 
around him that his mission in this world of Himsa is Ahimsa and only to the 
extent that he practices it does he adorn his kind. Man’s nature then he is not 
Himsa, but Ahimsa, for he can speak from experience his innermost conviction 
that he is not the body but Atman and that he may use the body only with a 
view to expressing the Atman only with a view to self-realization. And from 
that experience he evolves the ethics of subduing desire, anger, ignorance, 
malice and other passions, puts forth his best effort to achieve the end and 
finally attains complete success. Only when his efforts reach that 
consummation can he be said to have fulfilled himself, to have acted according 
to his nature. Conquest of one’s passions, therefore, is not super-human, but 
human, and observance of Ahimsa is heroism of the highest type, with no room 
therein for cowardice or weakness. 
Young India, 24-6-‘26, p. 230
 
Non-violence is not a cloistered virtue confined only to the Rishi1 and the cave-
dweller. It is capable of being practiced by the millions, not with full 
knowledge if its implications, but because it is the Law of our Species. It 
distinguishes man from the brute. But man has not shed the brute in him. He 
has to strive to do so. This striving applies to the practice of non-violence, not 
to the belief in it. I cannot strive to believe in a principle: I either believe in it 
or I do not. And if I believe in it, I must bravely strive to practice it. Ahimsa is 
an attribute of the brave. Cowardice and Ahimsa do not go together any more 
than water and fire. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 118  Harijan, 4-11-‘39, p. 331
 
I am not visionary. I claim to be a practical idealist. The religion of non-
violence is not meant merely for the Rishis and saints. It is meant for the 
common people as well. Non-violence is the Law of our Species, as violence is 
the Law of the Brute. The spirit lies dormant in the brute, and he knows no law 
but that of physical might. The dignity of man requires obedience to a higher 
law—to the strength of the spirit. The Rishis, who discovered the Law of non-
violence in the midst of violence, were greater geniuses than Newton. They 
were themselves greater warriors than Wellington. Having themselves known 
the use of arms, they realized their uselessness and taught a weary world that 
its salvation lay not through violence but through non-violence. 
Young India, 11-8-‘20, p. 3
 
1. Non-violence is the law of the human race and is infinitely greater than and 
superior to brute force. 
2. In the last resort, it does not avail to those who do not possess a living faith 
in the God of Love. 
3. Non-violence affords the fullest protection to one’s self-respect and sense of 
honour, but not always to possession of land or movable property, though its 
habitual practice does prove a better bulwark than the possession of armed 
men to defend them. Non-violence in the very nature of things is of no 
assistance in the defence of ill-gotten gains and immoral acts. 
4. Individuals or nations, who would practice non-violence, must be prepared 
to sacrifice (nations to the last man) their all except honour. It is, 
therefore, inconsistent with the possession of other people’s countries, i. e. 
modern Imperialism, which is frankly based on force for its defence. 
5. Non-violence is a power which can be wielded equally by all—children, 
young men and women or grown-up people, provided they have a living faith 
in the God of Love and have, therefore, equal love for all mankind. When The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 119  non-violence is accepted as the Law of Life, it must pervade the whole 
being and not be applied to isolated acts. 
6. It is a profound error to suppose that whilst the Law is good enough for 
individual, it is not for masses of mankind. 
Harijan, 5-9-‘36, p. 236
 
Consciously or unconsciously, we are acting non-violently towards one another 
in daily life. All well constructed societies are based on the Law of Non-
violence. I have found that life persists in the midst of destruction and, 
therefore, there must be a higher law than that of destruction. Only under that 
law would a well-ordered society be intelligible and life worth living. And, if 
that is the Law of Life we have to work it out in daily life. Whenever there are 
jars, wherever you are confronted with an opponent, conquer him with love. In 
this crude manner, I have worked it out in my life. That does not mean that all 
my difficulties are solved. Only I have found that this Law of Love has answered 
as the Law of destruction has never done. 
Young India, 1-10-‘31, p. 286
 
I claim that even now, though the social structure i s not based on a conscious 
acceptance of non-violence, all the world over mankind lives and men retain 
their possessions on the sufferance of one another. If they had not done so, 
only the fewest and the most ferocious would have survived. But such is not the 
case. Families are bound together by ties of love, and so are groups in the so-
called civilized society called nations. Only they do not recognize the 
supremacy of the Law of Non-violence. It follows, therefore, that they have not 
investigated its vast possibilities. 
Harijan, 22-2-‘42, p. 48
 
 Scientists tell us that without the presence of the cohesive force amongst the 
atoms that comprise this globe of ours, it would crumble to pieces and we The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 120  would cease to exist. And even as there is cohesive force in blind matter so 
must there be in all things animate; and the name for that cohesive force 
among animate beings is Love. We notice it between father and son, between 
brother and sister, friend and friend. But we have to learn to use that force 
among all that lives, and in the use of it consists our knowledge of God. Where 
there is Love, there is Life; hatred leads to destruction. 
Young India, 5-5-‘20, p. 7
 
All the saints of the world, ancient and modern, were each according to his 
light and capacity a living illustration of the Supreme Law of our Being. That 
the brute in us seems so often to gain an easy triumph is true enough. That, 
however, does not disprove the Law. It shows the difficulty of practice. How 
should it be otherwise with a Law which is as high as Truth itself? When the 
practice of the Law becomes universal, God will reign on earth as He does in 
Heaven. We know the earth, and we are strangers to the heaven within us. If it 
is allowed that for some the practice of love is possible, it is arrogance not to 
allow even the possibility of its practice in all the others. 
Harijan, 26-9-‘36, p. 260
 
The man who discovered for us law of Love was a far greater scientist than any 
of our modern scientists. Only our explorations have not gone far enough and so 
it is not possible for everyone to see all its workings. Such, at any rate, is the 
hallucination, if it is one, under which I am labouring. The more I work at this 
Law, the more I feel the delight in life, the delight in the scheme of this 
universe. It gives me a peace and a meaning of mysteries of Nature that I have 
no power to describe. 
Young India, 1-10-‘31, p. 287
 
The sum total of the experience of mankind is that men somehow or other live 
on.From which fact I infer that it is the Law of Love that rules mankind. Had The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 121  violence, i.e. hate, ruled us, we should have become extinct long ago. And yet 
the tragedy of it is that the so-called civilized men and nations conduct 
themselves as if the basis of society was violence. It gives me ineffable joy to 
make experiments proving that Love is the supreme and only Law of Life. Much 
evidence to the contrary cannot shake my faith. 
Harijan, 13-4-‘40, p. 90
 
This would is held together by bonds of love. History does not record the day-
to-day incidents of love and service. It only records incidents of conflict and 
wars. Actually, however, acts of love and service are much more common in 
this world than conflicts and quarrels. We find innumerable villages and towns 
flourishing in the world. If the world were always full of quarrel and discord, 
they could not possibly exist. 
Bapu’s Letters to Ashram sisters, (1960), p. 113
 
If we turn our eyes to the time of which history has any record down to our own 
time we shall find that man has been steadily progressing towards Ahimsa. Our 
remote ancestors were cannibals. Then came a time when they were fed up 
with cannibalism and they began to live on chase. Next came a stage when man 
was ashamed of leading the life of a wandering hunter. He, therefore, took to 
agriculture and depended principally on Mother Earth for his food. Thus, from 
being a nomad, he settled down to civilized stable life, founded villages and 
towns, and from member of a family he became member of a community and a 
nation. All these are signs of progressive Ahimsa and diminishing Himsa. Had it 
been otherwise, the human species should have been extinct by now, even as 
many of the lower species have disappeared. 
Harijan, 11-8-‘40, p. 245
 
Modern science is replete with illustrations of the seemingly impossible having 
become possible within living memory. But the victories of physical science The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 122  would be nothing against the victory of the Science of life, which is summed up 
in Love which is the Law of our Being. I know that it cannot be proved by 
argument. It shall be proved by persons living it in their lives, in utter disregard 
of consequences to themselves. There is no real gain without sacrifice. And 
since demonstration of the Law of Love is the realest gain, sacrifice too must 
be the greatest required.  
Harijan, 26-9-‘36, p. 260
 
If we believe that mankind has steadily progressed towards Ahimsa, it follows 
that it has to progress towards it still further. Nothing in this world is static, 
everything is kinetic. If there is no progression, then there is inevitable 
retrogression. No one can remain without the eternal cycle, unless it be God 
Himself. 
Harijan, 11-8-‘40, p. 245
 
1. A Seer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 123   
CHAPTER10 
T
HE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE 
I swear by non-violence because I know that it alone  conduces to the highest 
good of mankind, not merely in the next world but in this also. I object to 
violence because when it appears to do good, the good is only temporary, the 
evil it does is permanent. 
Young India, 21-5-‘25, p. 178
 
Non-violence is the greatest force at the disposal of mankind. It is mightier 
than the mightiest weapon of destruction devised by the ingenuity of man. 
Destruction is not the law of the humans. Man lives freely only by his readiness 
to die, If need be, at the hands of his brother, never by killing him. Every 
murder or other injury, no matter for what cause, committed or inflicted on 
another is a crime against humanity. 
Harijan, 20-7-‘35, p. 180
 
I have been practicing with scientific precision non-violence and its possibilities 
for an unbroken period of over fifty years. I have applied it in every walk of 
life, domestic, institutional, economic and political. I know of no single case in 
which it has failed, I have ascribed it to my imperfections. I claim no perfection 
for myself. But I do claim to be a passionate seeker after Truth, which is but 
another name of God. In the course of that search, the discovery of non-
violence came to me. Its spread is my life mission. I have no interest in living 
except for the prosecution of that mission. 
Harijan, 6-7-‘40, pp. 185-86
 
In this age of wonders no one will say that a thing or an idea is worthless 
because it is new. To say it is impossible because it is new. To say it is The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 124  impossible because it is difficult, is again not in consonance with the spirit of 
the age. Things undreamt of are daily being seen, the impossible is ever 
becoming possible. We are constantly being astonished these days at the 
amazing discoveries in the field of violence. But I maintain that far more 
undreamt of any seemingly impossible discoveries will be made in the field of 
non-violence. 
Harijan, 25-8-‘40, p. 260
 
Ahimsa is a science. The word ‘failure’ has no place in the vocabulary of 
science. Failure to obtain the expected result is often the precursor to further 
discoveries. 
Harijan, 6-5-‘39, p. 113
 
Non-violence is like radium in its action. An infinitesimal quantity of it 
embedded in a malignant growth, acts continuously, silently, and ceaselessly 
till has transformed the whole mass of the diseased tissue into a healthy one. 
Similarly, even a little of true non-violence acts in a silent, subtle, unseen way 
and leavens the whole society. 
Harijan, 12-11-‘38, p. 327
 
Superficially we are surrounded in life by strife and bloodshed, life living upon 
life. But some great seer, who ages ago penetrated the centre of Truth, said: It 
is not through strife and violence, but through non-violence that man can fulfill 
his destiny and his duty to his fellow-creatures.It is a force which is more 
positive than electricity and more powerful than even other. At the centre of 
non-violence is a force which is self-acting. 
Harijan, 14-3-‘36, p. 39 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 125   
CHAPTER 11 
Q
UALITIES OF VOTARIES OF NON-VIOLENCE 
True A himsa  would wear a smile even on death bed brought about by an 
assailant. It is only with that Ahimsa that we can befriend our opponents and 
win their love. 
Harijan, 2-3-‘40, p. 19
 
Non-violence is a weapon of the strong. With the weak it might easily be 
hypocrisy. Fear and Love are contradictory terms. Love is reckless in giving 
away, oblivious as to what it gets in return. Love wrestles with the world as 
with itself, and ultimately gains a mastery over all other feelings. My daily 
experience, as of those who are working with me, is that every problem would 
lend itself to solution if we are determined to make the Law of Truth and Non-
violence the Law of Life. For Truth and Non-violence are, to me, faces of the 
same coin. 
Young India, 1-10-‘31, p. 287
 
Every action is a resultant of a multitude of forces even of a contrary nature. 
There is no waste of energy. So we learn in the books on mechanics. This is 
equally true of human actions. The difference is that in the one case we 
generally know the forces at work, and when we do, we can mathematically 
foretell the resultant. In the case of human actions, they result from a 
concurrence of forces, of most of which we have no knowledge. But our 
ignorance must not be made to serve the cause of disbelief in the power of 
these forces. Rather is our ignorance a cause for greater faith. And non-
violence being the mightiest force in the world and also the most elusive in its 
working, it demands the greatest exercise of faith. Even as we believe in God in 
faith, so have we to believe in non-violence in faith. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 126  Harijan, 7-1-‘39, 417
 
A man cannot then practice Ahimsa and be a coward at the same time. The 
practice of Ahimsa calls forth the greatest courage. It is the most soldierly of a 
soldier’s virtues. 
The Modern Review, October, 1916
 
Ahimsa is a weapon of matchless potency. It is the summum bonum  of life. It is 
an attribute of the brave; in fact, it is their all. It does not come within the 
reach of the coward. It is no wooden or lifeless dogma, but living and a life-
giving force. It is the special attribute of the soul. That is why it has been 
described as the highest Dharma. 
Young India, 6-9-‘28, p. 301
 
My Ahimsa is neither maimed nor weak. It is all-powerful. Where there is 
Ahimsa there is Truth; and Truth is God. How He manifests Himself, I cannot 
say. All I know is that He is all-pervading and where He is, all is well. There is, 
therefore, one law for all. Where ever in the world Truth and Non-violence 
reign supreme, there is peace and bliss. That these exist nowhere shows that 
they are hidden from man for the time being. But they cannot disappear for 
ever. That faith must sustain the faithful.  
Harijan, 29-9-‘46, p. 332
 
The way of Non-violence and Truth is sharp as the razor’s edge. Its practice is 
more than our daily food. Rightly taken, food sustains the body; rightly 
practiced, non-violence sustains the soul. The body food we can only take in 
measured quantities and at stated intervals; non-violence, which is the spiritual 
food, we have to take in continually. There is no such thing as station. I have to 
be conscious every moment that I am pursuing the goal, and have to examine 
myself in terms of that goal. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 127  Harijan, 2-4-‘38, p. 65
 
Your Ahimsa to be effective, must shine through your speech, your action, your 
general behavior. A votary of Ahimsa must cultivate a habit of unremitting toil, 
Sleepless vigilance, ceaseless self-control. 
Harijan, 6-5-‘39, p. 113
 
The very first step in non-violence is that we cultivate in our daily life, as 
between ourselves, truthfulness, humility, tolerance, loving kindness. Honesty, 
they say in English, is the best policy. But in terms of non-violence, it is not 
mere policy. Policies may and do change. Non-violence is an unchangeable 
creed. It has to be pursued in face of violence raging around you. Non-violence 
with a non-violent man is no merit. In fact, it becomes difficult to say whether 
it is non-violence at all. But when it pitted against violence, then one realizes 
the difference between the two. This we cannot do unless we are ever wakeful, 
ever vigilant, ever striving. 
Harijan, 2-4-‘38, p. 65
 
Ahimsa magnifies one’s own defects and minimizes those of the opponent. It 
regards the mote in one’s own eye as beam, and the beam in the opponent’s 
eye as a mote. 
Harijan, 13-5-’39, p. 121
 
A votary of Ahimsa has, therefore, to be incorruptible, fair and square in his 
dealings, truthful, straightforward and utterly selfless. He must have also true 
humility. 
Harijan, 20-5-‘39, p. 133
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 128  Strange as it may appear, the fact remains that people find the easiest of 
things oftentimes to be the most difficult to follow. The reason, to borrow a 
term from the science of physics, lies in our inertia. Physicists tell us that 
inertia is an essential, and in its own place a most useful quality of matter. It is 
that alone which steadies the universe and prevents it from flying off at a 
tangent. But for it the latter would be a chaos of motion. But inertia becomes 
an incubus and a vice when it ties the mind down to old ruts. It is this kind of 
inertia which is responsible for our rooted prejudice that to practice pure 
Ahimsa is difficult. It is up to us to get rid of this incubus. The first step in this 
direction is firmly to resolve that all untruth and Himsa shall hereafter be 
taboo to us, whatever sacrifice it might seem to involve. For, the good these 
may seem to achieve is in appearance only, but in reality it is deadly poison. If 
our resolve is firm and our conviction clear, it would mean half the battle won, 
and the practice of these two qualities would come comparatively easy to us.  
Harijan, 21-7-‘40, p. 215
 
If the method of violence takes plenty of training, the method of non-violence 
takes even more training, and that training is much more difficult than the 
training for violence. The first essential of that training is a living faith in God. 
He who has a living faith in God will not do evil deeds with the name of God on 
his lips. He will not rely on the sword, but will rely solely on God. But you may 
say that a coward may also pass off as a believer in God, saying he does not use 
the sword. Cowardice is no sign of belief in God. The true man of God has the 
strength to use the sword, but will not use it knowing that every man is the 
image of God. 
Harijan, 14-5-‘38, p. 110
 
‘Enmity vanishes before Ahimsa’ is a great aphorism. It means that the greatest 
enmity requires an equal measure of Ahimsa for its abatement. Cultivation of 
this virtue may need long practice, even extending to several births. It does not 
become useless on that account. Travelling along the route, the pilgrim will The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 129  meet richer experiences from day to day so that he may have a glimpse of the 
beauty he is destined to see at the top. This will add to his zest. No one is 
entitled to infer from this that the path will be a continuous carpet of roses 
without thorns. A poet has sung that the way reach God accrues only to the 
very brave, never to the faint-hearted. 
Harijan, 14-12-‘47, p. 468
 
Non-violence, to be a potent force, must begin with the mind. Non-violence of 
the mere body without the co-operation of the mind is non-violence of the 
weak or the cowardly, and has, therefore, no potency. It is degrading 
performance. If we bear malice and hatred in our bosoms and pretend not to 
retaliate, it must recoil upon us and lead us and lead to our destruction. 
Young India, 2-4-‘31, p. 58
 
It takes fairly strenuous course of training to attain to a mental state of non-
violence. 
In daily life, it has to be a course of discipline though one may not like it, like 
for instance the life of a soldier. But I agree that unless there is a hearty co-
operation of the mind the mere outward observance will be simply a mask, 
harmful both to the man himself and to others. The perfect state is reached 
only when mind and body and speech are in proper co-ordination. 
Young India, 1-10-‘31, p. 287
 
This non-violence cannot be learnt by staying at home. It needs enterprise. In 
order to test ourselves we should learn to dare danger and death, mortify the 
flesh and acquire the capacity to endure all manner of hardships. He who 
trembles or takes to his heels the moment he sees two people fighting is not 
non-violent, but a coward. A non-violent person will lay down his life in 
preventing such quarrels. The bravery of the non-violent is vastly superior to The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 130  that of the violent. The badge of the violent is his weapon—spear, or sword, or 
rifle. God is the shield of the non-violent. 
Harijan, 1-9-‘40, p. 268
 
The alphabet of Ahimsa is best learnt in the domestic school, and I can say 
from experience that, if we secure there, we are sure to do so everywhere 
else. For a non-violent person, the whole world is one family. He will thus fear 
none, nor will others fear him. 
Harijan, 21-7-‘40, p. 214
 
Non-violence is not mere disarmament. Nor is it the weapon of the weak and 
the impotent. A child who has not the strength to wield the lathi does not 
practice non-violence. More powerful than all the armaments, non-violence is a 
unique force that has come into the world. He who has not learnt to feel it to 
be a weapon infinitely more potent than brute force has not understood its true 
nature. This non-violence cannot be ‘taught’ through word of mouth. But it can 
be kindled in our heart through the grace of God, in answer to earnest prayer. 
Harijan, 10-12-‘38, p. 377
 
Non-violence cannot be preached. It has to be practiced. 
Harijan, 20-3-‘37, p. 42
 
Man and his deed are two distinct things. Whereas a good deed should call forth 
approbation and a wicked deed disapprobation, the doer of the deed, whether 
good or wicked, always deserves respect or pity at the case may be. ‘Hate the 
sin and not the sinner’ is a precept which, though easy enough to understand, is 
rarely practiced, and that is why the poison of hatred spreads in the world. 
An Autobiography, (1966), p. 206
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 131  If one does not practice non-violence in one’s personal relations with others 
and hopes to use it in bigger affairs, one is vastly mistaken. Non-violence, like 
charity, must begin at home. But if it is necessary for the individual to be 
trained in non-violence, it is even more necessary for the nation to be trained 
likewise. One cannot be non-violent in one’s own circle and violent outside it. 
Harijan, 28-1-‘39, p. 441
 
If you really want to cultivate non-violence, you should take a pledge that, 
come what may, you will not give way to anger or order about members of your 
household or lord it over them. You can thus utilize trifling little occasions in 
everyday life to cultivate non-violence in your own person and teach it to your 
children. 
A pilgrimage for Peace, (1950), p. 90
 
I hold that non-violence is not merely a personal virtue. It is also a social 
virtue, to be cultivated like the other virtues. Surely, society is largely 
regulated by the expression of non-violence in its mutual dealings. What I ask 
for is an extension of it on a larger, national and international scale. 
Harijan, 7-1-‘39, p. 417
 
We have to make Truth and Non-violence not matters for mere individual 
practice, but for practice by groups and communities and nations. That, at any 
rate, is my dream. I shall live and die in trying to realize it. My faith helps me 
to discover new truths every day. Ahimsa is the attribute of the soul, and 
therefore, to be practiced by everybody in all the affairs of life. If I cannot be 
practiced in all departments, it has no practical value. 
Harijan, 2-3-‘40, p. 23
 
It follows therefore, that if non-violence becomes successfully established in 
one place, its influence will spread everywhere… The basic principle on which The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 132  the practice of non-violence rests is that what holds good in respect of oneself 
equally applies to the whole universe. 
Harijan, 12-11-‘38, p. 327
 
That non-violence which only an individual can use is not of much use in terms 
of society. Man is a social being. His accomplishments to be of use must be such 
as any person with sufficient diligence can attain. That which can be exercised 
only among friends is of value only as a spark of non-violence. It cannot merit 
the appellation of Ahimsa. 
Harijan, 14-12-‘47, p. 468
 
To practice non-violence in mundane matters is to know its true value. It is to 
bring heaven upon earth. There is no such thing as the other world. All words 
are one. There is no ‘here’ and no ‘there’. As Jeans has demonstrated, the 
whole universe including the most distant stars, invisible even through the most 
powerful telescope in the world, is compressed in an atom. I hold it, therefore, 
to be wrong to limit the use of non-violence to cave-dwellers and for acquiring 
merit for a favoured position in the other world. All virtue ceases to have use, 
if it serves no purpose in every walk of life. 
Harijan, 26-7-‘42, p. 248
 
The simplest things have the knack sometimes of appearing to us as the 
hardest. If our hearts were opened, we should have no difficulty. Non-violence 
is a matter of the heart. It does not come to us through any intellectual feat. 
Everyone has faith in God though everyone does not know it. For, everyone has 
faith in himself and that multiplied to nth degree is God. The sum total of all 
that lives is god. We may not be God but we are of God—even as a little drop of 
water is of the ocean. Imagine it torn away from the ocean and flung millions of 
miles away. It becomes helpless torn from its surroundings, and cannot feel the 
might and majesty of the ocean. But if someone could point out to it that it is The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 133  of the ocean, its faith would revive, it would dance with joy and whole of the 
might and majesty of the ocean would be reflected in it. Even so it is with all 
non-violent activities. 
Harijan, 3-6-‘39, p. 151
 
If one has pride and egoism, there is no non-violence. Non-violence is 
impossible without humility. My own experience is that whenever I have acted 
non-violently I have been led on it and sustained in it by the higher promptings 
of an Unseen Power. Through my own will I should have miserably failed. 
Harijan, 28-1-‘39, p. 442
 
I have learned this one lesson—that what is impossible with man is child’s play 
with God, and if we have faith in that Divinity which presides on the destiny of 
the meanest of His creation, I have no doubt that all things are possible; and in 
that final hope, I live and pass my time and endeavour to obey His will. 
Young India, 19-11-‘31, p. 361
 
I know the path. It is straight and narrow. It is like the edge of a sword. I 
rejoice to walk on it. I weep when I slip. God’s word is: “He who strives never 
perishes.” I have implicit faith in that promise. Though, therefore, from my 
weakness I fail a thousand times, I will not lose faith. 
Young India, 17-6-‘26, p. 215 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 134   
CHAPTER 12 
NON-VIOLENCE AND COWARDICE 
I do believe that, where there is only a choice betw een cowardice and 
violence, I would advise violence…. But I believe that non-violence is infinitely 
superior to violence, forgiveness is more manly than punishment. Forgiveness 
adorns a soldier. But abstinence is forgiveness only when there is the power to 
punish; it is meaningless when it pretend to proceed from a helpless creature. 
Young India, 11-8-‘20, p. 3
 
That non-violence can work to a certain extent in the hands of the weak is 
true. It has so worked with us. But when it becomes a cloak for our weakness, 
it emasculates us. Far better than emasculation would be the bravery of those 
who use physical force. Far better than cowardice would be meeting one’s 
death fighting. We were perhaps all originally brutes, and I am prepared to 
believe that we have become men by a slow process of evolution from the 
brute. We were thus born with brute strength, but we were born men in order 
to realize God who dwells in us. That indeed is the privilege of man, and it 
distinguishes him from the brute creation. But to realize God is to see Him in 
all that lives, i.e. to realize our oneness with all creation. This is impossible 
unless we voluntarily shun physical force and develop conscious non-violence 
that is latent in every one of us. This can only come out of strength. 
Harijan, 2-4-‘38, p. 65
 
Non-violence and cowardice are contradictory terms. Non-violence is the 
greatest virtue, cowardice the greatest vice. Non-violence springs from love, 
cowardice from hate. Non-violence always suffers, cowardice would always 
inflict suffering. 
Young India, 31-10-‘29, p. 356
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 135  Non-violence and cowardice go ill together. I can imagine a fully armed man to 
be at heart a coward. Possession of arms implies an element of fear, if not 
cowardice. But true non-violence is an impossibility without the possession of 
unadulterated fearlessness. 
Harijan, 15-7-‘39, p. 201
 
Strength does not come from physical capacity. It comes from an indomitable 
will.  
Young India, 11-8-‘20, p. 3
 
A small body of determined spirit fired by an unquenchable faith in their 
mission can alter the course of history. 
Harijan, 19-11-‘38, p. 343
 
Where there is fear there is no religion. 
Young India, 2-9-‘26, p. 308
 
Let us fear God and we shall cease to fear man.  
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, (1933), p. 330
 
Spirituality is not a matter of knowing scriptures and engaging in philosophical 
discussions. It is a matter of heart culture, of immeasurable strength. 
Fearlessness is the first requisite of spirituality. Cowards can never be moral. 
Young India, 13-10-‘21, p. 323 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 136   
Chapter 13 
WHAT IS SATYAGRAHA 
My goal is friendship with the world and I can combi ne the greatest love with 
the greatest opposition to wrong. 
Young India, 10-3-‘20, p. 5
 
Non-violence is ‘not a resignation from all real fighting against wickedness’. On 
the contrary, the Non-violence of my conception is a more active and more real 
fighting against wickedness than retaliation whose very nature is to increase 
wickedness. I contemplate a mental and therefore a moral opposition to 
immoralities. I seek entirely to blunt the edge of the tyrant’s sword, not by 
putting up against it a sharper edged weapon but by disappointing his 
expectation that I would be offering physical resistance. The resistance of the 
soul that I should offer instead would elude him. It would at first dazzle him 
and at last compel recognition from him, which recognition would not humiliate 
him but would uplift him. 
Young India, 8-10-‘25, p. 346
 
Having flung aside the sword, there is nothing except the cup of love which I 
can offer to those who oppose me. It is by offering that cup that I expect to 
draw them close to me. 
Young India, 2-4-‘31, p. 54
 
For the past thirty years I have been preaching and practicing Satyagraha . The 
principles of Satyagraha  as I know it today, constitute a gradual evolution. 
Satyagraha differs from Passive Resistance as the North Pole from the South. 
The latter has been conceived as a weapon of the weak and does not exclude 
the use of physical force or violence for the purpose of gaining one’s end, The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 137  whereas the former has been conceived as a weapon of the strongest and 
excludes the use of violence in any shape or form. 
The term Satyagraha  was coined by me in South Africa to express the force that 
the Indian there used for full eight years and it was coined in order to 
distinguish it from the movement then going on in the United Kingdom and 
South Africa under the name of Passive Resistance.  
Its root meaning is holding on to truth, hence Truth-force. I have also called it 
Love-force or Soul-force. In the application of Satyagraha  I discovered in the 
earliest stages that pursuit of truth did not admit of violence being inflicted on 
one’s opponent but he must be weaned from error by patience and sympathy. 
For what appears to be truth to the one may appear to be error to the other. 
And patience means self suffering. So the doctrine came to mean vindication of 
Truth not by infliction of suffering on the opponent but on one’s self. 
But on the political field the struggle on behalf of the people mostly consists in 
opposing error in the shape of unjust laws. When you have failed to bring the 
error home to the lawgiver by way of petitions and the like, the only remedy 
open to you, if you do not wish to submit to error, is to compel him by physical 
force to yield to you or by suffering in your own person by inviting the penalty 
for the breach of the law. Hence Satyagraha  largely appears to the public as 
Civil Disobedience or Civil Resistance. It is civil in the sense that it is not 
criminal. 
The lawbreaker breaks the law surreptitiously and tries to avoid the penalty, 
not so the civil resister. He ever obeys the laws of the State to which he 
belongs, not out of fear of the sanctions but because he considers them to be 
good for the welfare of society. But there come occasions, generally, rare, 
when he considers certain laws to be so unjust as to render obedience to them 
a dishonor. He then openly and civilly breaks them and quietly suffers the 
penalty for their breach. And in order to register his protest against the action 
of the lawgivers, it is open to hi m to withdraw his co-operation from the State 
by disobeying such other laws whose breach does not involve moral turpitude. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 138  In my opinion, the beauty and efficacy of Satyagraha  are so great and the 
doctrine so simple that it can be preached even to children. It was preached by 
me to thousands of men, women and children commonly called indentured 
Indians with excellent results. 
Young India, 14-1-‘20, p. 5
 
Satyagraha  is literally holding on to Truth and it means, therefore, Truth-force. 
Truth is soul or spirit. It is, therefore, known as soul force. It excludes the use 
of violence because man is not capable of knowing the absolute truth and, 
therefore, not competent to punish. The word was coined in South Africa to 
distinguish the non-violent resistance of the Indians of South Africa from the 
contemporary ‘passive resistance’ of the suffragettes and others. It is not 
conceived as a weapon of the weak.  
Passive resistance is used in the orthodox English sense and covers the 
suffragette movement as well as the resistance of the Non-conformists. Passive 
resistance has been conceived and is regarded as a weapon of the weak. Whilst 
it avoids violence, being not open to the weak it does not exclude its use if, in 
the opinion of a passive resister, the occasion demands it. However, it has 
always been distinguished from armed resistance and its application was at one 
time confined to Christian martyrs. 
Civil Disobedience is civil breach of unmoral statutory enactments. The 
expression was, so far as I am aware, coined by Thoreau to signify his own 
resistance to the laws of a slave State. He has left a masterly treatise on the 
duty of Civil Disobedience. But Thoreau was not perhaps an out and out 
champion of non-violence. Probably, also, Thoreau limited his breach of 
statutory laws to the revenue law i.e. payment of taxes. Whereas the term Civil 
Disobedience as practiced in 1919 covered a breach of any statutory and 
unmoral law. It signified the resister’s outlawry in a civil, i.e., non-violent 
manner. He invoked the sanctions of the law and cheerfully suffered 
imprisonment. It is a branch of Satyagraha.  The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 139  Non-co-operation predominantly implies with drawing of co-operation from the 
State that in the non-co-operator’s view has become corrupt and excludes Civil 
Disobedience of the fierce type described above. By its very nature, non-co-
operation is even open to children of understanding and can be safely practiced 
by the masses. Civil Disobedience presupposes the habit of willing obedience to 
laws without fear of their sanctions. It can, therefore, be practiced only as a 
last resort and by a select few in the first instance at any rate. Non-co-
operation, too, like Civil Disobedience is a branch of Satyagraha  which includes 
all non-violent resistance for the vindication of Truth. 
Young India, 23-3-‘21, p. 90
 
Carried out to its utmost limit, Satyagraha  is independent of pecuniary or other 
material assistance; certainly, even in its elementary form, of physical force or 
violence. Indeed, violence is the negation of this great spiritual force, which 
can only be cultivated or wielded by those who will entirely eschew violence. It 
is a force that may be used by individuals as well as by communities. It may be 
used as well in political as in domestic affairs. Its universal applicability is a 
demonstration of its permanence and invincibility. It can be used alike by men, 
women, and children. It is totally untrue to say that it is a force to be used only 
by the weak so long as they are not capable of meeting violence by violence. 
This superstition arises from the incompleteness of the English expression, 
passive resistance. It is impossible for those who consider themselves to be 
weak to apply this force. Only those who realize that there is something in man 
which is superior to the brute nature in him and that the latter always yields to 
it, can effectively be Satyagrahis . This force is to violence, and, therefore, to 
all tyranny, all injustice, what light is to darkness. In politics, its use is based 
upon the immutable maxim, that government of the people is possible only so 
long as they consent either consciously or unconsciously to be governed. We did 
not want to be governed Asiatic Act of 1907 of the Transvaal, and it had to go 
before this mighty force. Two courses were open to us—to us violence when we 
called upon to submit to the Act, or to suffer the penalties prescribed under The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 140  the Act, and thus to draw out and exhibit the force of the soul within us for a 
period long enough to appeal to the sympathetic chord in the governors or the 
law-makers. We have taken long to achieve what we set about striving for. That 
was because our Satyagraha  was not of the most complete type. All Satyagrahis  
do not understand the full value of the force, nor have we men who always 
from conviction refrain from violence. The use of this force requires the 
adoption of poverty, in the sense that we must be indifferent whether we have 
the wherewithal to feed or clothe ourselves. During the past struggle, all 
Satyagrahis , if any at all, were not prepared to go that length. Some again 
were only Satyagrahis  so called. They came without any conviction, often with 
mixed motives, less often with impure motives. Some even, whilst engaged in 
the struggle would gladly have resorted to violence but for most vigilant 
supervision. Thus it was that the struggle became prolonged; for the exercise of 
the purest soul-force, in its perfect form, brings about instantaneous relief. For 
this exercise, prolonged training of the individual soul is an absolute necessity, 
so that a perfect Satyagrahi  has to be almost, if not entirely, a perfect man. 
We cannot all suddenly become such men, but if my proposition is correct—as I 
know it to be correct—the greater the spirit of Satyagraha  in us, the better men 
will we become. Its use, therefore, is, I think indisputable, and it is a force, 
which, if it became universal would revolutionize social ideals and do away 
with despotisms and the ever growing militarism under which the nations of the 
West are groaning and are being almost crushed to death, and which fairly 
promises to overwhelm even the nations of the East. If the past struggle has 
produced even a few Indians who would dedicate themselves to the task of 
becoming Satyagrahis  as nearly perfect as possible, they would not only have 
served themselves in the truest sense of the term, they would also have served 
humanity at large. Thus viewed, Satyagraha  is the noblest and best education. 
It should come, not after the ordinary education in letters of children but it 
should precede it. It will not be denied, that a child before it begins to write its 
alphabet and to gain worldly knowledge, should know what the soul is, what 
truth is, what love is, what powers are latent in the soul. IT should be an The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 141  essential of real education that a child should learn, that in the struggle of life, 
it can easily conquer hate by love, untruth by truth, violence by self-suffering. 
Young India, 3-11-‘27, p. 369
 
Satyagraha is a relentless search for truth and a determination to reach truth. 
Young India, 19-3-‘25, p. 95
 
Non-violence in its dynamic condition means conscious suffering. It does not 
mean meek submission to the will of the evil-doer, but it means the putting of 
one’s whole soul against the will of the tyrant. Working under this law of our 
being, it is possible for a single individual to defy the whole might of an unjust 
Empire to save his honour, his religion, his soul and lay the foundation for that 
empire’s fall or its regeneration. 
Young India, 11-8-‘20, p. 3
 
There can be no Satyagraha  in an unjust cause. Satyagraha  in a just cause is 
vain, if the men espousing it are not determined and capable of fighting and 
suffering to the end, and the slightest use of violence often defeats a just 
cause. Satyagraha  excludes the use of violence in any shape or form, whether 
in thought, speech, or deed. Given a just cause, capacity for endless suffering 
and avoidance of violence, victory is a certainty. 
Young India, 27-4-‘21, p. 129
 
The conditions necessary for the success of Satyagraha  are: (1) The Satyagrahi  
should not have any hatred in his heart against the opponent. (2) The issue 
must be true and substantial. (3) The Satyagrahi  must be prepared to suffer till 
the end for his cause. 
Harijan, 31-3-‘46, p. 64
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 142  Since Satyagraha  is one of the most powerful methods of direct action, a 
Satyagrahi  exhausts all other means before he resorts to Satyagraha . He will, 
therefore, constantly and continually approach the constituted authority, he 
will appeal to public opinion, educate public opinion, state his case calmly and 
coolly before everybody who wants to listen to him, and only after he has 
exhausted all these avenues will he resort to Satyagraha . But when he has 
found the impelling call of the inner voice within him and launches out upon 
Satyagraha  he has burnt his boats and there is no receding. 
Young India, 20-10-‘27, p. 353
 
It is fundamental principle of Satyagraha  that the tyrant, whom the Satyagrahi  
seeks to resist has power over his body and material possessions, but he can 
have no power over the soul. The soul can remain unconquered and 
unconquerable even when the body is imprisoned. The whole science of 
Satyagraha  was born from a knowledge of this fundamental truth. 
Young India, 21-5-‘31, p. 118
 
Satyagraha is utter self-effacement, greatest humiliation, greatest patience 
and brightest faith. It is its own reward. 
Young India, 26-2-‘25, p. 73
 
Satyagraha  is gentle, it never wounds. It must not be the result of anger or 
malice. It is never fussy, never impatient, never vociferous. It is the direct 
opposite of compulsion. It was conceived as a complete substitute for violence. 
Harijan, 15-4-‘33, p. 8 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 143   
CHAPTER 14 
QUALIFICATIONS AND TRAINING OF A SATYAGRAHI 
Satyagraha  literally means insistence on truth. This insistence arms the votary 
with matchless power. This power or force is connoted by the word Satyagraha . 
Satyagraha , to be genuine, may be offered against parents, one’s wife or one’s 
children, against rulers, against fellow citizens, even against the whole world. 
Such a universal force necessarily makes no distinction between kinsmen and 
strangers, young and old, man and woman, friend and foe. The force to be so 
applied can never by physical. There is in it no room for violence. The only 
force of universal application can, therefore, be that of Ahimsa or Love. In 
other words it is soul-force. 
Love does not burn others, it burns itself. Therefore, a Satyagrahi , i.e., a civil 
resister will joyfully suffer even unto death.  
It follows, therefore, that a civil resister, whilst he will strain every nerve to 
compass the end of the existing rule, will do no intentional injury in thought, 
word or deed to the person of a single Englishman. This necessarily brief 
explanation of Satyagraha  will perhaps enable the reader t understand and 
appreciate the following rules: 
2. A Satyagrahi , i.e., a civil register will harbor no anger. 
3. He will suffer the anger of the opponent. 
4. In so doing he will put up with assaults from the opponent, never retaliate; 
but he will not submit, out of fear of punishment or the like, to any order 
given in anger. 
5. When any person in authority seeks to arrest a civil resister, he will 
voluntarily submit to the arrest, and he will not resist the attachment or 
removal of his own property, if any, when it is sought to be confiscated by 
the authorities. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 144  6. If a civil resister has any property in his possession as a trustee, he will 
refuse to surrender it, even thought in defending it he might lose his life. He 
will, however, never retaliate. 
7. Non-retaliation excludes swearing and cursing. 
8. Therefore a civil resister will never insult his opponent, and therefore also 
not take part in many of the newly coined cries which are contrary to the 
spirit of Ahimsa. 
9. A civil resister will not salute the Union Jack nor will he insult it or officials, 
English or Indians. 
10. In the course of the struggle if any one insults an official or commits an 
assault upon him, a civil resister will protect such official or officials from 
the insult or attack even at the risk of his life. 
Young India, 27-2-‘30, p. 69
In Satyagraha , it is never the numbers that count; it is always the quality, more 
so when the forces of violence are uppermost. 
Then it is often forgotten that it is never the intention of a Satyagrahi  to 
embarrass the wrongdoer. The appeal is never to his fear; it is, must be, always 
to his heart. The Satyagrahi ’s object is to convert, not to coerce, the wrong-
doer. He should avoid artificiality in all his doings. He acts naturally and from 
inward conviction. 
Keeping these observations before his mind’s eye, the reader will perhaps 
appreciate the following qualifications which, I hold, are essential for every 
Satyagrahi  in India: 
1. He must have a living faith in God, for He is his only Rock. 
2. He must believe in truth and non-violence as his creed and therefore have a 
faith in the inherent goodness of human nature which he expects to evoke 
by his truth and love expressed though his suffering. 
3. He must be leading a chaste life and be ready and willing for the sake of his 
cause to give up his life and his possessions. 
4. He must be a habitual Khadi-wearer and spinner. This is essential for India. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 145  5. He must be a teetotaler and be free from the use of other intoxicants in 
order that his reason may be always unclouded and his mind constant. 
6. He must carry out with a willing heart all the rules of discipline as may be 
laid down from time to time. 
7. He should carry out the jail rules unless they are specially devised to hurt 
his self-respect. 
Harijan, 25-3-‘39, p. 64
 
Some time ago I suggested the formation of a Peace Brigade whose members 
would risk their lives in dealing with riots, especially communal. The idea was 
that this Brigade should substitute the police and even the military. This reads 
ambitious. The achievement may prove impossible. Yet, if the Congress is to 
succeed in its non-violent struggle, it must develop the power to deal 
peacefully with such situations. 
Let us therefore see what qualifications a member of the contemplated Peace 
Brigade should possess. 
1. He or she must have a living faith in non-violence. This is impossible without 
a living faith in God. A non-violent man can do nothing save by the power 
and grace of God. Without it he won’t have the courage to die without 
anger, without fear and without retaliation. Such courage comes from the 
belief that God sits in the hearts of all and that there should be no fear in 
the presence of God. The knowledge of the omnipresence of God also means 
respect for the lives of even those who may be called opponents or goondas. 
This contemplated intervention is a process of stilling the fury of man when 
the brute in him gets mastery over him. 
2. This messenger of peace must have equal regard for all the principle 
religions of the earth. Thus, if he is a Hindu, he will respect the other faiths 
current in India. He must therefore possess a knowledge of the general 
principles of the different faiths professed in the country. 
3. Generally speaking this work of peace can only be done by local men in their 
own localities. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 146  4. The work can be done singly or in groups. Therefore no one need wait for 
companions. Nevertheless one would naturally seek companions in one’s 
own locality and form a local brigade. 
5. This messenger of peace will cultivate through personal service contacts 
with the people in his locality or chosen circle, so that when he appears to 
deal with ugly situations, he does not descend upon the members of a 
riotous assembly as an utter stranger liable to be looked upon as a suspect 
or an unwelcome visitor. 
6. Needless to say, a peace-bringer must have a character beyond reproach 
and must be known for his strict impartiality. 
7. Generally, there are previous warnings of coming storms. If these are 
known, the Peace Brigade will not wait till the conflagration breaks out but 
will try to handle the situation in anticipation. 
8. Whilst, if the movement spreads, it might be well if there are some whole 
time workers, it is not absolutely necessary that there should be. The idea is 
to have as many good and true men and women as possible. These can be 
had only if volunteers are drawn from those who are engaged in various 
walks of life but have leisure enough to cultivate friendly relations with the 
people living in their circle and otherwise possess the qualifications required 
of a member of the Peace Brigade. 
9. There should be a distinctive dress worn by the members of the 
contemplated brigade so that in course of time they will be recognized 
without the slightest difficulty. 
These are but general suggestions. Each centre can work out its own 
constitution on the basis here suggested. 
Harijan, 18-6-38, p. 152
 
Although Satyagraha can operate silently, it requires a certain amount of action 
on the part of a Satyagrahi: A Satyagrahi, for instance, must first mobilize 
public opinion against the evil which he is out to eradicate, by means of a wide 
and intensive agitation. When public opinion is sufficiently roused against a The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 147  social abuse even the tallest will not dare to practice or openly to lend support 
to it. An awakened and intelligent public opinion is the most potent weapon of 
a Satyagrahi. When a person supports a social evil in total disregard of 
unanimous public opinion, it indicates a clear justification for his social 
ostracism. But the object of social ostracism should never be to do injury to the 
person against whom it is directed. Social ostracism means complete non-co-
operation on the part of society with the offending individual; nothing more, 
nothing less, the idea being that a person who deliberately sets himself to flout 
society has no right to be served by society. For all practical purposes this 
should be enough. Of course, special action may be indicated in special cases 
and the practice may have to be varied to suit the peculiar features of each 
individual case. 
Young India, 8-8-29, p. 263
 
Ahimsa requires certain duties which can be done only by those with a trained 
physique. It is, therefore, most necessary to consider what kind of physical 
training a non-violent person should receive. 
Very few of the rules applying to a violent army will apply to a non-violent 
body. A violent army will not have its arms for show but for definitely 
destructive purposes. A non-violent body will have no use for such weapons and 
will, therefore, beat its swords into ploughshares and spears into pruning 
hooks, and will shrink from the thought of using them as lethal weapons. The 
violent soldier will be trained in the use of violence by being taught to shoot. 
The non-violent soldier will have no time for this pastime. He will get all his 
training though nursing the sick, saving those in danger at the risk of his own 
life, patrolling places which may be in fear of thieves and dacoits, and in laying 
down his life, if necessary, in dissuading them from their purpose. Even the 
uniforms of the two will differ. The violent men will wear a coat of mail for his 
protection, and his uniform will be such as can dazzle people. The uniform of 
the non-violent man will be simple, in conformity with the dress of the poor, 
and betokening humility. Its purpose will be just to keep him from heat and The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 148  cold and rain. A violent soldier’s protection will be his arms, no matter how 
much he takes God’s name. He will not shrink from spending millions on 
armaments. The first and last shield and buckler of the non-violent person will 
be his unwavering faith in God. And the minds of the two will be as poles 
asunder. The violent man will always be casting about for plans to work the 
destruction of his enemy and will pray to God to fulfill his purpose. The 
national anthem of the British people is worth considering in this connection. It 
prays to God to save the king, to frustrate the enemy’s Knavish tricks, and to 
destroy him. Millions of Englishmen sing this anthem aloud with one voice 
standing respectfully. If God is the Incarnation of Mercy, He is not likely to 
listen to such prayer, but it cannot but affect the minds of those who sing it, 
and in times of war it simply kindles their hatred and anger to white heat. The 
one condition of winning a violent war is to keep the indignation against the 
enemy burning fiercely. 
In the dictionary of the non-violent body there is no such word as an external 
enemy. But even for the supposed enemy he will have nothing but compassion 
in his heart. He will believe that no man is intentionally wicked, that there is 
no man but is gifted with the faculty to discriminate between right and wrong 
and that if that faculty were to be fully developed, it would surely mature into 
non-violence. He will therefore pray to God that He may give the supposed 
enemy a sense of right and bless him. His prayer for himself will always be that 
the spring of compassion in him may ever be flowing, and that he may ever 
grow in moral strength so that he may face death fearlessly. 
Thus since the minds of both will differ as the poles, their physical training will 
also differ in the same degree. 
We all know more or less what military training is like. But we have hardly ever 
thought that non-violent training must be of a different kind. Nor have we ever 
cared to discover whether in the past such training was given anywhere in the 
world. I am of opinion that it used to be given in the past and is even now being 
given in a haphazard way. The various exercises of Hatha Yoga-1 are in this 
direction. The physical training given by means of these imparts among other The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 149  things physical health, agility, and the capacity to bear heat and cold…. My 
reference to Hatha Yoga is meant only with a view to showing that this ancient 
type of non-violent training still exists, though I know that there is room in it 
for improvement. I do not know either that the author of this science had any 
idea of mass non-violence. The exercises had at their back the desire for 
individual salvation. The object of the various exercises was to strengthen and 
purify the body in order to secure control of the mind. The mass non-violence 
we are now thinking of applies to people of all religions and therefore the rules 
that may be framed must be such as can be accepted by all believers in 
Ahimsa. And then as we are thinking of a non-violent army, that is to say, of 
bringing into being a Satyagraha Sangha, we can but built a new accepting the 
old as our foundation. Let us then think of the physical training required by a 
Satyagrahi. If the Satyagrahi is not healthy in mind and body, he may have 
perhaps fail in mustering complete fearlessness. He should have the capacity to 
stand guard at a single spot day and night; he must not fall ill even if he has to 
bear cold and heat and rain; he must have the strength to go to places of peril, 
to rush to scenes of fire, and the courage to wander about alone in desolate 
jungles and haunts of death; he will bear, without a grumble, severe beating, 
starvation and worse, and will keep in his post of duty without flinching; he will 
have the resourcefulness and capacity to plunge into a seemingly impenetrable 
scene of rioting; he will have the longing and capacity to run with the name of 
God on his lips to the rescue of men living on the top storeys of building 
enveloped in flames; he will have the fearlessness to plunge into a flood in 
order to rescue people being carried off by it or to jump down a well to save a 
drowning person. 
This list can be extended ad libitum. The substance of it all is that we should 
cultivate the capacity to run to the rescue of people in danger and distress and 
to suffer cheerfully any amount of hardship that may be inflicted upon us. He 
who accepts this fundamental principle will easily be able to frame rules of 
physical training for Satyagrahis. I have a firm conviction that the very 
foundation of this training is faith in God. If that is absent, all the training one 
may have received is likely to fail at the critical moment. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 150  Let no one poohpooh my statement by saying that the Congress has many 
people who are ashamed to take the name of God. I am simply trying to state 
the view in terms of the science of Satyagraha as I have known and developed. 
The only weapon of the Satyagrahi is God, by whatsoever name one knows Him. 
Without Him the Satyagrahi is devoid of strength before an opponent armed 
with monstrous weapons. Most people lie prostrate before physical might. But 
he who accepts God as his only Protector will remain unbent before the 
mightiest earthy power. 
 As faith in God is essential in a Satyagrahi, even so in Brahmacharya. Without 
Brahmacharya the Satyagrahi will have no luster, no inner strength to stand 
unarmed against the whole world. Brahmacharya may have here the restricted 
meaning of conservation of the vital energy brought about by sexual restraint, 
and not the comprehensive definition I have given of it. He who intends to live 
on spare diet and without any external remedies, and still wants to have 
physical strength, has need to conserve his vital energy. It is the richest capital 
man can ever possess. He who can preserve it ever gains renewed strength out 
of it. He who uses it up, consciously or unconsciously, will ultimately be 
impotent. His strength will fail him at the right moment. I have often written 
about the ways and means of conserving this energy. Let the reader turn to my 
writings and carry out the instructions. He who lusts with the eye or the touch 
can never conserve his vital energy, nor the man who lusts after flesh-pots. 
Those who hope to conserve this energy without strict observance of the rules 
will no more succeed than those who hope to swim against the current without 
being exhausted. He who restrains himself physically can sins with his thoughts 
will fare worse than he who, without professing to observe Brahmacharya, lives 
the life of a restrained householder. For he who lusts with the thought will ever 
remain unsated and will end his life a moral wreck and burden on the earth. 
Such a one can never be a full Satyagrahi. Nor can one who hankers after 
wealth and fame. 
This is the foundation of the physical training for a Satyagrahi. The detailed 
structure of the course can easily be built in consonance with this foundation. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 151  It should now be clear that in the physical training of a Satyagrahi there is no 
room for lethal weapons like the sword or the spear. For far more terrible 
weapons that we have seen are in existence today, and newer once are being 
invented every day. Of what fear will a sword rid him who has to cultivate the 
capacity to overcome all fear-real or imaginary? I have not yet heard of a man 
having shed all fear by learning sword-play. Mahavir and other s who imbibed 
Ahimsa did not do so because they knew the use of weapons, but because, in 
spite of the knowledge of their use, they shed all fear. 
A slight introspection will show that he who has always depended on the sword 
will find it difficult to throw it away. But having deliberately discarded it he is 
likely to find his Ahimsa more lasting than that of him who, not knowing its use, 
fancies he will not fear it. But that does not mean that in order to be truly non-
violent one must beforehand possess and know the use of arms. By parity of 
reasoning, one might say that only a thief can be honest, only a diseased person 
can be healthy, and only a dissolute person can be a Brahamachari. The fact is 
that we have formed the habit of thinking along traditional grooves and will not 
get out of them. And as we cannot take a detached view, we cannot draw the 
right conclusions and get caught in delusive snares.  
Harijan, 13-10-40, pp. 318-19
 
Our motto must ever be conversion by gentle persuasion and constant appeal to 
the head and the heart. We must therefore be ever courteous and patient with 
those who do not see eye to eye with us. 
Young India, 29-9-21, p. 306
 
A Satyagrahi bids goodbye to fear. He is therefore never afraid of trusting the 
opponent. Even if the opponent plays him false twenty times, the Satyagrahi 
ready to trust him the twenty-first times, for an implicit trust in human nature 
is the very essence of his creed. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 152  The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi, (1957), p. 170
 
The Satyagrahi, whilst he is ever ready for fight, must be equally eager for 
peace. He must welcome any honourable opportunity for peace. 
Young India, 19-3-31, p.40
 
The Satyagrahi never misses, can never miss, a chance of compromise on 
honourable terms, it being always assumed that , in the event of failure, he is 
ever ready to offer battle. He needs no previous preparation; his cards are 
always on the table. 
Young India, 16-4-31, p. 77
 
Immediately we begin to think of things as our opponents’ think of them, we 
shall be able to do them full justice. I know that this requires a detached state 
of mind, and it is a state very difficult to reach. Nevertheless for a Satyagrahi it 
is absolutely essential. Three fourths of the miseries and misunderstandings in 
the world will disappear, if we step into the shoes of our adversaries and 
understand their standpoint. We will then agree with our adversaries quickly or 
think of them charitably. 
Young India, 19-3-25, p. 95
 
I have always held that it is only when one sees one’s own mistakes with a 
convex lens, and does just the reverse in the case of others, that one is able to 
arrive at a just relative estimate of the two. I further believe that a scrupulous 
and conscientious observance of this rule is necessary for one who wants to be 
a Satyagrahi.  
An Autobiography, (1966), p. 356
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 153  There is no time-limit for a Satyagrahi nor is there a limit to his capacity for 
suffering. Hence there is no such thing as defeat in Satyagraha. 
Young India, 19-2-25, p. 61
 
But if you believe in the efficacy of Satyagraha, you will rejoice in this slow 
torture and suffering, and you will not feel the discomfort of your position as 
you go and sit in the boiling sun from day to day. If you have faith in the cause 
and the means and in God the hot sun will be cool for you. You must not be 
tried and say, ‘how long’ and never get irritated. 
Not a single minute should be wasted in idle conversation, but we must be 
absorbed in the work before us, and if every one of us works in that spirit you 
will see that there is pleasure in the work itself. 
You may not waste a grain of rice or a scrap of paper, and similarly a minute of 
your time. It is not ours. It belongs to the nation and we are trustees for the 
use of it. 
Young India, 19-3-25, p. 95
 
My advice is Satyagraha first and Satyagraha last. There is no other or better 
road to freedom. 
Harijan, 15-9-46, p. 312
 
The conviction has been growing upon me, that things of fundamental 
importance to the people are not secured by reason alone, but have to be 
purchased with their suffering. Suffering is the law of human beings; war is the 
law of the jungle. But suffering is infinitely more powerful than the law of the 
jungle for converting the opponent and opening his ears, which are otherwise 
shut, to the voice of reason. 
Young India, 5-11-31, p. 341
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 154  True suffering does not know itself and never calculates. It brings its own joy 
which surpasses all other joys. 
Young India, 19-3-31, p. 41
 
A Satyagrahi has nothing to do with victory. He is sure of it, but he has also to 
know that it comes from God. His is but to suffer. 
Young India, 13-10-27, p. 345
 
Self-sacrifice of one innocent man is a million times more potent than the 
sacrifice of a million men who die in the act of killing others. The willing 
sacrifice of the innocent is the most powerful retort to insolent tyranny that 
has yet been conceived by God or man. 
Young India, 12-2-25, p. 60
 
1. A system of yoga in which he exercises of physical postures poses and breathing are 
chiefly treated to discipline body and mind towards self-realization. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 155   
CHAPTER -15 
NON-CO-OPERATION 
Non-co-operation is not a passive state, it is an in tensely active state, more 
active than physical resistance or violence. Passive resistance is a misnomer. 
Non-co-operation in the sense used by me must be non-violent and therefore, 
neither punitive, nor vindictive nor based on malice, ill will or hatred. 
Young India, 25-8-20, p. 2
 
My Non-co-operation, I hold, is not only not a way of violence, but may be an 
act of love, if love is the motive that has prompted my refusal. The fact is that 
all Non-co-operation is not violent, and Non-violent Non-co-operation can never 
be an act of violence. It may not be always an act of love. For love is an active 
quality which cannot always be inferred from the act itself. A surgeon may 
perform a most successful operation, and yet he may have no love for his 
patient…. 
Non-co-operation is not violence when the refusal of the restraint is a right and 
a duty, even though by reason of its performance some people may have to 
suffer. It will be an act of love when non-cooperation is restored to solely for 
the good of the wrong doer. 
Young India, 10-4-24, p. 122
 
The spirit of non-violence necessarily leads to humility. Non-violence means 
reliance of God, the Rock of ages. If we would seek His aid, we must approach 
Him with a humble and a contrite heart…. We must act, even as the mango tree 
which droops as it bears fruit, its grandeur lies in its majestic lowliness…. 
A non-co-cooperationist strives to compel attention and to set an example not 
by his violence, but by his unobtrusive humility. He allows his solid action to 
speak for his creed. His strength lies in his reliance upon the correctness of his 
position. And the conviction of it grows most in his opponent when he least The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 156  interposes his speech between his action and his opponent. Speech, especially 
when it is haughty, betrays want of confidence and it makes one’s opponent 
sceptical about the reality of the act itself. Humility, therefore, is the key to 
quick success. 
Young India, 12-1-21, p. 13
 
Public opposition is effective only where there is strength behind it. What does 
a son do when he objects to some action of his father? He requests the father 
to desist from the objectionable course, i.e. presents respectful petitions. If 
the father does not agree in spite of repeated prayers, he non-cooperates with 
him to the extent even of leaving the paternal roof. This is the pure justice. 
Where father and son are uncivilized, they quarrel, abuse each other and often 
even come to blows. An obedient son is ever modest, ever peaceful and ever 
loving. It is only his love which on due occasion compels him to non-co-
operate.The father himself understands this loving non-co-operation. He cannot 
endure abandonment by or separation from the son, is distressed at heart and 
repents. Not that it always happens thus. But the son’s duty of non-co-
operation is clear. 
Such non-co-operation is possible between a prince and his people. In particular 
circumstances it may be the people’s duty. Such circumstances can exist only 
where the latter are by nature fearless and are lovers of liberty. They generally 
appreciate the laws of the State and obey them voluntarily without the fear of 
punishment. Reasoned and willing obedience to the laws of the State is the first 
lesson in non-co-operation. 
The second is that of tolerance. We must tolerate many laws of the State, even 
when they are inconvenient. A son may not approve of some orders of the 
father and yet he obeys them. It is only when they are unworthy of tolerance 
and immoral that he disobeys them. The father will at once understand such 
respectful disobedience. In the same way it is only when a people have proved 
their active loyalty by obeying the many laws of the state that they acquire the 
right of Civil Disobedience. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 157  The third lesson is that of suffering. He who has not the capacity of suffering 
cannot non-co-operate. He who has not learnt to sacrifice his property and 
even his family when necessary can never non-co-operate. It is possible that a 
prince enraged by non-co-operation will inflict all manner of punishments. 
There lies the test of love, patience, and strength. He who is not ready to 
undergo the fiery ordeal cannot non-co-operate. A whole people cannot be 
considered fit or ready for non-co-operation when only an individual or two 
have mastered these three lessons. A large number of the people must be thus 
prepared before they can non-co-operate. The result of hasty non-co-operation 
can only lead to harm. Some patriotic young men who do not understand the 
limitations noted by me grow impatient. Previous preparation is needed for 
non-co-operation as it is for all importance things. A man cannot become a non-
co-operator by merely wishing to be one. Discipline is obligatory. 
Young India, 8-1-25, p. 14
 
Non-co-operation, when its limitations are not recognized, becomes a license 
instead of being a duty and, therefore, becomes a crime. The dividing line 
between right and wrong is often so thin as to become indistinguishable. But it 
is a line that is breakable and unmistakable. 
What is, then, the difference between those who find themselves in jails for 
being in the right, and those who are there for being in the wrong?Both wear 
often the same dress, eat the same food and are subject outwardly to the same 
discipline. But while the latter submit to discipline most unwillingly and would 
commit a breach of it secretly, and even openly if they could, the former will 
willingly and to the best of their ability conform to jail discipline and prove 
worthier and more serviceable to their cause than when they are outside. 
Indeed, whilst on the one hand Civil Disobedience authorizes disobedience of 
unjust laws or unmoral laws of a State which one seeks to overthrow, it 
requires meek and willing submission to the penalty of disobedience and , 
therefore, cheerful acceptance of the jail discipline and its attendant 
hardships. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 158  It is now, therefore, clear that civil resister’s resistance ceases and his 
obedience is resumed as soon as he is under confinement. In confinement, he 
claims no privileges because of the civility of his disobedience. Inside the jail, 
by his exemplary conduct he reforms even the criminals surrounding him, he 
softens the hearts if jailors and others in authority, such meek behaviour 
springing from strength and knowledge ultimately dissolves the tyranny of the 
tyrant. It is for this reason that I claim that voluntary suffering is the quickest 
and the best remedy for the removal of abuses and justices. 
Young India, 29-12-21, p. 434
 
Non-violence is the most vital and integral part of Non-co-operation. We may 
fail in everything else, and still continue our battle if we remained non-violent. 
But we capitulate miserably, if we fail in adhering to non-violence…. Any 
violence on our part must be a token of our stupidity, ignorance and impotent 
rage. To exercise restraint under the gravest provocation is the truest mark of 
soldiership. The veriest tyro in the art of war knows, that he must avoid the 
ambushes of his adversary. And every provocation is a dangerous ambush into 
which we must resolutely refuse to walk. 
Young India, 28-7-21, p. 237
 
I consider non-co-operation to be such a powerful and pure instrument, that if 
it is enforced in an earnest spirit, it will be like seeking first the Kingdom of 
God and everything else following as a matter of course. People will have then 
realized their true power. They would have learnt the value of discipline, self-
control, joint action, non-violence, organization and everything else that goes 
to make a nation great and good, and not merely great. 
Young India, 2-6-20, p. 3 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 159   
CHAPTER -16 
CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE 
Non-co-operation and civil disobedience are but diff erent branches of the same 
tree called Satyagraha. 
Young India, 26-12-24, p. 429
 
Every Satyagrahi was bound to resist all those laws which he considered to be 
unjust and which were not of a criminal character, in order to bend the 
Government to the will of the people. 
Young India, 21-1-20, p. 3
 
If I find that even my father has imposed upon me a law which is repugnant to 
my conscience, I think it is the least drastic course that I could adopt be 
respectfully telling him that I cannot obey it. By that course I do nothing but 
justice to my father… I have myself followed that course with the greatest 
advantage and I have preached that ever since. If it is not disrespectful to say 
so to my father, it is not so to say so to a friend and for that matter to my 
Government.  
Young India, 21-1-20, p. 4
 
Mass civil disobedience stands on a different footing. It can only be tried in a 
calm atmosphere. It must be the calmness of strength not weakness, of 
knowledge not ignorance. Individual civil disobedience may be and often is 
vicarious. Mass civil disobedience may be and often is selfish in the sense that 
individuals expect personal gain from their disobedience. Thus in South Africa, 
Kallenbach and Polak offered vicarious civil disobedience. They had nothing to 
gain. Thousands offered it because they expected personal gain also in the 
shape, say, of the removal of the annual poll-tax levied upon ex-indentured The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 160  men and their wives and grown-up children. It is sufficient in mass civil 
disobedience if the resister understand the working of the doctrine… 
We must dismiss the idea of overawing the Government by huge demonstrations 
every time someone is arrested. On the contrary, we must treat arrest as the 
normal condition of the life of a non-co-operator. For we must seek arrest and 
imprisonment, as a soldier who goes to battle seeks death. We expect to bear 
down the opposition of the Government by courting and not by avoiding 
imprisonment, even though it be by showing our supposed readiness to be 
arrested and imprisoned en masse. Civil disobedience then emphatically means 
our desire to surrender to a single unarmed policeman. Our triumph consists in 
thousands being led to the prisons like lambs to the slaughter house. If the 
lambs of the world had been willingly led, they would have long ago saved 
themselves from the butcher’s knife. Our triumph consists again in being 
imprisoned for no wrong whatsoever. The greater our innocence, the greater 
our strength and the swifter our victory. 
As it is, this Government is cowardly, we are afraid of imprisonment. The 
Government takes advantage of our fear of goals. If only our men and women 
welcome goals as health resorts, we will cease to worry about the dear ones 
put in goals which our countrymen in South Africa used to nickname His 
Majesty’s Hotels. 
We have too long been mentally disobedient to the laws of the State and have 
too often surreptitiously evaded them, to be fit all of a sudden for civil 
disobedience. Disobedience to be civil has to be open and non-violent. 
Complete civil disobedience is a state of peaceful rebellion-a refusal to obey 
every single State made law. It is certainly more dangerous than an armed 
rebellion. For it can never be put down if the civil resisters are prepared to 
face extreme hardships. It is based upon an implicit belief in the absolute 
efficiency of innocent suffering. By noiselessly going to prison a civil resister 
ensures a calm atmosphere. The wrong-doer wearies of wrong-doing in the 
absence of resistance. All pleasure is lost when the victim betrays no 
resistance. A full grasp of the conditions of successful civil resistance is The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 161  necessary at least on the part of the representatives of the people before we 
can launch out on an enterprise of such magnitude. The quickest remedies are 
always fraught with the greatest danger and require the utmost skill in handling 
them. 
Young India, 4-8-21, p. 244
 
I wish I could persuade everybody that civil disobedience is the inherent right 
of a citizen. He dare not give it up without ceasing to be a man. Civil 
disobedience is never followed by anarchy. Criminal disobedience can lead to 
it. Every state puts down criminal disobedience by force. It perishes, if it does 
not. But to put down civil disobedience is to attempt to imprison conscience. 
Civil disobedience can only lead to strength and purity. A civil resister never 
uses arms and hence he is harmless to a State that is at all willing to listen to 
the voice of public opinion. He is dangerous for an autocratic State, for he 
brings about its fall by engaging public opinion upon the matter for which he 
resists the state. Civil disobedience therefore becomes a sacred duty when the 
State has become lawless, or which is the same thing, corrupt. And a citizen 
that barters with such a State shares its corruption or lawlessness. 
It is therefore possible to question the wisdom of applying civil disobedience in 
respect of a particular act or law; it is possible to advise delay and caution. But 
the right itself cannot be allowed to be questioned. It is a birthright that 
cannot be surrendered without surrender of one’s self-respect. 
At the same time that the right of civil disobedience is insisted upon, it s used 
must be guarded by all conceivable restrictions. Every possible provision should 
be made against an out outbreak of violence or general lawlessness. Its area as 
well as its scope should also be limited to the barest necessity of the case. 
Young India, 5-1-22, p. 5
 
We dare not pin our faith solely on civil disobedience. It is like the use of a 
knife to be used most sparingly if at all. A man who cuts away without ceasing The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 162  cuts at the very root, and finds himself without the substance he was trying to 
reach by cutting off the superficial hard crust. The use of civil disobedience 
will be healthy, necessary, and effective only if we otherwise conform to the 
laws of all growth. We must therefore give its full and therefore greater value 
to the adjective ‘civil’ than to ‘disobedience’. Disobedience without civility, 
discipline, discrimination, non-violence is certain destruction. Disobedience 
combined with love is the living water of life. Civil disobedience is a beautiful 
variant to signify growth, it is not discordance which spells death. 
Young India, 5-1-22, p. 3
 
Civil disobedience asks for and needs not a single farthing for its support. It 
needs and asks for stout hearts with a faith that will not flinch from any danger 
and will shine the brightness in the face of severest trial. Civil disobedience is a 
terrifying synonym for suffering. But it is better often to understand the 
terrible nature of a thing if people will truly appreciate its benignant 
counterpat. Disobedience is a right that belongs to every human being and it 
becomes a sacred duty when it springs from civility, or, which is the same 
thing, love. 
Young India, 1-4-26, p. 122
 
What we all are after is mass civil disobedience. It cannot be made. It must be 
spontaneous, if it is to deserve the name and if it is to be successful. And there 
certainly will be no mass response where the ground has not been previously 
tilled, manured and watered. The greatest precaution has to be taken 
everywhere against an outbreak of violence. Whilst it is true, as I have said, 
that civil resistance this time will continue even though violence may break 
out, it is equally true that violence on our part will harm the struggle and 
retard its progress. Two opposite forces can never work concurrently so as to 
help each other. The plan of civil disobedience has been conceived to 
neutralize and ultimately entirely to displace violence and enthrone non-
violence in its stead, to replace hatred by love, to replace strife by concord. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 163  Young India, 27-3-30, p. 109
 
Victory is impossible until we are able to keep our temper under the gravest 
provocation. Calmness under fire is a soldier’s indispensable quality. A non-co-
operator is nothing if he cannot remain calm and unperturbed under a fierce 
fire of provocation….. 
There should be no mistake. There is no civil disobedience possible, until the 
crowds behave like disciplined soldiers. And we cannot resort to civil 
disobedience, unless we can assure every Englishman that he is as safe in India 
as he is in his own home. It is not enough that we give the assurance. Every 
Englishman and every Englishwomen must feel safe, not by reason of the 
bayonet at their disposal but by reason of our living creed of non-violence. That 
is the condition not only of success but our own ability to carry on the 
movement in its present form. There is no other way of conducting the 
campaign of non-co-operation. 
Young India, 25-8-21, p. 268
 
I have never claimed to be the one original Satyagrahi. What I have claimed is 
the application of that doctrine on an almost universal scale, and it yet remains 
to be seen and demonstrated that it is a doctrine which is capable of 
assimilation by thousands upon thousands of peoples in all ages and climes. I 
know, therefore, that mine is an experiment still in the making and it, 
therefore, always keeps me humble and rooted to the soil, and in that state of 
humility I always cling to every true example of Satyagraha that comes under 
my notice s a child clings to its mother’s breast. 
Young India, 22-9-27, p. 317
 
A civil resister does not go to jail to embarrass the jail authorities by indulging 
in the breach of jail rules. Of course, there can be civil disobedience in jail too. 
But there are definite rules for it. The point is that the civil resister’s fight The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 164  does not end with his imprisonment. Once we are inside the prison we become 
civilly dead so far as the outside world is concerned. But inside the prison our 
fight to convert the hearts of the Government’s bond slaves i. e., the jail 
officials, just begins…. 
It is s specialty of non-violence that its action never stops. That cannot be said 
of the sword or the bullet. The bullet can destroy the enemy; non-violence 
convert the enemy into a friend and thus enables the civil resister to assimilate 
to himself the latter’s strength. 
A Pilgrimage for Peace,(1950), pp. 88-89 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 165   
CHAPTER 17 
FASTING IN SATYAGRAHA 
Fasting is a potent weapon in the Satyagraha armory.  It cannot be taken by 
everyone... Mere physical capacity to take it is no qualification for it. It is of no 
use without a living faith in God. It should never be a mechanical effort or a 
mere limitation. It must come from the depth of one’s soul. It is, therefore, 
always rare.  
Harijan, 18-3-39, p. 56
 
There can be no room for selfishness, anger, lack of faith, or impatience in a 
pure fast… Infinite patience, firm resolve, single-mindedness of purpose, 
perfect calm, and no anger must of necessity be there. But since it is 
impossible for a person to develop all these qualities all at once, no one who 
has not devoted himself to following the laws of Ahimsa should undertake a 
Satyagrahi fast. 
Harijan, 13-10-40, p. 322
 
Fasting unto death is the last and the most potent weapon in the armoury of 
Satyagraha. It is a sacred thing. But it must be accepted with all its 
implications. It is not the fast itself, but what it implies that matters.  
Harijan, 18-8-46, p. 262
 
Fasting cannot be undertaken mechanically. It is a powerful thing but a 
dangerous thing, if handled amateurishly. It requires complete self-purification, 
much more than what is required in facing death with retaliation even in mind. 
One such act of perfect sacrifice would suffice for the whole world. Such is 
held to be Jesus’ example. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 166  Harijan, 27-10-46, p. 372
 
Of course, it is not to be denied that fasts can be really coercive. Such are fasts 
to attain a selfish object. A fast undertaken to wring money from a person or 
for fulfilling some such personal end would amount to the exercise of coercion 
or undue influence. I would unhesitatingly advocate resistance of such undue 
influence. I have my successfully resisted it in the fasts that have been 
undertaken or threatened against me. And if it is argued that the dividing line 
between a selfish and unselfish end is often very thin, I would urge that a 
person who regards the end of a fast to be selfish or otherwise base should 
resolutely refuse to yield to it, even though the refusal may result in the death 
of the fasting person. If people will cultivate the habit of disregarding fasts 
which in their opinion are taken for unworthy ends, such fasts will be robbed of 
the taint of coercion and undue influence. Like all human institutions, fasting 
can be both legitimately and illegitimately used.  
Harijan, 9-9-33, p. 4
 
If a man, however popular and great he may be, takes up an improper cause 
fasts in defence of the impropriety, it is the duty of his friends (among whom I 
count myself), fellow-workers and relatives to let him die rather than that an 
improper cause should triumph so that he may live. Fairest means cease to be 
fair when the end sought is unfair.  
Harijan, 17-3-46, p. 43
 
Fast is the last weapon in the armory of the votary of Ahimsa. When human 
ingenuity fails, the votary fasts. This fasting quickens the spirit of prayer, that 
is to say, the fasting is a spiritual act and, therefore, addressed to God. The 
effect of such action on the life of the people is that when the person fasting is 
at all known to them their sleeping conscience is awakened. But there is the 
danger that the people through mistaken sympathy may act against their will in 
order to save the life of the loved one. This danger has got to be faced. One The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 167  ought not to be deterred from right action when one is sure of the rightness. It 
can put promote circumspection. Such a fast is undertaken in obedience to the 
dictates of the inner voice and therefore prevents haste. 
Harijan, 21-12-47, p. 476
 
Fasting unto death is an integral part of Satyagraha programme, and it is the 
greatest and most effective weapon in its armory under given circumstances. 
Not everyone is qualified for undertaking it without a proper course of training. 
Harijan, 26-7-42, p. 248 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 168   
CHAPTER 18 
SATYAGRAHI LEADER 
The leaders of every clean movement are bound to see  that they admit only 
clean fighters to it. 
Satyagraha in South Africa, (1950), p. 139
 
Satyagraha presupposes the living presence and guidance of God. The leader 
depends not on his own strength but on that of God. He acts as the voice within 
guides him. 
Young India, 2-8-28, p. 260
 
Those who claim to lead the masses must resolutely refuse to be led by them, if 
we want to avoid mob law and desire ordered progress for the country. I 
believe that mere protestation of one’s opinion and surrender to the mass 
opinion is not only not enough, but in matters of vital importance, leaders must 
act contrary to the mass of opinion if it does not commend itself their reason. 
Young India, 14-7-20, p. 4
 
In religious Satyagraha there can be no room for aggressiveness, 
demonstrativeness, show. Those who take part in it must have equal respect 
and regard for the religious convictions and susceptibilities of those who 
profess a different faith from theirs. The slightest narrowness in their outlook is 
likely to be reflected magnified multifold in the opponent.  
Harijan, 27-5-39, p. 144
 
I have maintained that we would require a smaller army of Satyagrahis than 
that of soldiers trained in modern warfare, and the cost will be insignificant 
compared to the fabulous sums devoted by nations to armaments. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 169  Harijan, 22-10-38, p. 298
 
Satyagraha by the vast mass of mankind will be impossible if they had all to 
assimilate the doctrine in all its implications. I cannot claim to have assimilated 
all it implications nor do I claim even to know them all. A soldier of an army 
does not know the whole of the military science; so also does a Satyagrahi not 
know the whole science of Satyagraha. It is enough if he trusts his commander 
and honestly follows his instructions and is ready to suffer unto death without 
bearing malice against the so-called enemy. 
Harijan, 22-10-38 p. 298
 
I realized that before a people could be fit for offering civil disobedience, they 
should thoroughly understand its deeper implications. That being so, before re-
starting civil disobedience on a mass scale, it would be necessary create a band 
of well-tried, pure-hearted volunteers who thoroughly understood the strict 
conditions of Satyagraha. They could explain these to the people, and by 
sleepless vigilance keep them on the right path. 
An Autobiography, (1966), p. 357
 
A very small part of the preliminary training received by the military is common 
to the non-violent army. These are discipline, drill, singing in chorus, flag 
hoisting, signaling and the like. Even this is not absolutely necessary and the 
basis is different. The positively necessary training for a nonviolent army is an 
immovable faith in God, willing and perfect obedience to the chief of the non-
violent army and perfect inward and outward co-operation between the units 
of the army. 
Harijan, 12-5-46, p. 128
 
2. There must be common honesty among Satyagrahis. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 170  3. They must render heart discipline to their commander. There should be no 
mental reservation. 
4. They must be prepared to lose all, not merely, their personal liberty, not 
merely their possessions, land, cash, etc. but also the liberty and 
possessions of their families, and they must be ready cheerfully to face 
bullets, bayonets, or even slow death by torture. 
5. They must not be violent in thought, word or deed towards the ‘enemy’ or 
among themselves. 
Harijan, 22-10-38, p. 298
 
My experience has taught me that a law of progression applies to every 
righteous struggle. But in the case of Satyagraha the law amounts to an axiom. 
As a Satyagraha struggle progresses onward, many another elements helps to 
swell its current and there is a constant growth in the results to which it leads. 
This is really inevitable, and is bound up with the first principles of Satyagraha. 
For in the Satyagraha the minimum is also maximum, and it is the irreducible 
minimum, there is no question of retreat, and the only movement possible is an 
advance. In other struggles, even when they are righteous, the demand is first 
pitched a little higher so as to admit of future reduction, and hence the law of 
progression does not apply to all of them without exception. 
The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi (1967), p. 174 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 171   
CHAPTER 19 
SATYAGRHAA IN THE FACE OF RIOTS AND AGGRESSION 
To quell riots, non-violently, there must be true Ah imsa in one’s heart, an 
Ahimsa that takes even the erring hooligan in its warm embrace. Such an 
attitude cannot be cultivated. It can only come as a prolonged and patient 
effort which must be made during peaceful times. The would-be members of a 
peace brigade should come into close touch and cultivate acquaintance with 
the so-called goonda element in his vicinity. He should know all and be known 
to all and win the hearts of all by his living and selfless service. No section 
should be regarded as too contemptible or mean to mix with. Goondas do not 
drop from the sky, nor do they spring from the earth like evil spirits. They are 
the product of social disorganization, and society is therefore responsible for 
their existence. In other words, they should be looked upon as a symptom of 
corruption in our body politic. To remove the disease we must first discover the 
underlying cause. To find the remedy will then be a comparatively easy task.  
Harijan, 15-9-40, p. 285
 
“How could a disarmed neutral country allow other nations to be destroyed? 
But for our army which was waiting ready at our frontier during the last war we 
should have been ruined.” 
At the risk of being considered a visionary or a fool I must answer this question 
in the only manner I know. It must be cowardly of a neutral country to allow an 
army to devastate a neighbouring country. But there are two ways in common 
between soldiers of war and soldiers of non-violence, and if I had been citizen 
of Switzerland and a President of the Federal State what I would have done 
would be to refuse passage to the invading army by refusing all supplies. 
Secondly, by re-enacting a Thermopylae in Switzerland, you would have 
presented a living wall of men and women and children and inviting the 
invaders to walk over your corpses. You may say that such a thing is beyond The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 172  human experience and endurance. I say that it is not so. It was quite possible. 
Last year in Gujarat, women stood lathi charges unflinchingly and in Peshawar 
thousands stood hail of bullets without resorting to violence. Imagine these 
men and women staying in front of an army requiring a safe passage to another 
country. The army would be brutal enough to walk over them, you might say. I 
would then say you will still have done your duty by allowing yourselves to be 
annihilated. An army that dares to pass over the corpses of innocent men and 
women would not be able to repeat that experiment. You may, if you wish, 
refuse to believe in such courage on the part of the masses of men and women; 
but then you would have to admit that non-violence is made of sterner stuff. It 
was never conceived as a weapon of the weak, but of the stoutest hearts.  
Young India, 31-12-31, p. 427
 
If I have called the arrangement with Herr Hitler ‘Peace without honour’, it was 
not to cast any reflection on British or French statesmen. I have no doubt that 
Mr. Chamberlain could not think of anything better. He knew his nation’s 
limitations. He wanted to avoid war, if it could be avoided at all. Short of going 
to war, he pulled his full weight in favour of the Czechs. That it could not save 
honour was no fault of his. It would be so every time there is a struggle with 
Herr Hitler or Signor Mussolini. 
It cannot be otherwise. Democracy dreads to spill blood. The philosophy for 
which the two dictators stand calls it cowardice to shrink from carnage. They 
exhaust the resources of poetic art in order to glorify organized murder. There 
is no humbug about their word or deed. They are ever ready for war. There is 
nobody in Germany or Italy to cross their path. Their word is law.  
It is different with Mr. Chamberlain or M. Daladier. They have their Parliaments 
and Chambers to please. They have parties to confer with. They cannot 
maintain themselves on a perpetual war footing, if their language is to have a 
democratic accent about it. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 173  Science of war leads one to dictatorship pure and simple. Science of non-
violence can alone lead one to pure democracy. England, France and America 
have to make their choice. That is the challenge of the two dictators. 
Russia is out of the picture just now. Russia has a dictator who dreams of peace 
and thinks he will wade to it through a sea of blood. No one can say what 
Russian dictatorship will mean to the world. 
It was necessary to give this introduction to what I want to say to the Czechs 
and though them to all those nationalities which are called ‘small’ or ‘weak’. I 
want to speak to the Czechs because their plight moved me to the point of 
physical and mental distress, and I felt that it would be cowardice on my part 
not to share with them the thoughts that were welling up within me. It is clear 
that the small nations must either come or be ready to come under the 
protection of the dictators or be a constant menace to the peace of Europe. In 
spite of all goodwill in world England and France cannot save them. Their 
intervention can only mean bloodshed and destruction such as has never been 
seen before. If I were a Czech, therefore, I would free these two nations from 
the obligations to defend my country. And yet I must live. I would not be a 
vassal to any nation or body. I must have absolute independence or perish. To 
seek to win in a clash of arms would be pure bravado. Not so, if in defying the 
might of one who would deprive me of my independence I refuse to obey his 
will and perish unarmed in the attempt. In so doing, though I lose the body, I 
save me soul, i.e. my honour. 
This inglorious peace should be my opportunity. I must live down the 
humiliation and gain real independence. 
But says a comforter, “Hitler knows no pity. Your spiritual effort will avail 
nothing before him.” 
My answer is: “You may be right. History has no record of a nation having 
adopted non-violent resistance. If Hitler is unaffected by my suffering, it does 
not matter. For I shall have lost nothing worth. My honour is the only thing  
worth preserving.  That is independent of Hitler’s pity. But as a believer in non-
violence I may not limit its possibilities. Hitherto he and his likes have built The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 174  upon their invariable experience that men yield to force. Unarmed men, 
women and children offering non-violent resistance without any bitterness in 
them will be a novel experience for them. Who can dare say it is not in their 
nature to respond to the higher and finer forces? They have the same soul that I 
have.” 
This is how I should, I believe, act if I was a Czech. When I first launched out on 
Satyagraha, I had no companion. We were 13,000 men, women and children 
against a whole nation capable of crushing the existence out of us. I did not 
know who would listen to me. It all came as in a flash. All the 13,000 did not 
fight. Many fell back. But the honour of the nation was saved. New history was 
written by the South African Satyagraha. 
A more apposite instance, perhaps, is that of Khansaheb Abdul Gaffar Khan, the 
servant of God as he calls himself, the pride of Afghan as the Pathans delight to 
call him. He is sitting in front of me as I pen this line. He has made several 
thousands of his people throw down their arms. He thinks he has imbibed the 
lesson of non-violence. He is not sure of his people. I have come to the Frontier 
Province, or rather he has brought me, to see with my own eyes what his men 
here are doing. I can say in advance and at once that these men know very 
little of non-violence. All the treasure they have on earth is their faith in their 
leader. I do not cite these soldiers of peace as at all a finished illustration. I 
cite them as an honest attempt being made by a soldier to convert fellow 
soldiers to the ways of peace. I can testify that it is an honest attempt, and 
whether in the end it succeeds or fails, it will have its lessons for Satyagrahis of 
the future. My purpose will be fulfilled, it I succeed in reaching these men’s 
hearts and making them see that, if their non-violence does not make them 
feel much braver than the possession of arms and the ability to use them, they 
must give up their non-violence, which is another name for cowardice, and 
resume their arms which there is nothing but their own will to prevent them 
from taking back. 
I present Dr. Benes with a weapon not of the weak but of the brave. There is no 
bravery greater than a resolute refusal to bend the knee to an earthly power, The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 175  no matter how great, and that without bitterness of spirit in the fullness of 
faith that the spirit alone lives, nothing else does. 
Harijan, 15-10-38. P. 290-91
 
My work will be finished if I succeed in carrying conviction to the human family, 
that every man or woman, however weak in body, is the guardian of his or her 
self-respect and liberty. This defence avails, though the whole world may be 
against the individual resister. 
Selections from Gandhi, (1957) p. 43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 176   
SELECTION: III COMPARATIVE IDEOLOGIES 
CHAPTER 20 
ON SARVODAYA 
During the days of my education I had read practical ly nothing outside text-
books, and after I launched into active life I had very little time for reading. I 
cannot, therefore, claim much book knowledge. However, I believe I have not 
lost much because of this enforced restraint. On the contrary, the limited 
reading may be said to have enabled me thoroughly to digest what I did read. 
Of these books, the one that brought about an instantaneous and practical 
transformation in my life was Unto This Last. I translated it later into Gujarati, 
entitling it Saryodaya (the welfare of all). 
I believe that I discovered some of my deepest convictions reflected in this 
great book of Ruskin, and that is why it so captured me and made me transform 
my life. A poet is one who can call forth the good latent in the human breast. 
Poets do not influence all alike, for everyone is not evolved in an equal 
measure.  
The Teachings of Unto this Last I understand to be: 
1. That the good of the individual is contained in the good of all. 
2. That is lawyer’s work has the same value as the barber’s, inasmuch as all 
have the same right of earning their livelihood from their work. 
3. That a life of labour, i.e., the life of the tiller of the soil and the 
handicraftsman, is the life worth living. 
The first of these I knew. The second I had dimly realized. The third had never 
occurred to me. Unto This Last made it as clear as daylight for me that the 
second and the third were contained in the first. I arose with the dawn, ready 
to reduce these principles to practice. 
An Autobiography, (1966), p. 224
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 177  A votary of Ahimsa cannot subscribe to the utilitarian formula (of the greatest 
good of the greatest number). He will strive for the greatest good of all and die 
in the attempt to realize the idea. He will, therefore, be willing to die, so that 
the others may live. He will serve himself with the rest, by himself dying. The 
greatest good of all inevitably includes the good of the greatest number, and 
therefore he and the utilitarian will converge in many points in their career, 
but there does come a time when they must part company, and even work in 
opposite directions. The utilitarian to be logical will never sacrifice himself. 
The absolutist will even sacrifice himself. 
Young India, 9-12-26, p. 432
 
I do not believe in the doctrine of the greatest good of the greatest number. It 
means in its nakedness that in order to achieve the supposed good of fifty-one 
per cent, the interest of forty-nine percent may be, or rather, should be 
sacrificed. It is a heartless doctrine and has done harm to humanity. The only 
real, dignified, human doctrine is the greatest good of all, and this can only be 
achieved by uttermost self-sacrifice. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai-I, (1953), p. 149
 
If we would see our dream of Panchayat Raj-1, i.e., true democracy realized, 
we would regard the humblest and lowest Indian as being equally the ruler of 
India with the tallest in the land. This presupposes that all are pure or will 
become pure if they are not. And purity must go hand-in-hand with wisdom. No 
one would then harbor and distinction between community and community, 
caste and outcaste. Everybody would regard all as equal with oneself and hold 
them together in the silken net of love. No one would regard another as 
untouchable. We would hold as equal the toiling labourer and the rich 
capitalist. Everybody would know how to earn an honest living by the sweat of 
one’s brow and make no distinction between intellectual and physical labour. 
To hasten this consummation, we would voluntarily turn ourselves into 
scavengers. No one who has wisdom will ever touch opium, liquor or any The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 178  intoxicants. Everybody would observe Swadeshi as the rule of life and regard 
every woman, not being his wife, as his mother, sister or daughter according to 
her age, never lust after her in his heart. He would be ready to lay down his life 
when occasion demands it, never want to take another’s life. 
Harijan, 18-1-48, p. 517
 
1 Connoting Sarvodaya 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 179   
CHAPTER -21 
ON SOCIALISM 
Socialism is a beautiful word, and, so far as I am a ware in socialism all the 
members of society are equal-none low, none high. In the individual body the 
head is not high because it is the top of the body, nor are soles of the feet low 
because they touch the earth. Even as members of the individual body are 
equal, so are the members of the society. This is socialism.  
In it the prince and the peasant, the wealthy and the poor, the employer and 
the employee are all on the same level. In the terms of religion there is no 
duality in socialism. It is all unity. Looking at society all the world over, there is 
nothing but duality or plurality. Unity is conspicuous by its absence. This man is 
high, that one is low, that is a Hindu, that a Muslim, third a Christian, fourth a 
Parsi, fifth a Sikh, sixth a Jew. Even among these there are subdivisions. In the 
unity of my conception there is perfect unity in the plurality of designs. 
In order to reach this state we may not look on things philosophically and say 
that we need not make a move until all are converted to socialism. Without 
changing our life, we may go on giving addresses, forming parties and, hawk-
like, seize the game when it comes our way. This is no socialism. The more we 
treat it as game to be seized, the farther it must recede from us.  
Socialism begins with the first convert. If there is one such, you can add zeros 
to the one and the first zero will account for ten and every addition will 
account for ten times the previous number. If, however, the beginner is a zero, 
in other words, no one makes the beginning, multiplicity of zeros will also 
produce zero value. Time and paper occupied in writing zeros will be so much 
waste. 
This socialism is as pure as crystal. It, therefore, requires crystal-like means to 
achieve it. Impure means result in an impure end. Hence the prince and the 
peasant will not be equalized by cutting off the prince’s head, nor can the 
process of cutting off equalize the employer and the employed. One cannot The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 180  reach truth by untruthfulness. Truthful conduct alone can reach truth. Are not 
non-violence and truth twins? The answer is an emphatic ‘no’. Non-violence is 
embedded in truth and vice versa. Hence has it been said that they are faces of 
the same coin. Either is inseparable from the other. Read the coin either way. 
The spelling of words will be different. The value is the same. This blessed 
state is unattainable without perfect purity. Harbour impurity of mind or body 
and you has untruth and violence in you. 
Therefore, only truthful, non-violent and pure hearted socialists will be able to 
establish a socialistic society in India and the world. To my knowledge there is 
no country in the world which is purely socialistic. Without means described 
above, the existence of such a society is impossible. 
Harijan, 13-7-47, p. 232
 
Truth and Ahimsa must incarnate in socialism. In order that they can, the 
votary must have a living faith in God. Mere mechanical adherence to truth and 
Ahimsa is likely to break down at the critical moment. Hence have I said that 
truth is God. This God is a living Force. Our life is of that Force. That Force 
resides in, but is not the body. He who denies the existence of that great 
Force, denies to himself the use of that inexhaustible Power and thus remains 
impotent. He is like a rudderless ship which, tossed about here and there, 
perishes without making any headway. The socialism of such takes them 
nowhere, what to say of the society in which they live. 
If such be the case, does it mean that no socialist believes in God? If there be 
any, why have they not made any visible progress? Then again, many godly 
persons have lived before now; why have they not succeeded in founding a 
Socialistic State?  
It is difficult completely to silence these two doubts. Nevertheless, it is 
possible to say that it has perhaps never occurred to a believing socialist that 
there is any connection between his socialist and belief in God. It is equally 
safe to say that godly men as a rule never commended socialism to the masses. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 181  Superstitions have flourished in the world in spite of godly men and women. In 
Hinduism itself untouchability has, till of late, held undoubted sway.  
This fact is that it has always been a matter of strenuous research to know this 
great Force and its hidden possibilities. 
My claim is that in the pursuit of that search lies the discovery of Satyagraha. It 
is not, however, claimed that all the laws of Satyagraha have been laid down or 
found. This I do say, fearlessly and firmly, that every worthy object can be 
achieved by the use of Satyagraha. It is the highest and infallible means, the 
greatest force. Socialism will not be reached by any other means. Satyagraha 
can rid society of all evils, political, economic and moral. 
Harijan, 20-7-47, p. 240
 
I have claimed that I was Socialist long before those I know in India had avowed 
their creed. But my socialism was natural to me and not adopted from any 
books. It came out of my unshakable belief in non-violence. No man could be 
actively non-violent and not rise against social injustice, no matter where it 
occurred. Unfortunately Western socialists have, so far as I know, believed in 
the necessity of violence for enforcing socialistic doctrines. 
I have always held that social justice, even unto the least and the lowliest, is 
impossible of attainment by force. I have further believed that it is possible by 
proper training of the lowliest by non-violent means to secure redress of the 
wrongs suffered by them. That means is non-violent non-co-operation. At times 
non-co-operation becomes as much a duty as co-operation. No one is bound to 
co-operate in one’s own undoing or slavery. Freedom received through the 
effort of others, however benevolent, cannot be retained when such effort is 
withdrawn. In other words, such freedom is not real freedom. But the lowliest 
can feel its glow as soon as they learn the art of attaining it through non-
violent non-co-operation. 
Harijan, 20-4-40, p. 97
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 182  Socialism was not born with the discovery of the misuse of capital by 
capitalists. As I have contended, socialism, even communism, is explicit in the 
first verse of Ishopanishad-1. What is true is that when some reformers lost 
faith in the method of conversion, the technique of what is known as scientific 
socialism was born. I am engaged in solving the same problem that faces 
scientific socialists. It is true, however, that my approach is always and only 
through unadulterated non-violence. It may fail. If it does, it will be because of 
my ignorance of the technique of non-violence. I may be a bad exponent of the 
doctrine in which my faith is daily increasing. 
Harijan, 20-2-37, p. 12
 
The basis of socialism is economic equality. There can be no Ramarajya2 in the 
present state of iniquitous inequalities in which a few roll in riches and the 
masses do not get even enough to eat. I accepted the theory of socialism even 
while I was in South Africa. My opposition to the socialists and others consists in 
attacking violence as a means of effecting and lasting reform. 
Harijan, 1-6-47, p. 172
 
My socialism means ‘even unto this last’. I do not want to rise on the ashes of 
the blind, the deaf and the dumb. In their socialism, probably these have no 
place. Their one aim is material progress. For instance, America aims at having 
a car for every citizen. I do not. I want freedom for full expression of my 
personality. I must be free to build a staircase to Sirius if I want to. That does 
not mean that I want to do any such thing. Under the other socialism, there is 
no individual freedom. You own nothing, not even your body. 
Harijan, 4-8-46, p. 246
 
1. A well known Upanishad revealing the uniqueness of the Spirit and man’s purpose in 
life. 
2. Reign of Rama, the hero of the Ramayana; beneficent rule. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 183   
CHAPTER 22 
ON COMMUNISM 
Bolshevism is the necessary result of modern materia listic civilization. Its 
insensate worship of matter has given rise to a school which has been 
broughtup to look upon material advancement as the goal and which has all 
touch with the final things life. 
The collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. XV, p. 168
 
I am yet ignorant of what exactly Bolshevism is. I have not been able to study 
it. I do not know whether it is for the good of Russia in the long run. But I do 
know that in so far as it is based on violence and denial of God, it repels me. I 
do not believe in short-violent-cuts to success. Those Bolshevik friends who are 
bestowing their attention on me should realize that, however much I may 
sympathize with and admire worthy motives, I am an uncompromising opponent 
of violent methods even to serve the noblest of causes. 
Young India, 11-12-24, p. 406
 
What does Communism mean in the last analysis? It means a classless society-an 
ideal that is worth striving for. Only I part company with it when force is called 
to aid for achieving it…. The idea of inequality, of “high or low” is an evil, but I 
do not believe in eradicating evil from the human breast at the point of the 
bayonet.  
Harijan, 13-3-37, p. 40
 
“What do you think of Communism? Do you think it would be good for India?”  
Communism of the Russian type, that is Communism which is imposed on a 
people, would be repugnant to India. I believe in non-violent communism... The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 184  “But Communism in Russia is against private property. Do you want private 
property?” 
If communism came without any violence, it would be welcome. For then no 
property would be held by anybody expect on behalf of the people and for the 
people. A millionaire may have his millions, but he will hold them for the 
people. The State could take charge of them whenever they would need them 
for the common cause. 
“Is there any difference of opinion between you and Jawaharlal in respect of 
Socialism?” 
There is, but it is a difference in emphasis. He perhaps puts an emphasis on the 
result, whereas I put on the means. Perhaps according to him I am putting an 
over-emphasis on non-violence, would want to have Socialism by other means, 
If it was impossible to have it by non-violence. Of course my emphasis on non-
violence becomes one of principle. Even If I was assured that we could have 
independence by means of violence, I should refuse to have it. It won’t be real 
independence. 
Harijan, 13-2-37, p. 6
 
I must confess that I have not yet been able fully to understand the meaning of 
Bolshevism. All that I know is that it aims at the abolition of the institution of 
private property. This is the only an application of the ethical ideal of non-
possession in the realm of economics and if the people adopted this ideal of 
their own accord or could be made to accept it by means of peaceful 
persuasion, there would be nothing like it. But from what I know of Bolshevism 
it not only does not preclude the use of force but freely sanctions it for the 
expropriation of private property and maintaining the collective State of 
ownership of the same. And if that is so, I have no hesitation in saying that the 
Bolshevik regime in its present form cannot last for long. For it is my firm 
conviction that nothing enduring can be built on violence. But be that as it may 
there is no questioning the fact that the Bolshevik ideal has behind it the purest 
sacrifice of countless men and women who have given up their all for its sake, The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 185  and an ideal that is sanctified by the sacrifices of such master spirits as Lenin 
cannot go in vain: the noble example of their renunciation will be emblazoned 
forever and quicken and purify the ideal as time passes. 
Young India, 15-11-28, p. 381
 
I have made the workingmen’s cause my own long before any of the young 
Communists here were born. I spent the best part of my time in South Africa 
working for them, I used to live with them, and shared their joys and sorrows. 
You must therefore understand why I claim to speak for labour. I expect at 
least courtesy from you if nothing else. I invite you to come to me and discuss 
things with me as frankly as you can.  
You claim to be Communists, but you do not seem to live the life of 
Communism. I may tell you that I am trying my best to live up to the ideal of 
Communism in the best sense of the term. And Communism does not, I fancy, 
exclude courtesy. I am amongst you today, within a few minutes I will leave 
you. But if you want to carry the country with you, you ought to be able to 
react on it by reasoning with it. You cannot do so by coercion. You may deal 
destruction to bring the country round to your view. But how many will you 
destroy? Not tens of millions. You may kill a few thousands if you had millions 
with you. But today you are no more than a handful. I ask you to convert the 
Congress if you can and to take charge of it. But you cannot do so by bidding 
goodbye to the elementary rules of courtesy. And there is no reason why you 
should be lacking in ordinary courtesy, when it is open to you to give the fullest 
vent to your views, when India is tolerant enough to listen patiently to anyone 
who can talk coherently. 
Young India, 26-3-31, p. 53
 
The Communists seem to have made troubleshooting their profession. I have 
friends among them. Some of them are like sons to me. But it seems they do 
not make any distinction between fair and foul, truth and falsehood. They deny 
the charge. But their reported acts to sustain it. Moreover, they seem to take The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 186  their instructions from Russia, whom they regard as their spiritual home rather 
than India. I cannot countenance this dependence on an outside power. I have 
even said that we should not depend even on Russian wheat in our present food 
crisis. We must have the ability and courage to subsist on what our soil can give 
us rather than on foreign charity. Otherwise, we shall not deserve to exist as an 
independent country. The same applies to foreign ideologies country. The same 
applies to foreign ideologies. I would accept them only to the extent that I can 
assimilate them and adapt them to the Indian scene. But I must refuse to go 
under them.  
My formula for the Communists, therefore, is that I would prefer to die at their 
hands, but I will not retaliate. 
Harijan, 6-10-46, pp. 338-39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 187   
CHAPTER 23 
ON MARX 
“Marx showed us that our ideologies, institutions, a nd ethical standards, 
literature, art, customs, even religion, are a product of our economic 
environment.” 
I do not agree that our ideologies, ethical standards and values are altogether a 
product of our material environment without any absolute basis outside it. On 
the contrary as we are, so our environment becomes.  
“Is not the Wardha scheme of Basic Education based upon the assumption that 
purposive activity of the hand moulds not only our thinking but our whole 
personality? Does that not come very near the materialistic theory of 
knowledge as propounded by Marx?” 
But the Marxist wants to abolish the laboring hand altogether and substitute in 
its place the machine. He has no use for the hand. Dependence on manual 
labour, according to Marx, is the symbol and root cause of the destitution and 
slavery of the worker. It is the function of the machine to emancipate him from 
this state, I on the other hand, hold that machine enslaves and only intelligent 
use of the hand will bring to the worker both freedom and happiness. 
The Marxist regards though, as it were, ‘secretion of the brain’ and the mind ‘a 
reflex of the material environment’. I cannot accept that. Above and beyond 
both matter and mind is He. If I have an awareness of that living principle 
within me, no one can fetter my mind. The body might be destroyed, the spirit 
will proclaim its freedom. This to me is not a theory; it is a fact of experience. 
“The Marxists concede that an individual may transcend his material 
environment but class behavior is essentially determined by it. It cannot change 
unless the economic environment is altered. To transform the capitalist the 
capitalistic order must be destroyed.” 
What an individual can do, a whole class of people can be induced to do. It is 
all a question of discovering the right technique. The whole of our non-violent The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 188  non-co-operation movement, which aims at transforming the British ruling 
class, is based on this hypothesis. Trusteeship is my answer to the issue of 
class-conflict. 
“The wars were an inevitable consequence of the institution of private property 
in the capitalistic system.” 
No, not the economic factor alone. Ultimately it is the Unseen Power that 
governs the course of events-even in the minds of men who make those events. 
Supposing Hitler were to die today, it would alter the whole course of current 
history. Similarly, supposing all capitalists were wiped out as a result of an 
earthquake or some other natural cataclysm, the history of class-war would 
then be changed in a way least dreamt of by the exponents of economic 
interpretation of history. Would not the history of the present war have been 
different if instead of Chamberlain a more dynamic figure had been the Prime 
Minister of England? Or, if Chamberlain had not shown lack of political courage 
at the last moment? 
“The Marxists say that to abolish war we have but to abolish the institution of 
private property. You have also taught that property is incompatible with the 
non-violent way of life.” 
This is only partly true. Was not Helen of Troy the cause of the Trojan war? 
Were the wars of the Rajputs related to the institution of private property? No. 
To banish war we have to do more. We have to eradicate possessiveness and 
greed and lust and egotism from our own hearts. We have to carry war within 
ourselves to banish it from society… 
We may criticize Marx but that he was a great man who can deny? His analysis 
of social ills or the cures he prescribed for them may or may not be correct. I 
do not accept his economic theories but this much I know that the poor are 
being ground down. Something has got to be done for it. 
Mahatma Gandhi-The Last Phase, Vol. II, (1958), pp. 39 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 189   
SECTION IV: ONE WORLD 
CHAPTER 24 
NATIONALISM AND INTERNATIONALISM 
For me patriotism is the same as humanity. I am patr iotic because I am human 
and humane. It is not exclusive. I will not hurt England or Germany to serve 
India. Imperialism has no place in my scheme of life. The law of a patriot is not 
different from that of the patriarch. And a patriot is so much the less a patriot 
if he is a lukewarm humanitarian. There is no conflict between private and 
political law. 
Young India, 16-3-21, p. 81
 
It is impossible for one to be internationalist without being a nationalist. 
Internationalism is possible only when nationalism becomes a fact, i.e., when 
peoples belonging to different countries have organized themselves and are 
able to act as one man. It is not nationalism that is evil, it is the narrowness, 
selfishness, exclusiveness which is the bane of modern nations which is evil. 
Each wants to profit at the expense of, and rise on, the ruin of the other. 
Indian nationalism has, I hope, struck a different path. It wants to organize 
itself or to find full self-expression for the benefit and service of humanity at 
large. 
Young India, 18-6-25, p. 211
 
My mission is not merely brotherhood of Indian humanity. My mission is not 
merely freedom of India, though today it undoubtedly engrosses practically the 
whole of my life and the whole of my time. But through realization of freedom 
of India I hope to realize and carry on the mission of brotherhood of man. My 
patriotism is not an exclusive thing. It is all embracing and I should reject that 
patriotism which sought to mount upon the distress or the exploitation of other 
nationalities. The conception of my patriotism is nothing if it is not always in The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 190  every case without exception consistent with the broadest good of humanity at 
large. Not only that but my religion and my patriotism derived from my religion 
embrace all life. I want to realize brotherhood or identity not merely with the 
beings called human, but I want to realize identity with all life, even with such 
beings as crawl on earth. I want, if I don’t give you a shock, to realize identity 
with even the crawling things upon earth, because we claim common descent 
from the same God, and that being so, all life in whatever form it appears must 
be essentially one. 
Young India, 4-4-29, p. 107
 
Our nationalism can be no peril to other nations, inasmuch as we will exploit 
none just as we will allow none to exploit us. Through Swaraj we would serve 
the whole world. 
Young India, 16-4-31, p. 79
 
Just as the cult of patriotism teaches us today that the individual has to die for 
the family, the family has to die for the village, the village for the district, the 
district for the province, and the province for the country, even so a country 
has to be free in order that it may die, if necessary, for the benefit of the 
world. My love, therefore, of nationalism or my idea of nationalism is that my 
country may become free, that if need be the whole of the country may die, so 
that the human race may live. There is no room for race hatred there. Let that 
be our nationalism. 
Gandhiji in Indian Village, (1927), p. 170 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 191   
CHAPTER 25 
DIFFERENT RACES ARE DIFFERENT BRANCHES OF ONE TREE 
In the eyes of God who is the Creator of all, His cr eatures are all equal. Had He 
made any distinctions of high or low between man and man, they would have 
been visible as are the distinctions between say, an elephant and an ant. But 
He has endowed all human beings impartially with the same shape and the 
same natural wants. 
Harijan, 22-12-33, p. 2
 
It is wrong, it is sinful to consider some people lower than ourselves. On God’s 
Earth, nobody is low and nobody is high. We are all His creatures; and just as in 
the eyes of parents all their children are absolutely equal, so also in God’s eyes 
all His creatures must be equal. 
Harijan, 5-1-34, p. 8
 
In spite of the differences of races and religions, we shall learn to tolerate and 
respect one another and consider all human beings as children of one God and, 
therefore, brothers and sisters of one another. God is the Creator of all life; all 
His creatures are, therefore, equal in His eyes. Humanity is a gigantic tree 
having innumerable branches and leaves, and the same life throbs through 
them all. The realization of unity in diversity is implies in the removal of 
untouchability. 
Harijan, 1-12-33, p. 6
 
“What sort of relations would you favour between two races?” 
The closest possible. But while I have abolished all distinction between and an 
African and an Indian, that does not mean that I do not recognize the 
difference like them. The different races of mankind are like different The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 192  branches of tree-once we recognize the common parent stock from which we 
are sprung, we realize the basic unity of the human family, and there is no 
room left for enemies and unhealthy competition. 
Harijan, 18-2-39, p. 12
 
I do not believe… that an individual may gain spiritually and those who surround 
him suffer... I believe in the essential unity of man and… of all that lives. 
Therefore I believe that if one man gains… the whole world gains with him and, 
if one man falls, the whole world falls to that extent. I do not help opponents 
without at the same time helping myself and my co-workers. 
Young India, 4-12-24, p. 398
 
One man cannot do right in one department of life whilst he is occupied in 
doing wrong in any other department. Life is one indivisible whole. 
Young India, 27-1-27, p. 31
 
Unseen it (South Africa’s white man’s policy) holds the seeds of a world war. 
Harijan, 24-3-46, p. 52
 
Does real superiority (of the whites) requires outside props in the shape of 
legislation? 
Harijan,24-3-46, p.52
 
Is a civilization worth the name which requires for its existence the very 
doubtful prop of racial legislation and lynch law? 
Harijan, 30-6-46, p. 204
 
One day the black races will rise like the avenging Attila against their white 
oppressors, unless someone presents to them the weapon of Satyagraha. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 193  Harijan, 19-5-46, p. 134
 
…It will be a dark blot on the history of the white civilization if lynch law is 
allowed to have its course in South Africa. I hope that the South African 
Government and the civilized conscience of mankind will not allow that. 
Harijan, 30-6-46, p. 206
 
This new caste (system) is worse than the ancient but dying institution of India 
which has some redeeming features, even while it is dying. But the new 
civilized edition has none. It shamelessly proclaims that white civilization 
requires the erection of legal barriers in order to protect itself against Asiatics 
and Africans. 
Harijan, 2-6-46, p. 157
 
Those who agree that racial inequality must be removed and yet do nothing to 
fight the evil are impotent. I cannot have anything to say to such people. After 
all the underdogs will have to earn their own salvation…. 
The solution is largely in India’s hands. If everything is all right in India 
internally, she is likely to play an effective part in straightening up affairs… 
If the UNO fails to deal justly with the South African-Indian dispute, the UNO 
will lose its prestige. I have no doubt that the UNO can prosper only if it is just. 
Harijan, 26-10-47, p. 385
 
Do they forget that the greatest of the teachers of mankind were all Asiatics 
and did not possess a white face? These, if they descended on earth and went 
to South Africa, will all have to live in the segregated areas and be classed as 
Asiatics and coloured people unfit by law to be the equals of whites. 
Harijan, 30-6-46, p. 204 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 194   
CHAPTER 26 
ATOM BOMB 
There have been cataclysmic changes in the world. Do  I still adhere to my faith 
in truth and non-violence? Has not the atom bomb exploded that faith? Not only 
has it not done so, but it has clearly demonstrated to me that the twins 
constitute the mightiest force in the world. Before it the atom bomb is of no 
effect. The two opposing forces are wholly different in kind, the one moral and 
spiritual, the other physical and material. The one is infinitely superior to the 
other which by its very nature has an end. The force of the spirit is ever 
progressive and endless. Its full expression makes it unconquerable in the 
world. In saying this I know that I have said nothing new. I merely bear witness 
to the fact. What is more, the force resides in everybody, man, woman, and 
child irrespective of the colour of the skin. Only in many it lies dormant, but it 
is capable of being awakened by judicious training. 
It is further to be observed that without the recognition of this truth and due 
effort to realize it, there is no escape from self- destruction. The remedy lies in 
every individual training himself for self-expression in every walk of life, 
irrespective of response by the neighbours. 
Harijan, 10-2-46, p. 8
 
It has been suggested by American friends that the atom bomb will bring in 
Ahimsa as nothing else can. It will, if it is meant that its destructive power will 
so disgust the world that it will turn it away from violence for the time being. 
This is very like a man glutting himself with dainties to the point of nausea and 
turning away from them only to return with redoubled zeal after the effect of 
nausea is well over. Precisely in the same manner will the world return to 
violence with renewed zeal after the effect of disgust is worn out. 
Often does good come out of evil. But that is God’s, not man’s plan. Man knows 
that only evil can come out of evil, as good out of good. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 195  That atomic energy though harnessed by American scientists and army men for 
destructive purposes may be utilized by other scientists for humanitarian 
purposes is undoubtedly within the realm of possibility. But that is not what 
was meant by my American friends. They were not so simple as to put a 
question which connoted an obvious truth. An incendiary uses fire for his 
destructive and nefarious purposes, a housewife makes daily use of it in 
preparing nourishing food for mankind.  
So far as I can see, the atomic bomb has deadened the finest feeling that has 
sustained mankind for ages. There used to be the so-called laws of war which 
made it tolerable. Now we know the naked truth. War knows no law except 
that of might. The atom bomb brought an empty victory to the Allied arms but 
it resulted for the time being in destroying the soul of Japan. What has 
happened to the soul of the destroying nation is yet too early to see. Forces of 
nature act in a mysterious manner. We can but solve the mystery by deducing 
the unknown result from the known results of similar events. A slave-holder 
cannot hold a slave without putting himself or his deputy in the cage holding 
the slave. Let no one run away with the idea that I wish to put in a defence of 
Japanse misdeeds in pursuance of Japan’s unworthy ambition. The difference 
was only one of degree. I assume that Japan’s greed was more unworthy. But 
the greater unworthiness conferred no right on the less unworthy of destroying 
without mercy men, women and children of Japan in a particular area. 
The moral to be legitimately drawn from the supreme tragedy of the bomb is 
that it will not be destroyed by counter-bombs even as violence cannot to by 
counter-violence. Mankind has to get out of violence only through non-violence. 
Hatred can be overcome only by love. Counter-hatred only increases the 
surface as well as the depth of hatred. 
I am aware that I am repeating what I have many times stated before and 
practiced to the best of my ability and capacity. What I first stated was itself 
nothing new. It is an old as the hills. Only I recited no copy book maxim, but 
definitely announced what I believe in every fiber of my being. Sixty years of 
practice in various walks of life has only enriched the belief which the The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 196  experience of friends has fortified. It is, however, the central truth by which 
one can stand alone without flinching. I believe in what Max Muller said years 
ago, namely, that truth needed to be repeated as long as there were men who 
disbelieved it. 
Harijan, 7-7-46, p. 212
 
I regard the employment of the atom bomb for the wholesale destruction of 
men, women and children as the most diabolical use of science. 
Harijan, 29-9-46, p. 335 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 197   
CHAPTER 27 
DISARMAMENT  
If Germany today changed her policy and made a deter mination to use her 
freedom, not for dividing the commerce of the world but for protecting, 
through her moral superiority, the weaker races of the earth, she could 
certainly do that without armament. It would be found that before general 
disarmament in Europe commences, as it must some day, unless Europe is to 
commit suicide, some nation will have to dare to disarm herself and take large 
risks. The level of non-violence in that nation, if that event happily comes to 
pass, will naturally have risen so high as to command universal respect. Her 
judgments will be unerring, her decisions will be firm, her capacity for heroic 
self-sacrifice will begreat,and she will want to live as much for other nations as 
for herself. 
Young India, 8-10-25, p. 345
 
Not to believe in the possibility of permanent peace is to disbelieve in godliness 
of human nature. Methods hitherto adopted have failed because rock-bottom 
sincerity on the part of those who have striven has been lacking. Not that they 
have realized this lack. Peace is unattainable by part performance of 
conditions, even as chemical combination is impossible without complete 
fulfillment of conditions of attainment thereof. If recognized leaders of 
mankind who have control over engines of destruction were wholly to renounce 
their use with full knowledge of implications, permanent peace can be 
obtained. This is clearly impossible without the great powers of the earth 
renouncing their imperialistic designs. This is again seems impossible without 
these great nations ceasing to believe in soul-destroying competition and to 
desire to multiply wants and therefore increase their material possessions. It is 
my conviction that the root of the evil is want of a living faith in a living God. It 
is a first class human tragedy that peoples of the earth who claim to believe in 
the message of Jesus whom they describe as the Prince of Peace show little of The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 198  that belief in actual practice. It is painful to see sincere Christian divines 
limiting the scope of Jesus’s message to select individuals. I have been taught 
from my childhood, and I have tested the truth by experience, that primary 
virtues of mankind are possible of cultivation by the meanest of the human 
species. It is this undoubted universal possibility that distinguishes the human 
from the rest of God’s creation. If even one great nation were unconditionally 
to perform the supreme act of renunciation, many of us would see in our life-
time visible peace established on earth. 
Harijan, 16-5-36, p. 109
 
It is open to the great powers to take up non-violence any day and cover 
themselves with glory and earn the eternal gratitude of posterity. If they or any 
of them can shed the fear of destruction, if they disarm themselves, they will 
automatically help the rest to regain their sanity. But then these great powers 
have to give up imperialistic ambitions and exploitation of the so-called 
uncivilized or semi-civilized nations of the earth and revise their mode of life. 
It means a complete revolution. Great nations can hardly be expected in the 
ordinary course to move spontaneously in a direction the reverse of the one 
they have followed and, according to their notion of value, from victory to 
victory. But miracles have happened before and may happen even in this very 
prosaic age. Who can dare limit God’s power of undoing wrong? One thing is 
certain. If the mad race for armaments continues, it is bound to result in a 
slaughter such as has never occurred in history. If there is a victor left, the very 
victory will be a living death for the nation that emerges victorious. There is no 
escape from the impending doom save through a bold and unconditional 
acceptance of the non-violent method with all its glorious implications.  
Harijan, 12-11-38, p. 328 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 199   
CHAPTER 28 
WORLD OF FEDERATION 
Isolated independence is not the goal of the world-s tates. It is voluntary inter-
dependence. 
Young India, 17-7-24, p. 236
 
The better mind of the world desires today not absolutely independent States 
warring one against another, but a federation of friendly inter-dependent 
States. The consummation of that event may be far off. I want to make no 
grand claim for our country. But I see nothing grand or impossible about our 
expressing our readiness for universal inter-dependence rather, than 
independence. 
Young India, 26-12-24, p. 425
 
There is no limit to extending our service to our neighbours across our State-
made frontiers. God never made those frontiers. 
Young India, 31-12-31, p. 427
 
The aspiration for independence is the aspiration that fires all nations in 
Europe. But that independence does not exclude voluntary partnership. 
Imperialistic ambition is inconsistent with partnership.  
Harijan, 3-7-37, p. 165
 
The structure of a world federation can be raised only on foundation of non-
violence, and violence will have to be totally given up in world affairs. 
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government 1942-44, (1957), p. 143
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 200  Federation is undoubtedly a greater and nobler end for free nations. It is a 
greater and nobler end for them to strive to promote Federation than be self-
centred, seeking only to preserve their own freedom...The very first step to a 
world Federation is to recognize the freedom of conquered and exploited 
nations. 
Harijan, 9-8-42, p. 265
 
Today defence of citizenship is a defence of national commerce, i.e., 
exploitation. That exploitation presupposes the use of force for imposing 
commerce upon an unwilling people. Nations have, in a sense, therefore, 
almost become gangs of robbers, where as they should be a peaceful 
combination of men and women united for the common good of mankind. In the 
latter case, their strength will lie not in their skill in the use of gunpowder, but 
in the possession of superior moral fiber. 
Young India, 21-10-26, p. 366 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 201   
CHAPTER 29 
WORLD OF TOMORROW 
Perhaps never before has there been so much speculat ions about the future as 
there is today. Will our world always be one of violence? Will there always be 
poverty, starvation, misery? Will we have a firmer and wide belief in religion, 
or the world is godless? If there is to be a great change in society, how will that 
change be wrought? By war, or revolution? Or will it come peacefully? Different 
men give different answers to these questions, each man drawing the plan of 
tomorrow’s world as he hopes and wishes it to be. I answer not only out of 
belief but out of conviction. The world of tomorrow will be, must be, a society 
based on non-violence. That is the first law: out of it all other blessings will 
flow. It may seem a distant goal, an impractical Utopia. But it is not in the 
least unobtainable, since it can be worked for here in now. An individual can 
adopt the way of life of the future-the non-violent way-without having to wait 
for others to do so. And if an individual can do it, cannot whole groups of 
individuals? Whole nations? Men often hesitate to make a beginning, because 
they feel that the objective cannot be achieved in its entirety. This attitude of 
mind is precisely our greatest obstacle to progress-an obstacle that each man, 
if he only wills it, can clear away. 
Equal distribution-the second great law of tomorrow’s world as I see it-grows 
out of non-violence. It implies not that the world’s goods shall be arbitrarily 
divided up, but that each man shall have the wherewithal to supply his natural 
needs, no more. As a crude example, if one man requires a quarter-pounds of 
flour per week and another needs five pounds, each should not be given 
arbitrarily a quarter pound, or five pounds; both should be able to satisfy their 
wants. 
Here we come to perhaps the most vital question connected with the shaping of 
tomorrow’s world. How is this equal distribution to be brought about? Must the 
wealthy be dispossessed of all their holdings? The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 202  Non-violence answers no. Nothing that is violent can be of lasting benefit to 
mankind. Forcible dispossession would deprive society of many great gifts; the 
wealthy man knows how to create and build; his abilities must not be lost. 
Instead, he must be left in possession of his wealth so that he may use what he 
reasonably requires for his personal needs and act as trustee for the remainder, 
to be expended for the benefit of the society. There have been and are such 
men. To my mind, as soon as a man looks upon himself as a servant of society, 
earns for its sake, spends for its sake, then his earnings are good and his 
business venture is constructive. 
But does not this whole idea of non-violence imply a change in human nature? 
And does history at any time record such a change? Emphatically it does. Many 
an individual has turned from the mean, personal, acquisitive point of view to 
one that sees society as a whole and works for its benefit. If there has been 
such a change in one man, there can be the same change in many. 
I see no poverty in the world of tomorrow, no wars, no revolutions, no 
bloodshed. And in that world there will be a faith in God greater and deeper 
than ever in the past. The very existence of the world, in a broad sense, 
depends on religion. All attempts to root it out will fail.  
The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi, (1967), pp. 458-60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 203   
SECTION V: RELIGION AND CULTURE 
CHAPTER 30 
THE ESSENTIAL UNITY OF ALL RELIGIONS 
There is no religion higher than the Truth and Right eousness.  
Selections From Gandhi, (1957), p. 254
 
Let me explain what I mean by religion. It is not the Hindu religion which I 
certainly prize above all other religions, but the religion which transcends 
Hinduism, which changes one’s very nature, which binds one indissolubly to the 
Truth within and whichever purifies. It is the permanent element in human 
nature which counts no cost too great in order to find full expression and which 
leaves the should utterly restless until it has found itself, known its Marker and 
appreciated the true correspondence between the Maker and itself. 
Young India, 12-5-20, p. 2
 
The root of religion is ‘that which binds’. The root meaning of its Sanskrit 
equivalent Dharma is ‘that which holds’. It sustains a person as nothing else 
does. It is rock-bottom fundamental morality. When morally incarnates itself in 
a living man it becomes religion, because it binds, it holds, it sustains him in 
the hour of trial. 
Harijan, 26-1-34, p. 7
 
Religion binds man to God and man to man.  
Harijan, 4-5-40, p. 117
 
Religion which takes no count of practical affairs and does not help to solve 
them, is no religion. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 204  Young India, 7-5-25, p. 164
 
I reject any religious doctrine that does not appeal to reason and is in conflict 
with morality. I tolerate unreasonable religious sentiment when it is not 
immoral. 
Young India, 27-7-20, p. 4
 
True religion and true morality are inseparably bound up with each other. 
Religion is to morality what water is to the seed that is sown in the soil. 
Selections from Gandhi, (1957), p. 255
 
True morality consists, not in following the beaten track, but in finding out of 
the true path for ourselves and in fearlessly following it. 
Selections from Gandhi, (1957), p. 254
 
I believe in the fundamental truth of all great religions of the world. I believe 
that they are all God given, and I believe that they were necessary for the 
people to whom these religions were revealed. And I believe that, if only we 
could all of us read the scriptures of different faiths from the standpoint of the 
followers of those faiths we should find that they were at bottom all one and 
were all helpful to one another. 
Harijan, 16-2-34, pp. 5-6
 
I believe in the truth of all religions of the world. And since my youth upward, 
it has been a humble but persistent effort on my to understand the truth of all 
the religions of the world, and adopt and assimilate in my own thought, word, 
and deed all that I have found to be best in those religions. The faith that I 
profess not only permits me to do so but renders it obligatory for me to take 
the best from whatsoever source it may come. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 205  Harijan, 16-2-34, p. 7
 
For me the different religions are beautiful flowers from the same garden, or 
they are branches of the same majestic tree. Therefore they are equally true, 
though being received and interpreted through human instruments equally 
imperfect. 
Harijan, 30-1-37, p. 407
 
Each religion has its own contribution to make to human evolution. I regard the 
great faiths of the world as so many branches of a tree, each distinct from the 
other though having the same source. 
Harijan, 28-1-39, p. 448
 
All prayer, in whatever language or from whatever religion it was, was prayer 
addressed to one and the same God and taught mankind that all belonged to 
one family and should bear love to one another. 
All religions enjoined worship of one God who was all pervasive. He was present 
even in a droplet of water or in a tiny speck of dust. 
Various religions were like the leaves on a tree. No two leaves were alike, yet 
there was no antagonism between them or between the branches on which they 
grew. Even so, there is an underlying unity in the variety which we see in God’s 
creation. 
Harijan, 26-5-46, p. 154
 
“Would you say then that your religion is a synthesis of all religions?” 
Yes, if you will. But I would call that synthesis Hinduism, and for you the 
synthesis will be Christianity. If I did not do so, you would always be patronizing 
me, as many Christians do now, saying, “How nice it would be if Gandhi 
accepted Christianity,” and Muslims would be doing the same saying, “How nice The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 206  it would be if Gandhi accepted Islam!” That immediately puts a barrier 
between you and me. Do you see that? 
Harijan, 6-3-37, p. 27
 
It is the duty of everyone to study the scriptures of religions other than his 
own. This enables people to keep their religion pure and rid it of blemishes. 
Moreover, we have Christians, Muslims, Parsis and followers of other religions 
amongst us. It behaves the Hindus to study their religious books if they regard 
them as their brothers. 
Harijan, 25-5-47, p. 166
 
For me all the principal religions are equal in the sense that they are all true. 
They are supplying a felt want in the spiritual progress of humanity. Hence I 
have had no difficulty in bringing up Muslim, Parsi and Christian children under 
my care in their own faith. Indeed, I had to study some literature for their sake 
when their parents wanted me to teach them particular forms of worship 
according to special books. 
Harijan, 6-4-34, p. 59
 
I hold that it is the duty of every cultured man or woman to read 
sympathetically the scriptures of the world. If we are to respect others’ 
religions as we would have them to respect our own, a friendly study of world’s 
religions is a sacred duty. 
Young India, 2-9-26, p. 308
 
All men are born free and equal, but one is much stronger or weaker than 
another physically and mentally. Therefore superficially there is no equality 
between the two. But there an essential equality. In our nakedness God is not 
going to think of me as Gandhi and you as Keithan. And what are we in this 
mighty universe? We are less than atoms, and as between atoms there is no use The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 207  asking which is smaller and which is bigger. Inherently we are equal. The 
differences of race and skin and of mind and body and of climate and nation 
are transitory. In the same way essentially all religious are equal. 
Harijan, 13-3-37, p. 58
 
They are equally true and equally imperfect. The finer the line you draw, the 
nearer it approaches Euclid’s true straight line, but it never is the true straight 
line. The tree of Religion is the same, there is not that physical equality 
between the branches. They are all growing, and the person who belongs to the 
growing branch must not gloat over it and say, ‘Mine is the superior one’. None 
is superior, none is inferior, to the other. 
Harijan, 13-3-37, p. 38
 
Just as a tree had a million leaves, similarly though God was one, there were as 
many religions as there were men and women though they were rooted in one 
God. 
Harijan, 16-3-47, p. 63
 
I am a believer in the truth of all the great religions of the world. There will be 
no lasting peace on earth unless we learn not merely to tolerate but even to 
respect the other faiths as our own. A reverent study of the sayings of different 
teachers of mankind is a step in the direction of such mutual respect. 
In search of the Supreme, Vol. III, (1962) p. 10
 
Belief in one God is the corner-stone of all religions. But I do not foresee a time 
when there would be only one religion on earth in practice. In theory, since 
there is one God, there can be only one religion. But in practice, no two 
persons I have known have had the same and identical conception of God. 
Therefore, there will, perhaps, always be different religions answering to 
different temperaments and climatic conditions. But I can clearly see the time The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 208  coming when people belonging to different faiths will have the same regard for 
other faiths that they have for their own. I think that we have to find unity in 
diversity… We are all children of one and the same God and, therefore, 
absolutely equal. 
Harijan, 2-2-34, p. 8
 
How can there be room for distinctions of high and low where there is this all-
embracing fundamental unity underlying the outward diversity? For that is a 
fact meeting you at every step in dairy life. The final goal of all religions is to 
realize this essential oneness. 
The essence of all religions is one; only their approaches are different.  
Gandhiji’s View of Life, (1954), p. 158
 
The propagation of truth and non-violence can be done less by books than by 
actually living those principles. Life truly lived is more than books. 
Harijan, 13-5-39, p. 122
 
After long study and experience, I have come to the conclusion that (1) all 
religions are true; (2) all religions have some error in them; (3) all religions are 
almost as dear to me as my own Hinduism, inasmuch as all human beings should 
be as dear to one as one’s own close relatives. My own veneration for other 
faiths is the same as that for my own faith; therefore no thought of conversion 
is possible. The aim of the Fellowship should be to help a Hindu to Become a 
better Hindu, a Musalman to become a better Musalman, and a Christian a 
better Christian. The attitude of patronizing toleration is false to the spirit of 
International Fellowship. If I have a suspicion in my mind that my religion is 
more or less true, and that other’s are more or less false, instead of being more 
or less true, then though I may have some sort of fellowship with them, it is of 
an entirely different kind from the one we need in the International Fellowship. 
Our prayer for other must be NOT “God, give all the light that Thou has given The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 209  me,” BUT “Give all the light and truth he needs for his highest development.” 
Pray merely that your friends may become better men, whatever their form of 
religion. 
Selections from Gandhi, (1957), pp. 258-59
 
I do not believe in people in people telling others of their faith, especially with 
a view to conversion. Faith does not admit of telling. It has to be lived and then 
it becomes self-propagating. 
Young India, 20-10-27, p. 352
 
Preaching jars on me and makes no appeal me, and I get suspicious of 
missionaries who preach. But I love those who never preach but live the life 
according to their lights. Their lives are silent, yet most effective testimonies. 
Therefore, I cannot say what to preach, but I can say that a life of service and 
uttermost simplicity is the best preaching. If, therefore, you go on serving 
people and ask them also to serve, they would understand. But you quote 
instead John 3, 16, and ask them to believe it. That has no appeal to me, and I 
am sure people will not understand it. Where there has been acceptance of the 
gospel though preaching, my complaint is that there has been some motive. 
A rose does not need to preach. It simply spreads its fragrance. The fragrance is 
its own sermon. If it had human understanding and if it could engage a number 
of preaches, the preachers would not be able to sell more roses than the 
fragrance itself could do. The fragrance of religious and spiritual life is much 
finer and subtler than of the rose. 
Harijan, 29-3-35, p. 50
 
You bid good-bye to humility the moment you say that life is not adequate and 
that you must supplement it by speech. Human species need not go to animals 
and shout to them: “We are humans.” The animals know them as humans. The The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 210  language of the soul never lends itself to expression. It rises superior to the 
body. Language is a limitation of the truth which can be only respected by life. 
Harijan, 12-12-36, p. 351
 
There is no occasion for articulate expression. Life is its own expression. I take the 
simile of the rose I used years ago. The rose does not need to write a book or 
deliver a sermon on the scent it sheds all round, nor on the beauty which 
everyone who has eyes can see. Well, spiritual life is infinitely superior to the 
beautiful and fragrant rose, and I make bold to say that the moment there is a 
spiritual expression in life, the surroundings will readily respond. There are 
passages in the Bible, the Gita, the Bhagavata, the Koran, which eloquently 
show this.”Wherever,” we read, “Krishna appeared, people acted like those 
possessed.” The same thing about Jesus. But to come nearer home, why are 
people touched as if by magic wherever Jawaharlal goes? They sometimes do 
not even know he has come, and yet they take sudden fire from the very 
thought that he is coming. Now there it may not be described as a spiritual 
influence, but there is a subtle influence and it is unquestionably there, call it 
by what name you like. They do not want to hear him, they simply want to see 
him. And that is natural. You cannot deal with millions in any other way. 
Spiritual life has grater potency than Marconi waves. When there is no medium 
between me and my Lord and I simply becomes a willing vessel for his 
influences to flow into it, then I overflow as the water of the Ganges at its 
source. There is no desire to speak when one lives the truth. Truth is most 
economical of words. Truth is most economical of words. There is thus no truer 
or other evangelism than life. 
Harijan, 12-12-36, p. 353
 
The time has now passed when the followers of one religion can stand and say, 
ours is the only true religion and all others are false. The growing spirit of 
toleration towards all religions is a happy augury of future. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 211  The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. V, p. 49
 
India, with its ancient religions, has much to give, and the bond of unity 
between us can best be fostered by a wholehearted sympathy and appreciation 
of each other’s form of religion. A greater toleration on this important question 
would mean a wider charity in our everyday relations, and the existing 
misunderstandings would be swept away. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. p. 50
 
“How could you reconcile yourself to believing all religions to be true?” 
That has been my fundamental position for years. Underlying it is the idea that 
you don’t become the judges of the world. Differences in the world there have 
been, and will be. God is all-powerful. He appears in many shapes and forms. If 
we search, we may find as many religions as there are men. Hundreds of men 
are merely striving to know the Truth. They will put the Truth in their own 
way. No two men will put it in identical terms. Though I know that God, the all-
powerful, resides in every one of us, we are imperfect media. We are all 
different. No two bodies are identically the same. No two leaves of the tree are 
identically the same; there is bound to be some difference. Each one prays to 
God according to his own light. Whom am I to judge and say that I pray better 
than you do? I don’t judge the Muslims, Parsis, Christians, and Jews. If I am a 
seeker of Truth, it is quite sufficient for me. I cannot say that because I have 
seen God in this way, the whole world must see Him in that way. All religions 
are true and equal. That, however, is not to say that they are equally true in 
religious terms or are absolutely true. Another man’s religions is true for him, 
as mine is for me. I cannot be a judge of his religion. That is my fundamental 
position. 
Conversations of Gandhiji, (1949), p. 85
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 212  The need of the moment is not one religion, but mutual respect and tolerance 
of the devotees of the different religions. We want to reach not the dead level, 
but unity in diversity. Any attempt to root out traditions, effects of heredity, 
climate and other surroundings is not only bound to fail, but is a sacrilege. 
The soul of religions is one, but it is encased in a multitude of forms. The latter 
will persist to the end of time. Wise men will ignore the outward crust and see 
the same soul living under a variety of crusts.  
Young India, 25-9-24, pp. 317-18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 213   
CHAPTER 31 
CIVILIZATION AND CULTURE 
In ancient times there were no restrictions on educa tion. It was not controlled 
by the state but was solely in the hands of the Brahmans who shaped the 
system of education solely with an eye it the welfare of the people. It was 
based on restraint and Brahmacharya. It was due to such a system of education 
that Indian civilization had outlived so many vicissitudes through thousands of 
years, while such ancient civilizations as those of Greece, Rome and Egypt had 
become extinct. No doubt the wave of a new civilization has been passing 
through India. But I am sure that it is transitory, it will soon pass away and 
Indian civilization will be revivified. In ancient times the basis of life was self-
restraint but now it is enjoyment. The result is that people have become 
powerless cowards and forsook the truth. Having come under the influence of 
another civilization, it may be necessary to adapt our own civilization in certain 
respects to our new environment, but we should not make any radical change 
in a civilization which is acknowledged even by some Western scholars to be 
the best. It may be urged that it is necessary to adopt the methods and 
instruments of Western civilization. But the forces born of spirituality, the bed-
rock of Indian civilization, are more than a match for material forces. India is 
preeminently the land of religion. It is the first and the last duty of Indians to 
maintain it as such. They should draw their strength from the soul, from God. If 
there adhere to that path Swarajya which they are aspiring to and working for 
will become their hand-maid. 
Mahatma Gandhi: His Life, Writings and Speeches (Ganesh & Co.), pp. 194-95
 
Brahmacharya is inherent in Hindu civilization, and Western civilization lacks it. 
It might be said the people of the West had prospered, but I would ask what 
was the age of their civilization. Egypt, Babylon, Greece and other great 
civilizations had perished, but Indian civilization still lives. The reason for it 
was that Indian civilization has what they had not, viz., Brahmacharya. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 214  The Collected works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. XXV, p. 321
 
We can only hope that, if the Asiatic has faith in himself and in his civilization, 
he will not lower the latter, and we doubt not that that which has stood the 
test of ages will come out scatheless in the test it is now undergoing in this sub-
continent. But the handful of Asiatics in South Africa have to remember that, if 
they do not want to disgrace the country of their origin or their system of life, 
they must thoroughly represent it, and not present a parody of it. They must 
live up to the moral code that has been handed down to them for ages past. 
With them, honesty Is not merely the best policy, and on that account only to 
be observed when it is profitable, but it must be adhered to at all cost and in 
all circumstances. With them, might is not right, but right is always might. 
They can have nothing to do with the doctrine of the survival of the fittest! 
They have to live and let live. If they catch the modern craze for competition 
and adopt the characteristically grasping nature of this vaunted civilization, 
they will certainly go under. 
The Collected works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. XI, p. 193
 
I am and I have been a determined opponent of modern civilization. I want you 
to turn your eyes today upon what is going on in Europe and if you have come 
to the conclusion that Europe is today groaning under the heels of the modern 
civilization, then you and your elders will have to think twice before you can 
emulate that civilization in our Motherland. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. XIII, p. 65
 
Modern Civilization is a curse in Europe as also in India. War is the direct result 
of modern civilization. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. XIII, p. 80
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 215  Modern civilization can be summed up by two expressions. One is that it 
represents ceaseless activity, and the second is that it aims at the annihilation 
of space and time. Everybody nowadays appears to be preoccupied, and to me 
that appears a dangerous symptom. They are all so intent upon earning bread 
and butter that they have no time for anything else. Modern civilization makes 
them materialistic, makes them concentrate their thoughts upon their bodies 
and upon the means of multiplying bodily comforts. Herbert Spencer has 
summed up the modern man by saying that the civilized man leads a complex 
life as opposed to the entirely simple life of the savage. The source from which 
the Asiatic trouble arose in the Transvaal is that the Asiatic’s wants are very 
simple, whereas those of the European are complex and therefore expensive. 
The tendency of modern methods goes to make the Native’s life more complex. 
While the wants of the raw Native are easily satisfied, the more enlightened of 
them require many more embellishment. Thus, they require more money, and 
when they find they cannot get it honesty they resort to dishonesty. 
After 18 years of study devoted to the consideration of the question, I have 
come to the conclusion that instead of there being a change for the better, 
there has been a change for the worse. I find that the simple life is better than 
the complex, in that they find time to devote attention to higher pursuits. In 
ancient civilization, there had been no rush whatsoever. They nowadays look 
downwards to the earth; in those days they looked upwards to Heaven. 
The flesh is not the be-all and the end-all of life. Now is the service of 
Mammon; then was the service of God. If I did not think that the soul existed 
and if I did not recognize than in all of them there were identical souls, then I 
for one would not like to live upon this earth. I would like to die. The body is 
the vehicle subservient to the soul .The body is simply earth, dross and 
objectionable. 
Ancient civilization made them look to the higher pursuits of life, the love of 
God, the respect of a neighbor and the consciousness of the existence of the 
soul. The sooner they returned to the (simple) life, the better. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 216  The collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. X, pp. 279-80
 
But from the present civilization, or, rather, from Western civilization, there 
flow propositions which have almost become maxims to live by-I call them 
fallacious maxims. They are “might is right” and “survival of the fittest”. Those 
who have propounded these two maxims have given a meaning to them. I am 
not going into the meaning that might be attached in our minds to them, but 
they have said undoubtedly, by “might is right”, that physical might is right, 
that physical strength is right and supreme. Some of them have also combined 
intellectual strength with physical strength, but I would replace both these 
with heart-strength, and I say that nobody with merely physical might and 
intellectual might can ever enjoy that strength that can proceed from the 
heart. It never can be that mere intellectual or mere physical strength can ever 
supercede the heart strength or, as Ruskin would say, social affections. A 
quickening and quickened soul responds only to the springs of the heart.  
The collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. VIII, pp. 243-44
 
It appears that Western civilization is destructive, Eastern civilization is 
constructive. Western civilization is centrifugal, Eastern civilization is 
centripetal. Western civilization, therefore, is naturally disruptive whereas 
Eastern civilization combines. I believe also that Western civilization is without 
a goal, Eastern civilization has always had the goal before it. I do not mix up or 
confuse Western civilization with Christian progress. I decline to believe that it 
is a symbol of Christian progress that we have covered a large part of the globe 
with the telegraph system, that we have got telephones and ocean greyhounds, 
and that we have trains running at a velocity of 50 or even 60 miles per hour. I 
refuse to believe that all this activity connotes Christian progress, but it does 
connote Western civilization. I think western civilization also represents 
tremendous activity, Eastern civilization represents contemplativeness, but it 
also sometimes represents lethargy. The people in India, the people in China-I 
leave Japan for the time being-having been sunk in their contemplative mood, The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 217  have forgotten the essence of the thing, they have forgotten that, in 
transferring their activity from one sphere of life to another sphere of life, they 
had not to be idle, they had not to be lazy. The result is that immediately they 
find an obstacle in their way, they simply sit down. It is necessary that 
civilization should come in contact with that of the West, it is necessary that 
civilization should be quickened with the Western spirit. Immediately that fact 
is accomplished, I have no doubt also that the Eastern civilization will become 
predominant, because it has a goal. I think you will see easily that a civilization 
or a condition in which all the forces fly away from the centre must necessarily 
be without a goal, whereas those which converge to a point have always a goal. 
It is then necessary for these two civilizations to meet and we shall have a 
different force altogether, by no means a menacing force, by no means a force 
that disunites, but a force that unites. The two forces are undoubtedly 
opposing forces, but perhaps in the economy of nature both are necessary. Only 
we, as intelligent human beings with heart and soul, have to see what those 
forces are, and have to use them, not blindly but intelligently, not anyhow and 
haphazard, but with a goal in view. Immediately that is done, there is no 
difficulty whatsoever in the two civilizations meeting and meeting for a good 
purpose. 
The Collected of Mahatma Gandhi, vol. VIII, pp. 244-45
 
The pandemonium that is going on in Europe shows that modern civilization 
represents forces of evil and darkness, whereas the ancient, i.e., Indian, 
civilization represents in its essence the divine force. Modern civilization is 
chiefly materialistic, as ours is chiefly spiritual. Modern civilization occupies 
itself in the investigation of the laws of matter, and employs human ingenuity 
in inventing or discovering means of production and weapons of destruction; 
ours is chiefly occupied in exploring spiritual laws. Our Shastras-1 lay down 
unequivocally that a proper observance of truth, chastity, scrupulous regard for 
all life, abstention from coveting others possessions and refusal to hoard 
anything but what is necessary for our daily wants is indispensable for a right The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 218  life; that without it is a knowledge of the divine element is an impossibility. 
Our civilization tells us with daring certainty that a proper and perfect 
cultivation of the quality of Ahimsa which, in its active form, means purest love 
and pity, brings the whole world to our feet. The author of this discovery gives 
a wealth of illustration which carries conviction with it. 
The collected works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. XIII, pp. 261-62
 
I have ventured utterly to condemn modern civilization because I hold that the 
spirit of it is evil. It is possible to show that some of its incidents are good, but I 
have examined its tendency in the scale of ethics. I distinguish between the 
ideals of individuals who have risen superior to their environment, as also 
between Christianity and modern civilization. Its activity is by no means 
confined to Europe. Its blasting influence is now being exhibited in full force in 
Japan. And it now threatens to overwhelm India. History teaches us that men 
who are in the whirlpool, except in the cases of individuals, will have to work 
out their destiny in it; but I do submit that those who are still outside its 
influence, and those who have a well-tried civilization to guide them, should be 
helped to remain where they are, if only as a measure of prudence. I claim to 
have tested the life which modern civilization has to give, as also that of the 
ancient civilization, and I cannot help most strongly contesting the idea that 
the Indian population requires to be roused by “the lash of competition and the 
other material and sensuous, as well as intellectual, stimuli”; I cannot admit 
that these will add a single inch to its moral stature. 
The collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. X, p. 247
 
While Western civilization is still young, we find things have come to such a 
pass that, unless its whole machinery is thrown overboard, people will destroy 
themselves like so many moths. Even today we can see that there are more and 
more cases of suicide every day. 
The collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. IX, p. 389
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 219  But I must frankly confess that I am not so much concerned about the stability 
of the Empire as I am about that of the ancient civilization of India which, in 
my opinion, represents the best that the world has ever seen. The British 
Government in India constitutes a struggle between the modern civilization, 
which is the Kingdom of Satan, and the ancient civilization, which is the 
Kingdom of God. The one is the God of War, the other is the God of Love. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. X, 189
 
But the moment you talk to them (villages) and they begin to speak, you will 
find that wisdom drops from their lips. Behind the crude exterior, you will find 
a deep reservoir of spirituality. I call this culture. You will not find such a thing 
in the West. You try to engage a European peasant in conversation, and you will 
find that he is uninterested in things spiritual. In the case of the Indian 
villagers, an age-old culture is hidden under an entrustment of crudeness. Take 
away the encrustation, remove this illiteracy, and you have the finest specimen 
of what a cultured, cultivated, free citizen should be. 
Mahatma, Vol. V, (1952), p. 11
 
I should be sorry to learn that Chinese culture resided in brick and mortar or in 
huge tomes which the moth can eat. A nation’s culture resides in the hearts 
and in the soul of its people. Chinese culture is Chinese only to the extent that 
it has become part and parcel of Chinese life. 
Mahatma, Vol. V, (1952), p. 12
 
There is no such thing as western or European civilization, but there is a 
modern civilization, which is purely material. 
 The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. IX, p. 479
 
 East and West can only and really meet when the West has thrown overboard 
modern civilization, almost in its entirety. They can also seemingly meet when The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 220  east has also adopted modern civilization. But that meeting would be an armed 
truce, even as it is between, say, Germany and England, both of which nations 
are living in the Hall of Death in order to avoid being devoured, the one by the 
other. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. IX, p. 479
 
 The Indian culture of our times is in the making. Many of us are striving to 
produce a blend of all the cultures which seem today to be in clash with one 
another. No culture can live, if it attempts to be exclusive. There is no such 
thing as pure Aryan culture in existence today in India. Whether the Aryans 
were indigenous to in India or were unwelcome intruders, does not interest me 
much. What does interest me is the fact that my remote ancestors blended 
with one another with the utmost freedom and we of the present generation 
are a result of that blend. Whether we are doing any good to the country of our 
birth and the tiny globe which sustains us or whether we are a burden, the 
future alone will show. 
Harijan, 9-5-26, p. 100
 
I do not want my house to be walled in on all sides and my windows to be 
stuffed. I want the cultures of all the lands to be blown about my house as 
freely as possible. But I refuse to be blown off about my feet by any. I refuse to 
live in other people’s houses as an interloper, a beggar or a slave. I refuse to 
put the necessary strain of learning English upon my sisters for the sake of false 
pride or questionable social advantage. I would have our young men and young 
women with literary tastes to learn as much of English and other world-
languages as they like, and then expect them to give the benefits of their 
learning to India and to the world, like, a Bose, a Ray or the Poet himself. But I 
would not have a single Indian to forget, neglect or be ashamed of his mother 
tongue, or to feel that he or she cannot think or express the best thoughts in 
his or her own vernacular. Mine is not a religion of the prison-house. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 221  Young India, 1-6-21, p. 170
 
 The Gujarat Vidyapith does not propose merely to feed on, or repeat, the 
ancient cultures. It rather hopes to build a new culture based on the traditions 
of the past and enriched by the experience of later times. It stands for the 
synthesis of the different cultures that have come to stay in India, that have 
influenced Indian life, and that, in their turn have themselves been influenced 
by the spirit of the soil. This synthesis will naturally be of the Swadeshi type, 
where each culture is assured its legitimate place, and not of the American 
pattern, where one dominant culture absorbs the rest, and where the aim is 
not towards harmony, but towards an artificial and forced unity. 
Young India, 17-11-20, p. 6
 
As to the habit of looking to the West for Light, I can give little guidance if the 
whole of my life has not provided any. Light used to go out from the East. If the 
Eastern reservoir has become empty, naturally the east will have to borrow 
from the West. I wonder if light, if it is light and not a miasma, can ever be 
exhausted. As a boy I learnt that it grew with the giving. Anyway I have acted 
in that belief and have, therefore, traded on the ancestral capital. It has never 
failed me. This, however, does not mean that I must act like a frog in the well. 
There is nothing to prevent me from profiting by the light that may come from 
the West. Only I must take care that I am not overpowered by the glamour of 
the West. I must not mistake the glamour for true light. 
Harijan, 13-1-40, p. 414
 
1 Seriptures 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 222   
SECTION VI ART, LITERATURE AND SCIENCE 
CHAPTER 32 
ON ART 
There are two aspects of things, -the outward and th e inward. It is purely a 
matter of emphasis with me. The outward has no meaning except in so far as it 
helps the inward. All true Art is thus the expression of the soul. The outward 
forms have value only in so far as they are the expression of the inner spirit of 
man. 
I know that many call themselves as artists, and are recognized as such, and 
yet in their works there is absolutely no trace of the soul’s upward urge and 
unrest…. 
Take Oscar Wilde. I can speak of him, as I was in England at the time that he 
was being much discussed and talked about…. Wilde saw the highest Art simply 
in outward forms and, therefore, succeeded in beautifying immorality. All true 
Art must help the soul to realize its inner self. In my own case, I find that I can 
do entirely without external forms in my soul’s realization. I can claim, 
therefore, that there is truly sufficient Art in my life, though you might not see 
what you call works of Art about me. My room may have blank walls; and I may 
even dispense with the roof, so that I may gaze out upon the starry heavens 
overhead that stretch in an unending expanse of beauty. What conscious Art of 
man can give me the panoramic scenes that open out before me, when I look 
up to the sky above with all its shining stars? This, however, does not mean that 
I refuse to accept the value of productions of Art, generally accepted as such, 
but only that I personally feel how inadequate these are compared with the 
eternal symbols of beauty in Nature. These productions of man’s Art have their 
value only so far as they help the soul onward towards self-realization. 
I see and find beauty in Truth or through Truth. All truths, not merely true 
ideas, but truthful faces, truthful pictures, or songs, are highly beautiful. 
People generally fail to see Beauty in Truth, the ordinary man runs away from The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 223  it and becomes blind to the Beauty in it. Whenever men begin to see Beauty in 
Truth, then true Art will arise. 
Mere outward form may not make a thing beautiful. To a true artist only that 
face is beautiful which, quite apart from its exterior, shines with the Truth 
within soul. There is then, as I have said, no beauty apart from Truth. On the 
other hand, Truth may manifest itself in forms which may not be outwardly 
beautiful at all. Socrates, we are told, was the most truthful man of his time 
and yet his features are said to have been the ugliest in Greece. To my mind, 
he was beautiful because all his life was a striving after Truth, and you may 
remember that his outward form did not prevent Phidias from appreciating the 
beauty of Truth in him, though as an artist he was accustomed to see Beauty in 
outward forms also! 
Truth and untruth often co-exist; good and evil are often found together. In an 
artist also, not seldom the right perception of things and the wrong co-exist. 
Truly beautiful creations come when right perception is at work. If these 
moments are rare in life, they are also rare in Art. 
Young India, 13-11-24, p. 377
 
Truth is the first thing to be sought for, and Beauty and Goodness will then be 
added unto you. Jesus was, to my mind, a supreme artist, because he saw and 
expressed Truth; and so was Mohammed, the Quran being the most perfect 
composition in all Arabic literature, -at any rate, that is what scholars say. It is 
because both of them strove first for Truth, that the grace of expression 
naturally came in; and yet neither Jesus nor Mohammed wrote on Art. That is 
the Truth and beauty I crave for, live for, and would die for. 
“May not after all some artists be able to see Truth in and through Beauty?” 
Some may, but here too, just as elsewhere, I must think in terms of the 
millions. And to the millions we cannot give that training to acquire a 
perception of Beauty in such a way as to see Truth in it. Show them Truth first, 
and they will see beauty afterwards…. Whatever can be useful to those starving The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 224  millions is beautiful to my mind. Let us give today the vital things of life, and 
all the graces and ornaments of life will follow. 
Young India, 20-11-24, p. 386
 
Man’s beauty is in his character, that of a beast in its bodily form. In the case 
of cow, for instance, we may say how good it is because of its skin, or hair, or 
feet, or horns; in the case of man, on the other hand, we do not say that he is 
good, because he is five feet and a half, and bad because he is four feet and a 
half, and better if he is an inch more than five and a half feet. The basis of 
goodness or badness in the case of man lies in his heart, not in the body, or 
even in accumulated wealth. 
Bapu’s Letters to Ashram Sisters, (1952), p. 102
 
True beauty, after all, consists in purity of heart. 
Young India, 20-10-27, p. 350
 
Why should I need an artist to explain a work of art to me? Why should it not 
speak out to me itself? I tell you what I mean. I saw in the Vatican art 
collection a statue of Christ on the Cross which simply captured me and kept 
me spell-bound. I saw it five years ago but it is still before me. There was no 
one there to explain its charm to me. In Belur in Mysore, I saw in the ancient 
temple a bracket in stone made of a little statuette, which spoke out to me 
without anyone to help me to understand it. It was just a woman, half-naked, 
struggling with the folds of her clothes to extricate herself from the shafts of 
cupid, who is after all lying defeated at her feet in the shape of a scorpion. I 
could see the agony on the form-the agony of the stings of the scorpion. That, 
at any rate, was my interpretation of it…. 
I want art and literature that can speak to the millions. 
Harijan, 14-11-36, p. 315
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 225  People who claim to pursue “art for art’s sake” are unable to make good their 
claim. There is a place for art in life, apart from the question-what is art? But 
art can only be a means to the end which we must all of us achieve. If however, 
it becomes an end in itself, it enslaves and degrades humanity. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai I, (1953), p. 160
 
Few people, who have devoted themselves to art, are known to have achieved 
a unique blending of devotion to art and pure and blameless life. We have 
somehow accustomed ourselves to the belief that art is independent of the 
purity of private life. I can say with all the experience at my command that 
nothing could be more untrue. As I am nearing the end of my earthly life, I can 
say that purity of life is the highest and truest art. The art of producing good 
music from a cultivated voice can be achieved by many, but art of producing 
that music from the harmony of a pure life is achieved very rarely. 
Harijan, 19-2-38, p. 10
 
True art takes note not merely of form, but also of what lies behind. There is 
an art that kills and an art that gives life…. True art must be evidence of 
happiness, contentment and purity of its authors. 
Young India, 11-8-21, p. 253
 
“Won’t you ask people to grow flowers on a small piece of land? Colour and 
beauty is as necessary to the soul, as food is to the body.” 
No, I won’t. Why can’t you see the beauty of colour in vegetables? And then, 
there is beauty in the speckles sky. But no, you want the colours of the rainbow 
which is a mere optical illusion. We have been taught to believe that what is 
beautiful need not be useful and what is useful cannot be beautiful. I want to 
show that what is useful can also be beautiful. 
Harijan, 7-4-46, 67
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 226  Beauty divorced from utility is inconceivable, utility here being taken in the 
widest sense of the word. Cloth woven from 400s may or may not be good for 
wearing, but the laborious effort which one has to put forth in spinning such 
superfine yarn, the mysteries of the art of spinning which are unfolded to him 
and the solutions of problems which suggest themselves to him in the process 
are all beneficial for Daridranarana (God as the poor)……  
What do the pictures and sculptures which held me spell-bound at the Vatican 
show? There are not many who have the capacity of appreciating their beauty. 
But the painters and the sculptors in question certainly worked with a view to 
serve humanity. If a picture inspires evil thoughts in the minds of the spectator, 
it does not deserve to be called artistic. For, art is that which leads a man one 
step forward on the path of morality and gives him elevated views. If it 
degrades him ethically, it is not art, but only obscenity. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai- I, (1953), pp. 224-25
 
Who can deny that much that passes for science and art today destroys the soul 
instead of uplifting it, and instead of evoking the best in us panders to our 
basest passions? 
Young India, 11-8-27, p. 255
 
There is a famous classical saying which has now become a proverb that he man 
‘that hath no music in himself’ is either an ascetic or a beast. We are far from 
being ascetics, and to the extent that we are devoid of music we are near 
allied to beasts. To know music is to transfer it to life. The prevalent discord of 
today is an indication of our sad plight…. 
Where there is discord and every one striking his own tune, there is bad 
government or anarchy….Where there is filth and squalor and misery, there can 
be no music. It implies an atmosphere quite the contrary. If we put a broad 
interpretation on music, i.e., if we mean by it union, concord, mutual help, it 
may be said that in no department of life can we dispense with it. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 227  Music today has been regarded to mean the vocal effort of a singing girl. We 
fight shy of sending our sisters and daughters to music schools. There seems to 
be superstition that their voice is best when it is devoid of sweetness. 
Music, truly speaking, is an ancient and sacred art. The hymns of Sama Veda-1 
are mine of music, and no ayat-2 of Quran can be recited unmusically. David’s 
psalms transport you to raptures and remind you of hymns from Sama Veda. Let 
us revive that art…. 
But to go a step further. If we would see music in millions of our poor homes, 
we should all wear Khadi and spin. The music of the spinning-wheel can be a 
free gift to all and is, therefore, sweeter. It is the hope and solace and 
mainstay of the millions and for me, therefore, the truly good music. 
Young India, 15-4-26, p. 140
 
Music has given me peace. I can remember occasions when music instantly 
tranquilized occasions my mind when I was greatly agitated over something. 
Music has helped me to overcome anger. I can recall occasions when a hymn 
sank deep into me, though the same thing expressed in prose had failed to 
touch me. I also found that the meaning of hymns discordantly sung has failed 
to come home to me and that it burns itself on my mind when they have been 
properly sung. When I hear Gita verses melodiously recited, I never grow weary 
of hearing; and the more I hear, the deeper sinks the meaning into my heart. 
Melodious recitations of the Ramayana, which I heard in my childhood, left on 
me an impression which years have not obliterated or weakened. I distinctly 
remember how when once the hymn. 
“The path of the Lord is meant for the brave, not the coward” was sung to me 
in an extraordinary sweet tune, it moved me as it had never before. In 1907, 
while in the Transvaal I was almost fatally assaulted, the pain of the wounds 
was relieved when, at my instance, Oliver Doke gently sang to me’ Lead Kindly 
Light’. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 228  Let no one infer from this that I know music. On the contrary, it would be more 
correct to say that my knowledge of music is very elementary. I cannot 
critically judge music. All I can claim is that I have a natural ear for good 
homely music. 
I do not mean to suggest either that because the influence of music has been 
uniformly good on me, it must act similarly on others. On the contrary, I know 
that many people employ music to feed their carnal passions. To sum up, 
therefore, we may say that the influence of music will differ according to 
temperaments. As Tulsidas has sung: 
“The Lord of Creation created everything in this world as an admixture of good 
and evil. 
“But a good man selects the good and rejects the evil, even as the fabled swan 
is said to help himself to cream, leaving the water in the milk.” 
Young India, 10-1-29, p. 15
 
Music exercises great influence on us. We have not given sufficient 
consideration to this important fact or else we should have provided for the 
teaching of music to our boys and girls. The Vedic hymns are found to have 
been composed on the basis of music.  
Harmonious music has the power to soothe the anguish of the soul. At times, 
we find that there is too much restlessness prevailing in large gatherings. This 
can be arrested and calmed if a national song is sung by all. When a larger 
number of people sing in harmony it is very inspiring and uplifting. Hundreds of 
boys singing a poem full of the spirit of adventure and bravery will be an 
impressive spectacle. While carrying on their work it is quite common to the 
boatmen and other labourers raise the cry of Harihar-3 and Alla-beli-4. This is 
to enable them to do their work more easily. It is an example of the power of 
music. I have seen my English friends trying to ignore the cold weather by 
singing. Our boys easily pick up songs from popular plays and learn to play upon 
such a crude musical instrument as the harmonium. This prevents cultivation a The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 229  taste for a good music. Instead, if they were trained in classical music, their 
time which is now wasted in singing popular and often silly songs, would be put 
to good use. Just as a trained singer does not sing out of tune or out to time, 
even so a learner of the right kind of music would not sing dirty songs. Music 
must be given a place in our scheme of education, and its value in the cultural 
awakening of the people accepted. 
True Education, (1962), p. 30
 
“Do you really care for music?” 
What a question! I have loved music-particularly devotional songs-since my 
childhood days. Of course I cannot claim, I warn you, and expert or analytical 
knowledge of its technique, but I cannot say I regret that very much, seeing 
that good music always moves me-genuinely. After all that is the essential 
thing, isn’t it? 
“Don’t you think such knowledge generally deepens our appreciation for music 
as an art?” 
Maybe. But as I told you just now I have never pined for expertism. To me 
music is something to receive joy and inspiration from, and I am quite content 
so long as I get that. 
How well I remember, the joy and peace and comfort that music used to give 
me when I was ailing in a South African hospital. I was then recovering from 
some hurts I had received at the hands of some roughs who had been engaged 
to cripple me-thanks to the growing success of my Passive Resistance 
Campaign. At my request the daughter of a friend of mine used, very often, to 
sing to me the famous hymn, ‘Lead Kindly Light’. And how it acted like a 
healing balm-invariably! I still remember this song with the gratitude. So there-
are you persuaded that I really care for music-or shall I have to adduce more 
convincing proofs? The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 230  Mira’s songs are always beautiful. Well-I know a good many of them. I like the 
members of my Ashram to sing to me her lovely songs-so touching in their 
sincerity and poetic appeal!...  
They are so moving, because they are so genuine. Mira sang because she could 
not help singing. Her songs well forth straight from the heart-like a spray. They 
were not composed for the lure of fame or popular applause as are some 
others’ songs…. 
It would be tragedy indeed if our beautiful music were to die from sheer 
popular neglect and indifference. I have always said so….  
“To be frank, I was under the impression that art had no place in the gospel of 
your austere life. In fact I had often pictured you as a dread saint who was 
positively against music.” 
Against music I !.... 
“May not your asceticism be somewhat responsible for such popular 
misconceptions? For surely you wouldn’t blame the people too much if they 
found it rather difficult to reconcile asceticism with art?” 
But I do maintain that asceticism is the greatest of all arts. For what is art but 
beauty in simplicity and what is asceticism but the loftiest manifestation of 
simple beauty in daily life shorn of artificialities and make –believes? That is 
why I always say that a true ascetic not only practices art but lives it….. 
I cannot even conceive of the evolution of India’s religious life without her 
music! 
“Why then do people suppose that you are unkind to art?” 
Well-well-there are some plausible reasons, I imagine. One is that I fail to see 
anything in much that passes for art in these days. In other words, my values 
are different. For instance, I don’t call that a great art which demands an 
intimate knowledge of technique for its appreciation. To me art, in order to be 
truly great, must, like the beauty of Nature, be universal in its appeal. I 
cannot, for the life of me, call the power of making hair-splitting distinctions The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 231  the test of artistic appreciation. True art and its appreciation can have nothing 
to do with sophisticated pretentiousness. It must be simple in its presentation 
and direct in its expression like the language of Nature. 
“But I am told you are averse to pictures on the walls of your rooms.” 
But why must my walls be overlaid with pictures if I thought that walls were 
meant only for sheltering us? Why may I not use of them for other purposes? 
“But if other people should want to have pictures-” 
 That is their affair, not mine. If it pleases them, let them adorn their walls 
with as many pictures as they like. Only I do not need them for my inspiration 
that is all. Nature suffices for me and that’s all, there is to it.  
Have I not gazed and gazed at the marvelous mystery of the starry vault, hardly 
ever tiring of that great panorama? Have I not the forests and the seas, the 
rivers and the mountains, the fields and the valleys with which to slake my 
thirst for beauty? Could one conceive of any painting comparable in inspiration 
to that of the star-studded sky, the majestic sea, the noble mountains? Is there 
a painter’s colour comparable to the vermillion of an emergent dawn or the 
gold of a parting a day? No, my friend, I need no inspiration other than 
Nature’s. She has never failed me yet: she mystifies me, bewilders me, sends 
me into ecstasies. What need have I for the childish colour-schemes of humans? 
Beside God’s handiwork does not man’s fade into insignificance? And-to be 
more concrete-tell me how can art be so thrilling, after all, when Nature, the 
mightiest artist, is there to cater for us! 
Life must immensely exceed all the arts put together. For what is this hot-
house art-plant of yours without life-soul and background of a steady worthy 
life? It may be all very edifying to flaunt it, but what, after all, does this 
fussing with art amount to if it all the time stultifies life instead of elevating it? 
Is not grotesque to claim-as so many artists do-that art is the crown of 
creation, the last meaning of existence? 
Art greater than life indeed! As if you could ever truly live under the aegis of a 
slogan! As if the soul could be spoon-fed with just one principle of enjoyment! The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 232  It is exactly when such high pretensions are loud in the land in the name of art 
that I have to cry halt. For to me the greatest artist is surely he who lives the 
finest life. It is therefore not art I repudiate, but the lofty airs it gives itself. In 
other words, my values are different, that’s all…. 
To me life is far too great a mystery, far too sacred a gift of the Gods to be 
appraised adequately from one particular angle. And that is why, I said so 
categorically just now that the greatest artist is he who lives the finest life. 
Among the Great, (1950), pp. 61-67 
I did not want to suggest arts were to be roundly condemned by all. Don’t I 
know that people have different temperaments? I merely meant that so far as I 
was concerned I had no need of arts like painting for my own inspiration. For I 
myself find enough satisfaction in the view of the starry vault. Perhaps Europe 
needs paintings to satisfy her. She hasn’t our sky. 
Her love for painting may, indeed, be due to other sources. I only wanted to 
impress on you the fact that I personally, find paintings rather superfluous…. 
I must repeat I am not keen about painting….  
I have told you that so far as I am concerned Nature suffices for me. But for 
others, if they are sincerely convinced that arts such as painting do any real 
good to humanity, so far so good. Only, let the artist guard against self-
deception and self-love. Let him be always alive to his duty towards the 
masses. To the extent that his art benefits the masses, it is to be approved of. 
To the extent that it doesn’t, it is to be discouraged. 
I cannot quite see eye to eye with those who swear by specialization. A real 
work of art should appeal to all.  
“Why are you so much against specialization?” 
I would put to you a counter-question: Why are you so much against the 
universalization of art, against helping it to derive its real inspiration from the 
virgin soil of popular response-in short, against vitalizing art by the life-blood of 
humanity? Why don’t you look the plain fact in the face that Nature, which The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 233  must be the last inspiration of all real arts, never stints? She never specializes 
in a way so that only the cultured few may enjoy her bounties leaving the vast 
majority out in the cold. Why then do you want to make art the handmaid of a 
privileged few? Surely, it can be no part of true art’s mission to confine its 
appeal to a select coterie, a handful of connoisseurs. Why must art lose touch 
with the life of the soil? I fail to see how you are going to reclaim art unless it 
were progressively stimulated by some widespread demand of the people. How 
would you save art if you didn’t tend its roots by the sap of the soil which is the 
fount of life? Why make art into a sort of plaything for a small Upper House?... 
I maintain that the profoundest utterances of man in every great philosophy or 
religion as in every great art must appeal equally to all. I cannot for the life of 
me see much in any specialization which can mean nothing to the vast 
multitude. Its only tangible effect seems to be that it gives a swelled head to a 
few and breeds in them contempt for the majority where there should be 
sympathy and understanding for all. Can there be anything commendable in 
such a perverted tendency? Or do you suppose that an activity which makes 
only for division instead of unity could ever rebound to the glory of our Creator? 
Rather than serve such a fine mission would it not be a thousand times better 
to do our best to alleviate the widespread misery of mankind, to come forward 
with the balm of sympathy and light of knowledge, to wipe the tears with 
which the earth is soaked from crust to center?  
Among The Great, (1950), p. 78-82
 
1. One of the four Vedas –the ancient lyrical and highly profound works of the Aryans. 
2. A verse from the Quran 
3. Hindu name of God 
4. Muslim name of God 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 234   
CHAPTER 33 
ON LITERATURE AND JOURNALISM 
For whose sake are we going to have our literature? Not certainly for the great 
gentry of Ahmedabad. They can afford to engage literary men and have great 
libraries in their homes. But what about the poor man at the well who with 
unspeakable abuse is goading his bullocks to pull the big leather bucket? ...Now 
I have hundreds of such folk for whom I want real life-giving literature. How I 
am to do so? I live in Segaon today where, in a population of 600, a little over 
ten are literate, certainly not more than fifty, very likely less. Of the ten or 
more who can read, there are scarcely three of four who can understand what 
they read, and among the women there is not one who is literate. 75 percent of 
the populations are Harijans. Now I thought of getting up a little library for 
them. The books had to be of course within their understanding, and so I 
begged a dozen school books from two or three girls who had no use for them. I 
have with me a young man who is an LL.B. but who has forgotten all his law and 
cast in his lot with me. He goes to the village and reads to those who come to 
him from these books whatever they can follow and digest. He takes a 
newspaper or two with him. But how is he to make them follow our 
newspapers? What do they know of Spain and of Russia? What do they know of 
geography? What I am to read to them?... 
You must know that much as I should have loved to bring with me a Segaon boy 
here, I have not done so. What would he do here? He would find himself in a 
strange world. But I am here as his representative, as those village folk’s 
representative. That is true democracy. I shall one day ask you to go with me 
there. I am clearing the way for you. Of course, the road is strewn with thorns, 
but I shall see that the thorns be not without roses too.  
 As I am speaking to you just now, I am put in mind of Dean Farrar and his book 
on the life of Christ. I may fight the British rule, but I do not hate the English or 
their language. In fact I appreciate their literary treasures. And Dean Farrar’s 
book is one of the treasures of the English language. You know how he labored The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 235  to produce that book? He read everything about Jesus in the English language, 
and then he went to Palestine, saw every place and spot in the Bible he could 
identify, and then wrote the book in faith and prayer, for the masses in 
England, in a language which all of them could understand. It is not in Dr. 
Johnson’s style but in the easy style of Dickens. Have we men like Farrar who 
will produce great literature for the village folk? Our literary men will pore of 
Kalidas and Bhavabhuti and English authors, and will give us imitations. I want 
them to go to villages, study them and give something life-giving…. 
I want art and literature that can speak to the millions. 
Harijan, 14-11-36, pp. 314-15
 
Let me tell you Gujarati will be none the poorer without novels or literature 
which is popularly and rightly called ‘fiction’. The less we revel in the realm of 
fiction the better for us. When I went to South Africa some 40 years ago I had 
armed myself with a few books, one of which was Taylor’s Gujarati grammar. 
The book, I remember, captivated me, but I have never had the opportunity of 
reading it again. I had it taken out of the library on the day I presided, but 
could read nothing in it except a few remarks of the Epilogue that he was 
written to that book of grammar. Some words of his in that Epilogue gripped 
me. “Who said that Gujarati is a poor inadequate language?’’ asks Mr. Taylor 
passionately. “Gujarati, the daughter of Sanskrit, how can it be poor? How can 
it be inadequate?” As is the speaker so is his language. It is not its inherent 
poverty but the poverty of the people speaking it that is reflected in Gujarati. 
That poverty cannot be wiped out by a few novels. How will it profit us if, to 
take a simple instance, we had a number of Nanda Batrishis in our language? 
No, I must hark back again to the village, and tell you what I need. Take, for 
instance, astronomy of which my ignorance was a bysmal. In Yeravada Jail I saw 
Kakasaheb gazing at the stars every night and he infected me with his passion. I 
sent for books and even a telescope. Books in English there were numerous, but 
Gujarati books there were none. There was a little book that had been sent 
me, but it was a miserable affair. Now why should we not be able to give our The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 236  people, our village folk, good books on astronomy? But have we for them even 
tolerable books on geography? I know of none. The fact is that we have 
neglected the village folk, and though we depend on them entirely for our food 
we have behaved all through as though we were their patrons and they were 
our wards. We have never thought of their needs. Our country presents in the 
world the solitary pitiable phenomenon of a nation carrying on its affairs 
through the medium of a foreign tongue. No wonder that our poverty of spirit is 
reflected in our language. There is no good book in French or German but is 
translated into English within a short time of its publication. Even its own 
classics are made available to the average reader, even to the children in 
convenient abridged sizes and at the cheapest prices. Have we anything like it? 
The field is vast and unexplored, and I want our litterateurs and linguists to 
explore it. I want them to go to the villages, feel the pulse of the people, 
examine their needs and supply what they want. We have Village Workers’ 
Training School in Wardha. I asked the Principal of the school to know the 
village crafts himself if he ever aspired to write intelligently about them. Don’t 
say that your intellects would lose their freshness in villages by being choked in 
their closed atmosphere. I will say that it is not the closed atmosphere, it is 
your own closed intellect with which you have gone there. If you will go there 
with your eyes and ears and intellects open, they will be all the fresher for a 
live contact with the virgin village air. 
Harijan, 21-11-36, pp. 326-27
 
I am told that our literature is full of even an exaggerated apotheosis of 
women. Let me say that it is an altogether wrong apotheosis. Let me place one 
simple test before you. In what light do you think of them when you proceed to 
write about them? I suggest that before you put your pens to paper, think of 
woman as your own mother, and I assure you the chastest literature will flow 
from your pens even like the beautiful rain from heaven which waters the 
thirsty earth below. Remember that a woman was your mother before a woman 
became your wife. Far from quenching their spiritual thirst some writers The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 237  stimulate their passions, so much so that poor ignorant women waste their time 
wondering how they might answer to the description our fiction gives of them. 
Are detailed descriptions of their physical form an essential part of literature, I 
wonder? Do you find anything of the kind in the Upanishada, the Quran or the 
Bible? And yet do you know that the English language would be empty without 
the Bible? Three parts Bible and one part Shakespeare is the description of it. 
Arabic would be forgotten without the Quran. And think of Hindi without 
Tulsidas! Do you find in it anything like what you find in present-day literature 
about women?  
Harijan, 21-11-36, p. 327
 
A language mirrors the character of the people who use it. We acquire 
information about the manners and customs of the Negroes of South Africa by 
studying their native tongue. A language takes its form from the character and 
life of those who speak it. We can say without hesitation that the people whose 
language does not reflect the qualities of courage, truthfulness and compassion 
are deficient in those virtues. Importing of words expressive of courage or 
compassion from other tongues will not enrich or widen the content of a 
language nor make its speaker brave and kind. Courage is not to be had as a 
gift; if it is there within, covered with rust though it be, it will shine forth when 
that covering disappears. In our own mother tongue, we find a large number of 
words denoting an excess of meekness, because we have lived under subjection 
for many years. Similarly, no other language in the world has as many nautical 
terms as English. Supposing that an enterprising Gujarati writer were to render 
books on the subject from English into Gujarati, it would not add one whit to 
the range and power of our language, nor would it in any way increase our 
knowledge of ships. But as soon as start building ships and raise a navy, the 
necessary technical phraseology will automatically establish itself. 
The Collected works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. XIV, pp. 11-12
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 238  I had promised the Editor a contribution for the Diwali Number of Hindustan, 
but I find that I have no time to make good the promise. However, thinking that 
I must write something, I am placing before the readers my views on 
newspapers. I happened to work in a newspaper office in South Africa owing to 
certain circumstances, and had given this subject much thought. I have acted 
upon the views which I and presenting here. 
In my opinion, a newspaper should not be used as the means of earning a living. 
There are certain spheres of work which have a direct bearing on public 
welfare; to undertake them for earning one’s livelihood is fraught with danger-
inasmuch as it obscures, and might hurt, the essential aim which one should put 
before oneself in taking to such an activity. And when newspapers are made an 
instrument of earning not only one’s livelihood but also of making profits, it 
leads to a number of evils. It is not necessary to prove to those familiar with 
newspaper work that such evils are actually operating today on quite a big 
scale. 
Newspapers are meant primarily to educate people, and apprise them of 
current trends in the history of the world. This is responsible work. Yet we see 
that readers cannot always depend on the information supplied by newspapers. 
Often, facts are found to be quite the opposite of what has been reported. If 
newspaper editors and staff realized that it was their duty to educate the 
people, they would wait to check the veracity of the news they print. It is true 
that, often, they have to work under difficult conditions, and sift the mass of 
information they receive and then infer hurriedly, within the limited time at 
their disposal, the true facts in each case. And, yet, I feel that it is better not 
to publish a particular piece of news until its truth has been definitely 
established. 
The reporting of speeches in Indian newspapers is generally defective. There 
are very few who can write down a speech verbatim while it is being delivered 
or afterwards from memory. This result in much distortion and interpolation. 
The best rule would be to send the proof of the reported speech to the speaker The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 239  for correction and publish its own report of the speech only if the speaker does 
not revise the proof sent to him. 
It is generally seen that newspapers publish any matter they have without 
regard to its need or importance just to fill in vacant space. This practice is 
almost universal. It is so in the West also. The reason is that most newspaper 
have an eye on profits. There is no doubt that newspapers have done great 
service to the people and these defects are therefore overlooked. But to my 
mind, they have done equally great harm. There are newspapers in the West 
which are so full of trash that it would be a sin to read them. Many create and 
promote ill-will among people with their prejudices. At times, they produce 
bitterness and strife even between different families communities. Thus, 
newspapers cannot escape criticism merely because they also serve the 
interests of the people. On the whole, it would seem that the gain and loss 
from newspapers are almost equal. 
It is a now an established practice with newspapers to derive their main income 
from advertisements rather than from subscribers. The result is deplorable. The 
very newspaper which in its editorial columns strongly denounces the drink-evil 
publishes advertisements in praise of drink. We read about the ill effects of 
tobacco as well as where to buy good tobacco or which brand of cigarette to 
smoke in the same newspapers. Or, it may, on the one hand, publish a severe 
denunciation of a certain play and, on the other, elsewhere in its columns a 
long advertisement of it. The largest source of revenue is derived from medical 
advertisements, which are the cause of much harm to our people. They, almost 
wholly, nullify the other services rendered by newspapers. I have seen the harm 
caused by such advertisements, for many people are lured into buying the 
medicines-supposed to increase virility, overcome debility, etc. Many of these 
medicines are those which encourage immorality. It is strange that such 
advertisements find a place even in religious papers. This custom has been 
adopted from the West. Whatever the effort, we must either put an end to this 
undesirable practice or, at least, reform it. It si the duty of every newspaper to 
exercise care in accepting advertisements for publication in its pages. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 240  The last, though not the least, question is: “What is the duty of a newspaper in 
a country where there are laws like the ‘Seditious Writing Act’ and the 
‘Defence of the India Act’ to restrict its freedom?”In order to get over this 
limitation our newspapers have evolved a style of writing which makes it 
possible to interpret what they say on a particular matter, which may seem to 
fall within the purview of these Acts, in two different ways. Some have 
perfected this art to a science. But in my opinion, this causes harm to our 
country. People develop a tendency to equivocate and fail to cultivate the 
courage to speak the truth. It changes the form of the language which, instead 
of being an instrument for expressing one’s thoughts, becomes a mask for 
concealing them. I am convinced that this is not the way to educate our 
people. Both people and individuals must cultivate the habit of speaking their 
minds. Newspapers are in a position to impart such training to them. The right 
course, and the one which will ultimately be found to be of the greatest 
advantage to us, would be that those who are afraid of the above laws and who 
do not want to get entangled in them should stop publishing newspapers, or 
that they should frankly state their true views and bear the consequences. 
Justice Steven has said somewhere that there can be no hatred in the language 
of a man who has no hatred in his heart. And if there is any hatred on should 
frankly express it. In case one has not the courage to act thus, one should stop 
publishing a newspaper. In this lies the good of our people and our country. 
True Education, (1962), pp. 171-73
 
The sole aim of journalism should be service. 
An Autobiography, (1966), p. 215
 
One of the objects of a newspaper is to understand popular feeling and to give 
expression to it; another is to arouse among the people certain desirable 
sentiments; and the third is fearlessly to expose popular defects. 
Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule, (1962), p. 19
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 241  Reference to abuses in the States is undoubtedly a necessary part of journalism 
and it is a means of creating public opinion. Only, my scope is strictly limited, I 
have taken up journalism not for its sake but merely as an aid to what I have 
conceived to be my mission in life. My mission is to teach by example and 
precept under severe restraint the use of the matchless weapon of Satyagraha 
which is a direct corollary of non-violence and truth. I am anxious, indeed I am 
impatient to demonstrate that there is no remedy for the many ills of life save 
that of non-violence. It is a solvent strong enough to melt the stoniest heart. To 
be true to my faith, therefore, I am not write in anger or malice. I may not 
write idly. I may not write merely to excite passion. The reader can have no 
idea of the restraint I have to exercise from week to week in the choice of 
topics and my vocabulary. It is training for me. It enables me to peep into 
myself and make discoveries of my weaknesses. Often my vanity dictates a 
smart expression or my anger a harsh adjective. It is terrible ordeal but a fine 
exercise to remove these weeds. The reader sees the pages of the Young India 
fairly well dressed up and sometimes, with Romain Rolland, he is inclined to 
say ‘what a fine old man this must be.’ Well, let the world understand that the 
fineness is carefully and prayerfully cultivated. And if it has proved acceptable 
to some whose opinion I cherish, let the reader understand that when that 
fineness has become perfectly natural i.e., when I have become incapable of 
evil and when nothing harsh or haughty occupies, be it momentarily, my 
thought-world, then and not till then, my non-violence will move all the hearts 
of all the world. I have placed before me and the reader no impossible ideal or 
ordeal. 
Young India, 2-7-25, p. 232
 
Unfortunately, the newspapers have become more important to the average 
man than the scriptures. I would fain advise them to give up reading 
newspapers. They would lose nothing by so doing whereas real food for their 
minds and spirits lies in the scriptures and other good literature. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 242  The Press is called the Fourth Estate. It is definitely a power but to misuse that 
power is criminal. I am a journalist myself and would appeal to fellow 
journalists to realize their responsibility and to carry on their work with no idea 
other than that of upholding the truth. 
Harijan, 27-4-47, p. 128
 
We think the editors of all such newspapers, which do not run with a 
commercial motive but only with a view to public service, must be prepared to 
face extinction at any moment. It is oblivious that all newspapers do not come 
within the scope of this rule, but only those which aim at public service by 
advocating reforms in the Government or among the people or in both. What 
should an editor do when something he has published displeases the 
Government or is held to violate some law, but is none the less true? Should he 
apologize? We would say, certainly not. True, he is not bound to publish such 
matter, but once it has been published, the editor ought to accept 
responsibility for it. 
This raises a very important issue. If the principle we have laid down is correct, 
it follows that, if any provocative writing has been published unintentionally 
and no apology is offered for the same, the newspaper will in consequence be 
prevented from rendering other services as well and the community will go 
without that benefit. We would not, therefore, apply this principle to matter 
published unintentionally, but it should apply to what is published after full 
deliberation. If a newspaper runs into difficulties for publishing any such 
matter, we think the closing down of the newspaper will be a better service to 
the public. The argument that in that case one may have to face the 
confiscation of all one’s property and be reduced to poverty has no force. Such 
a contingency may certainly arise, and it was precisely for this reason that we 
said that the editor of a journal devoted to public service must be ever ready 
for death…. 
Let us take an illustration. Suppose that the government has committed a gross 
injustice and robbed the poor. A progressive newspaper is being published in The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 243  such a place. It writes against the oppressive measure and advises the people 
to disregard the unjust law of the Government. The Government takes offence 
and threatens confiscation of property if no apology is forthcoming. Should the 
reformer apologize? We think the reply is again the same, that he should stand 
the confiscation of his property and close down the newspaper but certainly not 
offer an apology. The people would then see that, if the reformer could lose his 
all for their sake, they should also in their own interest oppose the law. If the 
reformer should apologize, the effect on the people would exactly be the 
reverse of this. They would know that the man would not be concerned 
overmuch even if their houses were on fire, that, from a safe distance, he 
would only indulge in meaningless declamations. When he himself ran into 
trouble (they would say) he meekly retired. And so they will think of doing 
likewise and resign themselves to the inevitable. They will thus argue 
themselves into greater weakness. It is, therefore, clear in this instance that 
the best service that the reformer can render will be stop the newspaper. 
The collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi-Vol. X, pp. 226-27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 244   
CHAPTER 24 
ON SCIENCE 
I was wondering where do I come in? There is no plac e here for a rustic like me 
who was to stand speechless in awe and wonderment. I am not in a mood to say 
much. All I can say is, that all these huge laboratories and electrical apparatus 
you see here are due to the labour,-unwilling and forced,-of millions. For 
Tata’s thirty lakhs did not come from outside, nor does the Mysore contribution 
come from anywhere else but this begar-1 world. If we are to meet the villages 
and to explain to them, how we are utilizing their money on buildings and 
plants which will never benefit them, but might perhaps benefit their posterity, 
they will not understand it. They will turn a cold shoulder. But we never take 
them into our confidence, we take it as a matter of right, and forget, that the 
rule of ‘no taxation without representation’, applies to them too. If you will 
really apply it to them, and realize your responsibility to render them an 
account, you will see that there is another side to all these appointments. You 
will then find not a little but a big corner in your hearts for them, and if you 
will keep it in a good nice condition, you will utilize your knowledge for the 
benefit of the millions on whose labour your education depends. I shall utilize 
the purse you have given me for Daridranarayan. The real Daridranarayan even 
I have not seen, but know only through my imagination. Even the spinners who 
will get this money are not the real Daridranarayan who live in remote corners 
of distant villages which have yet to be explored. I was told by your professor, 
that the properties of some of the chemicals will take years of experiments to 
explore. But who will try to explore villages? Just as some of the experiment in 
your laboratories go on for all the twenty-four hours, let the big corner in your 
heart remain perpetually warm for the benefit of the poor millions. 
I expect far more from you than from the ordinary man in the street. Don’t be 
satisfied with having given the little you have done, and say “We have done 
what we could, let us now play tennis and billards.” I tell you, in the billiard 
room and on the tennis court think of the big debt that is being piled against The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 245  you from day to day. But beggars cannot be choosers. I thank you for what you 
have given me. Think of the prayer I have made and translate it into action. 
Don’t be afraid of wearing the cloth the poor women make for you, don’t be 
afraid of your employers showing you the door if you wear Khadi. I would like 
you to be men, and stand up before the world firm in your convictions. Let your 
zeal for the dumb millions be not stifled in the search for wealth. I tell you, 
you can devise a far greater wireless instrument, which does not require 
external research, but internal,-and all research will be useless if it is not allied 
to internal research,-which can link your hearts with those of the millions. 
Unless all the discoveries that you make have the welfare of the poor as the 
end in view, all your workshops will be really no better than Satan’s workshops, 
as Rajagopalachari said in joke. Well, I have given you enough food for thought, 
if you are in a reflective mood, as all research students ought to be. 
Young India, 21-7-27, p. 235
 
A humanitarian industrial policy for India means to me a glorified revival of 
hand spinning, for through it alone can pauperism, which is blighting the lives 
of millions of human beings in their own cottages in this land, be immediately 
removed. Everything else may thereafter be added, so as to increase the 
productive capacity of this country. I would, therefore, have all young men 
with a scientific training to utilize their skill in making the spinning wheel, if it 
is possible, a more efficient instrument of production in India’s cottages. I am 
not opposed to the progress of science as such. On the contrary the scientific 
spirit of the West takes no note of God’s lower creation. I abhor vivisection 
with my whole soul. I detest the unpardonable slaughter of innocent life in the 
name of science and humanity so-called, and all the scientific discoveries 
stained with innocent blood I count as of no consequence. If the circulation of 
blood theory could not have been discovered without vivisection, the human 
kind could well have done without it. And I see the day clearly dawning when 
the honest scientist of the West, will put limitations upon the present methods 
of pursuing knowledge. Future measurements will take note not merely of the The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 246  human family but of all that lives and even as we are slowly but surely 
discovering that it is an error to suppose that Hindus can thrive upon the 
degradation of a fifth of themselves or that peoples of the West can rise or live 
upon the exploitation and degradation of the Eastern and African nations, so 
shall we realize in the fullness of time, that our dominion over the lower order 
of creation is not for their slaughter, but for their benefit equally with ours. 
For I am as certain that they are endowed with a soul as that I am.  
Young India, 17-12-25, p. 440
 
1 Forced Labour 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 247   
SECTION –VII: ECONOMIC IDEAS 
CHAPTER 35 
ECONOMIC AND ETHICS 
The whole gamut of man’s activities today constitute s an indivisible whole. You 
cannot divide social, economic, political and purely religious work into 
watertight compartments. I do not know any religion apart from human 
activity. 
Harijan, 24-12-38, p. 393
 
I must confess that I do not draw a sharp or any distinction between economics 
and ethics. Economies that hurts the moral well-being of a individual or a 
nation is immoral and, therefore, sinful. Thus the economics that permits one 
country to prey upon another is immoral.It is sinful to buy and use articles 
made by ‘sweated labor’. It is sinful to eat American wheat and let my 
neighbor, the grain dealer, starve for want of customer. Similarly, it is sinful 
for me to wear the latest finery of Regent Street when I know that if I had but 
worn the things woven by the neighbouring spinners and weavers, that would 
have clothed me, and fed and clothed them.  
Young India, 13-10-21, p. 325
 
True economics never militates against the highest ethical standard, just as all 
true ethics to be worth its name must at the same time be also good 
economics. An economics that inculcates Mammon worship, and enables the 
strong to amass wealth at the expense of the weak, is a false and dismal 
science. It spells death. True economics on the other hand, stands for social 
justice, it promotes the good of all equally including the weakest, and is 
indispensable for decent life.  
Harijan, 9-10-37, p. 292
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 248  That economics is untrue which ignores or disregards moral values. The 
extension of the law of non-violence in the domain of economics means nothing 
less than the introduction of moral values as a factor to be considered in 
regulating international commerce. 
Young India, 26-12-24, p. 421
 
I venture to think that the scriptures of the world are far safer and sounder 
treatises on laws of economics than many modern textbooks. 
Mahatma, Vol. I, (1951), p. 238
 
You know how Adam Smith in his Wealth of Nations, after laying down certain 
principles according to which economic phenomena are governed, went on to 
describe certain other things which constituted the ‘disturbing factor’ and 
prevented economic laws from having free play. Chief among these was the 
‘human element’. Now it is this ‘human element’ on which the entire 
economics of Khadi rests; and human selfishness, Adam Smith’s ‘pure economic 
motive’, constitutes the ‘disturbing factor’ that has got to be overcome. 
Harijan, 21-9-34, p. 253
 
Khaddar economics is wholly different from the ordinary. The latter takes no 
note of the human factor. The former wholly concerns itself with the human. 
Harijan, 16-7-31, p. 181 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 249   
CHAPTER 36 
SUPREMACY OF MAN: FULL EMPLOYMENT 
The supreme consideration is man. 
Y
oung India, 13-11-24, p. 378
 
Every human being has a right to live and therefore to find the wherewithal to 
feed himself and where necessary to clothe and house himself. But for this very 
simple performance we need no assistance from economists or their laws. 
Speeches and writings of Mahatma Gandhi, (4th Edn.), p. 350
 
Through Khadi, we were struggling to establish the supremacy of man in the 
place of the supremacy of power-driven machine over him.  
Harijan, 21-12-47, p. 476
 
We must utilize all available human labour before we entertain the idea of 
employing mechanical power. 
Harijan, 25-8-46, p. 281
 
I heartily endorse the proposition that any plan which exploits the raw 
materials of a country and neglects the potentially more powerful man-power is 
lopsided and can never tend to establish human equality. 
Real planning consists in the best utilization of the whole man-power of India 
and the distribution of the raw products of India in her numerous villages 
instead of sending them outside and re-buying finished articles at fabulous 
prices. 
Harijan, 23-3-47, p. 79
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 250  America is the most industrialized country in the world, and yet it has not 
banished poverty and degradation. That is because it neglects the universal 
man-power and concentrates power in the hands of the few who amass fortunes 
at the expense of many. 
Harijan, 23-3-47, p. 79
 
As I look at Russia, where the apotheosis of industrialization has been reached, 
the life there does not appeal to me. To use the language of the Bible, “What 
shall it avail a man if he gain the whole world and lose his soul?” In modern 
terms, it is beneath human dignity to lose one’s individuality and become a 
mere cog in the machine. I want every individual to become a full-blooded, 
fully developed member of the society. 
Harijan, 28-1-39, p. 438
 
Every human being is a machine, only it should be kept oiled and in proper 
trim. That is what I am trying to do. 
Harijan, 25-1-35, p. 399
 
The hungry millions ask for one poem: invigorating food. They cannot be given 
it. They must earn it. And they can earn only by the sweat of their brow. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, (4th Edn.), p. 593
 
To a people famishing and idle, the only acceptable form in which God can dare 
appear is work and promise of food as wages. 
Young India, 13-10-21, p. 325
 
I dare not take before them the message of God. I may as well place before the 
dog over there the message of God as before those hungry millions, who have The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 251  no luster in their eyes and whose only God is their bread. I can take before 
them a message of God only by taking the message of sacred work before them. 
Young India, 15-10-31, p. 310
 
We should be ashamed of resting, or having a square meal, so long as there is 
one able-bodied man or woman without work or food. 
Young India, 6-10-21, p. 314
 
According to me the economic constitution of India and for the matter of that 
the world, should be such that no one under it should suffer from want of food 
and clothing. In other words everybody should be able to get sufficient work to 
enable him to make the two ends meet. And this ideal can be universally 
realized only if the means of production of the elementary necessaries of life 
remain in the control of the masses. These should be freely available to all as 
God’s air and water are or ought to be; they should not be made a vehicle of 
traffic for the exploitation of others. Their monopolization by and country, 
nation or group of persons would be unjust. The neglect of this simple principle 
is the cause of the destitution that we witness today not only in this unhappy 
land but other parts of the world too. 
Young India, 15-11-28, p. 381 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 252   
CHAPTER 37 
PLAIN LIVING AND HIGH THINKING 
A certain degree of physical harmony and comfort is necessary, but above a 
certain level it becomes a hindrance instead of help. Therefore the ideal of 
creating an unlimited number of wants and satisfying them seems to be a 
delusion and a snare. The satisfaction of one’s physical needs, even the 
intellectual needs of one’s narrow self, must meet at a certain point a dead 
stop, before it degenerates into physical and intellectual voluptuousness. A 
man must arrange his physical and cultural circumstances so that they do not 
hinder him in his service of humanity, on which all his energies should be 
concentrated. 
Harijan, 29-8-36, p. 226
 
I do not believe that multiplication of wants and machinery contrived to supply 
them is taking the world a single step nearer its goal... I whole-heartedly 
detest this mad desire to destroy distance and time, to increase animal 
appetites and go to the ends of the earth in search of their satisfaction. If 
modern civilization stands for all this, and I have understood it to do so, I call it 
Satanic. 
Young India, 17-3-27, p. 85
 
If by abundance you mean everyone having plenty to eat and drink and to 
clothe himself with, enough to keep his mind trained and educated, I should be 
satisfied. But I should not like to pack more stuffs in my belly than I can digest 
and more things than I can ever usefully use. But neither do I want poverty, 
penury, misery, dirt and dust in India. 
Harijan, 12-2-38, p. 2
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 253  What may be hoped for is that Europe on account of her fine and scientific 
intellect, will realize the obvious and retrace her steps, and from the 
demoralizing industrialism she will find a way out. It will not necessarily be a 
return to the old absolute simplicity. But it will have to be a reorganization in 
which village life will predominate, and in which brute and material force will 
be subordinated to the spiritual force. 
Young India, 6-8-25, p. 273
 
I should not have labored my point as I have done, if I did not believe that, in 
so far as we have made the modern materialistic craze our goal, so far are we 
going downhill in the path of progress… Hence the ancient ideal has been the 
limitation of activities promoting wealth. This does not put an end to all 
material ambition. We should still have, as we have always had, in our midst 
people who make the pursuit of wealth their aim in life. But we have always 
recognized that it is a fall from the ideal… That you cannot serve God and 
Mammon is an economic truth of the highest value. We have to make our 
choice. Western nations are today groaning under the heal of the monster-god 
of materialism. Their moral growth has become stunted. They measure their 
progress in L.s.d. American wealth has become the standard. She is the envy of 
other nations. I have heard many of our countrymen say that we will gain 
American wealth but avoid its methods. I venture to suggest that such an 
attempt, if it were made, is foredoomed to failure…. 
Ours will only then be a truly spiritual nation when we shall show more truth 
than gold, greater fearlessness than pomp of power and wealth, greater charity 
than love of self. If we will but cleanse our houses, our palaces and temples of 
the attributes of wealth and show in them the attributes of morality, we can 
offer battle to any combinations of hostile forces without having to carry the 
burden of a heavy militia. Let us seek first the Kingdom of God and His 
righteousness, and the irrevocable promise is that everything will be added 
unto us. These are Real Economics. May you and I treasure them and enforce 
them in our daily life. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 254  Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, (4th Edn.), pp. 353-55
 
The less you possess, the less you want, the better you are. And better for 
what? Not for enjoyment of this life, but for enjoyment of personal service to 
the fellow-beings; service which you dedicate yourself, body, soul and mind. 
Mahatma, Vol. III, (1952), p. 157
 
I believe that independent India can only discharge her duty towards a groaning 
world by adopting a simple but ennobled life by developing her thousands of 
cottages and living at peace with the world. High thinking is inconsistent with 
complicated material life based on high speed imposed on us by Mammon 
worship. All the graces of life are possible only when we learn the art of living 
nobly. 
Harijan, 1-9-46, p. 285
 
Man falls from the pursuit of the ideal of plain living and high thinking the 
moment he wants to multiply his daily wants. History gives ample proof of this. 
Man’s happiness really lies in contentment. He who is discontented, however 
much he possesses, becomes a slave to his desires. And there is really no 
slavery equal to that of the desires. All the sages have declared from the 
house-tops that man can be his own worst enemy as well as his best friend. To 
be free or to be a slave lies in his own hands. And what is true for the 
individual is true for society. 
Harijan, 1-2-42, p. 27
 
Even if the paradise of material satisfactions, which they envisage as their final 
goal, were realize on earth, it would not bring mankind either contentment or 
peace. 
Mahatma Gandhi-The Last Phase, Vol. II, (1958), p. 139
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 255  The human body is meant solely for service, never for indulgence. The secret of 
happy life lies in renunciation. Renunciation is life. Indulgence spells death. 
Harijan, 24-2-46, p. 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 256   
CHAPTER 38 
DIGNITY OF LABOUR: BREAD LABOUR 
God created man to work for his food and said that t hose who ate without work 
were thieves. 
Young India, 13-10-21, p. 325
 
Bodily sustenance should come from bodily labour, and intellectual labour is 
necessary for the culture of the mind. Division of labour there will necessarily 
be, but it will be a division into various species of bodily labour and not a 
division into intellectual labour to be confined to one class and bodily labour 
confined to another class. 
Mahatma, Vol. III, (1952), p. 349
 
You must teach the people to labour with their hands and realize the dignity of 
work.  
Mahatma, Vol. V, (1952), p. 185
 
If everybody lived by the sweat of his brow, the earth would become a 
paradise. The question of the use of special talents hardly needed separate 
consideration. If everyone laboured physically for his bread, it followed that 
poets, doctors, lawyers and other s would consider it their duty to use those 
talents gratis for the service of humanity. Their output will be all the better 
and richer for their selfless devotion to duty. 
Mahatma, Vol. VII, (1953), p. 389
 
Leisure is good and necessary up to a point only. God created man to eat his 
bread in the sweat of his brow, and I dread the prospect of our being able to 
produce all that we want, including our foodstuffs, out of a conjurer’s hat. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 257  Harijan, 16-5-36, p. 111
 
Supposing a few millionaires from America came and offered to send us all our 
foodstuffs and implored us not to work but to permit them to give vent to their 
philanthropy, I should refuse point-blank to accept their kind offer… specially 
because it strikes at the root of the fundamental law of our being. 
Harijan, 7-12-35, p. 341
 
Last but not least, it seems to us that, after all, nature has intended man to 
earn his bread by manual labour-“by the sweat of his brow”-and intended him 
to dedicate his intellect not towards multiplying his material wants and 
surrounding himself with enervating and soul-destroying luxuries, but towards 
uplifting his moral being-towards knowing the will of the Creator-towards 
serving humanity and thus truly serving himself. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. X, p. 130
 
If all labored for their bread and no more, then there would be enough food 
and enough leisure for all. Then there would be no cry of over-population, no 
disease and no such misery as we see around. Such labour will be the highest 
form of sacrifice. Men will no doubt do many other things either through their 
bodies or through their minds, but all this will be labour of love for the common 
good. These will then be no rich and poor, none high and none low, no 
touchable and no untouchable. 
This may be an unattainable ideal. But we need not, therefore, cease to strive 
for it. Even if, without fulfilling the whole law of sacrifice, that is, the law of 
our being, we performed physical labour enough for our daily bread, we should 
go a long way towards the ideal. 
If we did so, our wants would be minimized our food would be simple. We 
should then eat to live, not live to eat. Let anyone who doubts the accuracy of 
this proposition try to sweat for his bread, he will derive the greatest relish The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 258  from the productions of his labour, improve his health, and discover that many 
things he took were superfluities. 
May not men earn their bread by intellectual labour? No. The needs of the body 
must be supplies by the body. “Render unto Caesar that which is Caesar that 
which is Caesar’s” perhaps applies here well. Mere mental, that is, intellectual 
labour is for the soul and is its own satisfaction. It should never demand 
payment. In the ideal state, doctors, lawyers and the like will work solely for 
the benefit of society, not for self. Obedience to the law of bread labour will 
bring about a silent revolution in the structure of society. Man’s triumph will 
consist in substituting the struggle for existence by the struggle for mutual 
service. The law of the brute will be replaced by the law of man.  
Harijan, 29-6-35, p. 156
 
Let me not be misunderstood. I do not discount the value of intellectual labour, 
but no amount of it is any compensation for bodily labour which every one of us 
is born to give for the common good of all. It may be, often is, infinitely 
superior to bodily labour but it never is or can be a substitutefor it, even as 
intellectual food, though far superior to the grains we eat, never can be a 
substitute for them. Indeed, without the products of the earth, those of the 
intellect would be an impossibility. 
Harijan, 15-10-25, p. 335
 
Intelligent bread labour is any day the highest form of social service…. 
The adjective ‘intelligent’ has been prefixed to labor in order to show that 
labour to be social service must have that definite purpose behind it. Otherwise 
every labourer can be said to render social service. He does in a way, but what 
is meant here is something much more than that. A person who labours for the 
general good of all serves society and is worthy of his hire. Therefore, such 
bread labour is not different from social service. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 259  Harijan, 1-6-35, p. 125
 
Return to the villages means a definite, voluntary recognition of the duty of 
bread labour and all it connotes. But says the critic, “Millions of India’s children 
are today living in the villages and yet they are living a life of semi-starvation.” 
This, alas, is but too true. Fortunately, we know that theirs is not voluntary 
obedience. They would perhaps shirk body labour if they could, and even rush 
to the nearest city if they could be accommodated in it. 
Compulsory obedience to a master is a state of slavery, willing obedience to 
one’s father is the glory of sonship. Similarly, compulsory obedience to the law 
of bread labour breeds poverty, disease and discontent. It is a state of slavery. 
Willing obedience to it must bring contentment and health. And it is health 
which is real wealth, not pieces of silver and gold. 
Harijan, 29-6-35, p. 156
 
My Ahimsa would not tolerate the idea of giving a free meal to a healthy person 
who has not worked for it in some honest way, and if I had the power, I would 
stop every Sadavrata-1 where free meals are given. It has degraded the nation 
and it has encouraged laziness, idleness, hypocrisy and even crime. Such 
misplaced charity adds nothing to the wealth of the country, whether material 
or spiritual, and gives a false sense of meritoriousness to the donor. How nice 
and wise it would be if the donor were open institutions where they would give 
meals under healthy, clean surroundings to men and women who would work 
for them. I personally think that the spinning wheel or any of the processes that 
cotton has to go through will be an ideal occupation. But if they will not have 
that, they may choose any other work; only the rule should be “No labour, no 
meal.” 
Young India, 13-8-25, p. 282
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 260  I do feel that whilst it is bad no encourage begging, I will not send away a 
beggar without offering him work and food. If he does not work, I shall let him 
go without food. Those who are physically disabled like the halt and the 
maimed have got to be supported by the State. There is, however, a lot of 
fraud going on under cover of pretended blindness or even genuine blindness. 
So many blind have become rich because of ill-gotten gains. It would be a good 
thing if they were taken to an asylum, rather than be exposed to this 
temptation. 
Harijan, 11-5-35, p. 99
 
1. A place where free meals are served 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 261   
CHAPTER 39 
SWADESHI 
Swadeshi is that spirit in us which restricts us to the use and service of our 
immediate surroundings to the exclusion of the more remote. Thus, as for 
religion, in order to satisfy the  requirements of the definition, I must restrict 
myself to my ancestral religion. That is, the use of my immediate religious 
surrounding. If I find it defective, I should serve it by purging it of its defects. 
In the domain of politics, I should make use of the indigenous institutions and 
serve them by curing them of their proved defects. In that of economics I 
should use only things that are produced by my immediate neighbours and serve 
those industries by making them efficient and complete where they might be 
found wanting. It is suggested that such Swadeshi, if reduced to practice, will 
lead to the millennium…. 
Much of the deep poverty of the masses is due to the ruinous departure from 
Swadeshi in the economic and industrial life. If not an article of commerce had 
been brought from outside India, she would be today a land flowing with milk 
and honey. But that was not to be. We were greedy and so as England. The 
connection between England and India was based clearly upon an error... 
If we follow the Swadeshi doctrine, it would be your duty and mine to find out 
neighbours who can supply our wants and to teach them to supply them where 
they do not know how to proceed, assuming that there are neighbours who are 
in want of healthy occupation. Then every village of India will almost be a self-
supporting and self-contained unit, exchanging only such necessary 
commodities with other villages as are not locally producible. This may all 
sound nonsensical. Well, India is a country of nonsense. It is nonsensical to 
parch one’s throat with thirst when a kindly Mohammedan is ready to offer 
pure water to drink. And yet thousands of Hindus would rather die of thirst 
than drink water from a Mohammedan household. These nonsensical men can 
also, once they are convinced that their religion demands that should wear The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 262  garments manufactured in India only and eat food only grown in India, decline 
to wear any other clothing or eat any other food…. 
It has often been urged that India cannot adopt Swadeshi in the economic life 
at any rate. Those who advance this objection do not look upon Swadeshi as a 
rule of life. With them it is a mere patriotic effort-not to be made if it involved 
any self-denial. Swadeshi as defined here, is a religious discipline to be 
undergone in utter disregard of the physical discomfort it may cause to 
individuals. Under its spell the deprivation of a pin of a needle, because these 
are not manufactured in India, need cause to terror. A Swadeshist will learn to 
do without hundreds of things which today he considers necessary…. 
I would urge that Swadeshi is the only doctrine consistent with the law of 
humanity and love. It is arrogance to think of launching out to serve the whole 
of India when I am hardly able to serve even my own family. It were better to 
concentrate my effort upon the family and consider that through them I was 
serving the whole nation and, if you will, the whole of humanity. This is 
humility and it is love. The motive will determine the quality of the act. I may 
serve my family regardless of the sufferings I may cause to others. As for the 
instance, I may accept an employment which enables me to extort money from 
people. I enrich myself thereby and then satisfy many unlawful demands of the 
family. Here I am neither serving the family nor the State. Or I may recognize 
that God has given me hands and feet only to work with for my substance and 
for that of those who may be dependent upon me. I would then at once simplify 
my life and that of those whom I can directly reach. In this instance, I would 
have served the family without causing injury to anyone else. Supposing that 
everyone followed this mode of life, we should have at once an ideal state. All 
will not reach that state at the same time. But those of us who, realizing its 
truth, enforce it in practice, will clearly anticipate and accelerate the coming 
of that happy day. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, (4th Edn.), pp. 336-44
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 263  Even Swadeshi like any other good thing can be ridden to death if it is made a 
fetish. That is a danger which must be guarded against. To reject foreign 
manufactures, merely, because they are foreign and to go on wasting national 
time and money in the promotion in one’s country of manufactures for which it 
is not suited, would be criminal folly and a negation of the Swadeshi spirit. A 
true votary of Swadeshi will never harbor ill-will towards the foreigner; he will 
not be actuated by antagonism towards anybody on the earth. Swadeshism is 
not a cult of hatred. It is a doctrine of selfless service, that has its roots in the 
purest Ahimsa, i.e., love. 
From Yerawada Mandir, (1957), p. 66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 264   
CHAPTER 40 
ECONOMIC EQUALITY 
All must have an equal opportunity. Given the opport unity, every human being 
has the same possibility for spiritual growth. 
Harijan, 17-11-46, p. 404
 
I cannot picture to myself a time when no man shall be richer than another. But 
I do picture to myself a time when the rich will spurn to enrich themselves at 
the expense of the poor and the poor will cease to envy the rich. Even in a 
most perfect world, we shall fail to avoid inequalities, but we can and must 
avoid strife and bitterness. There are numerous examples extant of the rich 
and the poor living in perfect friendliness. We have but to multiply such 
instances. 
Young India, 7-10-26, p. 348
 
I do not believe in dead uniformity. All men are born equal and free is not 
Nature’s law in the literal sense. All men are not born equal in intellect, for 
instance, but the doctrine of equality will be vindicated if those who have 
superior intellect will use it not for self-advancement at the expense of others, 
but for the service of those who are less favoured in that respect than they. 
Harijan, 6-10-46, p. 338
 
Economic equality must never be supposed to mean possession of an equal 
amount of worldly goods by everyone. It does mean, however, that everyone 
will have a proper house to live in, sufficient and balanced food to eat, and 
sufficient Khadi with which cover himself. It also means that the cruel 
inequality that obtains today will be removed by purely non-violent means. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 265  Harijan, 18-8-40, p. 253
 
Economic equality of my conception does not mean that everyone would 
literally have the same amount. It simply means that everybody should have 
enough for his or her needs… The elephant needs a thousand times more food 
than the ant, but that is not an indication of inequality. So the real meaning of 
economic equality is: “To each according to his need.” That is the definition of 
Marx. If a single man demanded as much as a man with wife and four children 
that would be a violation economic equality. 
Let no one try to justify the glaring difference between the classes and the 
masses, the prince and the pauper, by saying that the former need and more. 
That will be idle sophistry and a travesty of my argument…The contrast 
between the rich and the poor today is a painful sight. The poor villagers are 
exploited by the foreign Government and also by their own countrymen-the 
city-dwellers. They produce the food and go hungry. They produce milk and 
their children have to go without it. It is disgraceful. Everyone must have 
balanced diet, a decent house to live in, facilities for the education of one’s 
children and adequate medical relief. That constitutes my picture of economic 
equality. I do not want to taboo everything above and beyond the bare 
necessaries, but they must come after the essential needs of the poor are 
satisfied. Firs things must come first. 
Harijan, 31-3-46, p. 63
 
Put your talents in the service of the country instead of converting them into 
pound. If you are a medical man, there is disease enough in India to need all 
your medical skill. If you are lawyer, there are differences and quarrels enough 
in India. Instead of fomenting more trouble, patch up those quarrels and stop 
litigation. If you are an engineer, build model houses suited to the means and 
needs of our people and yet full of health and fresh air. There is nothing that 
you have learnt which cannot be turned to account. (The friend who asked the 
questions was a Chartered Accountant and Gandhiji then said to him :) There is The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 266  a dire need everywhere for accountants to audit the accounts of Congress and 
its adjunct associations. Come to India, I will give you enough work and also 
your hire four annas per day which is surely much more than millions in India 
get.  
Young India, 5-11-31, p. 384
 
My ideal is equal distribution, but so far as I can see, it is not to be realized. I 
therefore work for equitable distribution. 
Young India, 17-3-27, p. 86
 
The real implication of equal distribution is that each man shall have the 
wherewithal to supply all his natural needs and no more. For example, if one 
man has a weak digestion and requires only a quarter of a pound, both should 
be in a position to satisfy their wants. To bring this ideal into being, the entire 
social order has got to be reconstructed. A society based on non-violence 
cannot nurture any other ideal. We may not perhaps be able to realize the 
goal, but we must bear it in mind and work unceasingly to near it. To the same 
extents as we progress towards our goal, we shall find contentment and 
happiness, and to that extent, too, shall we have contributed towards the 
bringing into being of a non-violent society. 
Harijan, 25-8-40, p. 260 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 267   
CHAPTER 41 
DECENTRALIZED ECONOMY 
I suggest that, if India is to evolve along non-viol ent lines, it will have to 
decentralize many things. Centralization cannot be sustained and defended 
without adequate force. Simple homes from which there is nothing to take 
away require no policing; the places of the rich must have strong guards to 
protect them against dacoity. So must huge factories. Rurally organized India 
will run less risk of foreign invasion than urbanized India, well equipped with 
military, naval and air forces. 
Harijan, 30-12-39, p. 391
 
You cannot build non-violence on a factory civilization, but it can be built on 
self-contained villages…Rural economy as I have conceived it, eschews 
exploitation altogether, and exploitation is the essence of violence. 
Harijan, 4-11-39, p. 331
 
I must dissent from the view that the core of planning is centralization. Why 
should not decentralization lend itself to planning as well as centralization? 
The Hindus, 28-6-46
 
The end to be sought is human happiness combined with full mental and moral 
growth. I use the adjective moral as synonymous with spiritual. This end can be 
achieved under decentralization. Centralization as a system is inconsistent with 
a non-violent structure of society. 
Harijan, 18-1-42, p. 5 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 268   
CHAPTER 42 
VILLAGE COMMUNITIES 
Society based on non-violence can only consists of g roups settled in villages in 
which voluntary co-operation is the condition of dignified and peaceful 
existence. A society which anticipates and provides for meeting violence with 
violence will either lead a precarious life or create big cities and magazines for 
defence purposes. It is not unreasonable to presume from the state of Europe 
that its cities, its monster factories and huge armaments are so intimately 
interrelated that the one cannot exists without the other. The nearest 
approach to civilization based upon non-violence is the erstwhile village 
republic of India. I admit that it was very crude. I know that there was in it no 
non-violence of my definition and conception. But the germ was there. 
Harijan, 13-1-40, pp. 410-11
 
I am convinced that if India is to attain true freedom and through India the 
world also, then sooner or later the fact must be recognized that people will 
have to live in villages, not in towns, in huts, not in palaces. Crores of people 
will never be able to live at peace with each other in towns and palaces. They 
will then have no recourse but to resort to both violence and untruth. 
I hold that without truth and non-violence there can be nothing but destruction 
for humanity. We can realize truth and non-violence only in the simplicity of 
village life and this simplicity can best be found in the Charkha and all that the 
Charkha connotes. I must not fear if the world today is going the wrong way. It 
may be that India too will go that way and like the proverbial moth burn itself 
eventually in the flame round which it dances more and more fiercely. But it is 
my bounden duty up to my last breath to try to protect India and through India 
the entire world from such a doom. 
A Bunch of Old Letters, (1958), pp. 506- 07
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 269  My idea of village Swaraj is that it is a complete republic, independent of its 
neighbours for its own vital wants, and yet interdependent for many others in 
which dependence is a necessity. Thus every village’s first concern will be to 
grow its own food crops and cotton for its cloth. It should have a reserve for its 
cattle, recreation and playground for adults and children. Then if there is more 
land available, it will grow useful money crops, thus excluding Ganja-1 
tobacco, opium and the like. The village will maintain a village theatre, school 
and public hall. It will have its own waterworks ensuring clean water supply. 
This can be done through controlled wells or tanks. Education will be 
compulsory up to the final basic course. As far as possible every activity will be 
conducted on the co-operative basis. There will be no castes such as we have 
today with their graded untouchability. Non-violence with the technique of 
Satyagraha and non-co-operation will be the sanction of the village community. 
There will be a compulsory service of village guards who will be selected by 
rotation from the register maintained by the village. The government of the 
village will be conducted by the Panchayat of five persons annually elected by 
the adult villagers, male and female, possessing minimum prescribed 
qualifications. These will have all the authority and jurisdiction required. Since 
there will be no system of punishments in the accepted sense, this Panchayat 
will be the legislature, judiciary and executive combined to operate for its year 
of office. Any village can become such a republic today without much 
interference, even from the present Government, whose sole effective 
connection with the villages is the exaction of the village revenue. I have not 
examined here the question of relations with the neighbouring villages and the 
centre if any. My purpose is to present an outline of village government. Here 
there is perfect democracy based upon individual freedom. The individual is the 
architect of his own government. The law of non-violence rules him and his 
government. He and his village are able to defy the might of a world. For the 
law governing every villager is that he will suffer death in the defence of his 
and his village’s honour. 
There is nothing inherently impossible in the picture drawn here. To model 
such a village may be the work of a life time. Any lover of true democracy and The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 270  village life can take up a village, treat it as his world and sole work, and he will 
find good results. He begins by being the village scavenger, spinner, watchman, 
medicine man and school-master all at once. If nobody comes near him, he will 
be satisfied with scavenging and spinning. 
Harijan, 26-7-42, p. 238
 
My ideal village will contain intelligent human beings. They will not live in dirt 
and darkness as animals. Men and women will be free and able to hold their 
own against anyone in the world. There will be idle, no one will wallow in 
luxury. Everyone will have to contribute his quota of manual labour... It is 
possible to envisage railways, post and telegraph… and the like.  
A Bunch of Old Letters, (1958), pp. 505-06
 
1. Narcotic from the flower of Indian hemp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 271   
CHAPTER 43 
SELF- SUFFICIENCY 
Man is not born to live in isolation but is essentia lly a social animal independent 
and inter-dependent. No one can or should ride on another’s back. If we try to 
work out necessary conditions for such a life, we are forced to the conclusion 
that the unit of society should be a village or call it a manageable small group 
of people who would, in the ideal, be self-sufficient (in the matter of their vital 
requirements) as a unit and bound together in bonds of mutual co-operation 
and interdependence. 
Mahatma Gandhi-The Last Phase, Vol. II, (1958), p. 548
 
In other words, there should be equality between the towndwellers and villages 
in the standard of food and drink, clothing and other living conditions. In order 
to realize this equality today people should be able to produce their own 
necessaries of life, i.e., clothing, foodstuffs, dwellings and lighting and water.  
Mahatma Gandhi-The Last Phase, Vol. II, (1958), p. 547
 
Truth and non-violence from the foundation of the order of my conception. Our 
first duty is that we should not be a burden on society, i.e., we should be self-
dependent. From this point of view self-sufficiency itself is a kind of service. 
After becoming self-sufficient we shall use our spare time for the service of 
others. If all become self-sufficient, none will be in trouble. In such a state of 
affairs there would be no need of serving anybody. But we have not yet 
reached this stage and therefore we have to think of social service. Even if we 
succeed in realizing self-sufficiency completely, man being a social being, we 
will have to accept service in some form or other. That is, man is as much self-
dependent as interdependent. When dependence becomes necessary in order 
to keep society in good order it is no longer dependence, but co-operation; 
there is no one weak or strong among those who co-operate. Each is equal to The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 272  the other. There is the feeling of helplessness in dependency. Members of a 
family are as much self-dependent as inter-dependent. They are all co-
operators. So also when we take a society, a nation or the whole of mankind as 
a family all men become co-operators. If we can conceive a picture of such co-
operation we shall find that there would be no need of support from the lifeless 
machine. Instead of making the greatest use of machinery we shall be able to 
do with the least use thereof and therein lies the real security and self-
protection of society. 
The Ideology of the Charkha, (1951), pp. 86-88
 
My idea of self-sufficiency is that villages must be self-sufficient in regard to 
food, cloth and other basic necessities. But even this can be overdone. 
Therefore you must grasp my idea properly… Self-sufficiency does not mean 
narrowness. To be self-sufficient is not to be altogether self contained. In no 
circumstances would we be able to produce all the things we need. So though 
our aim is complete self-sufficiency, we shall have to get from outside the 
village what we cannot produce in the village; we shall have to produce more 
of what we can in order thereby to obtain in exchange what we are unable to 
produce. 
Khadi- why and How, (1959) p. 166
 
As for food, India has plenty of fertile land, there is enough water and no 
dearth of man power… The public should be educated to become self reliant. 
Once they know that they have got to stand on their own legs, it would 
electrify the atmosphere. 
Harijan, 19-10-47, p. 379
 
Self sufficiency is a big word… Villages will be swept away, if they are not self-
sufficient as to their primary wants and self reliant as to their protection 
against internal disruption by dissensions and disease and external danger from The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 273  thieves and dacoits. Self-sufficiency, therefore, means all the cotton processes 
and growing of seasonal food crops and fodder for cattle. Unless this is done 
there will be starvation. And self-reliance means corporate organization 
ensuring adjustment of internal differences through arbitration by the wise 
men of villages and cleanliness by corporate attention to sanitation and 
common disease. No mere individual effort is going to suffice. And above all, 
villagers must be taught to feel their own strength by combined effort to make 
their villages proof against thieves and dacoits. This is the best done by 
corporate non-violence. But if the way to non-violence does not seem clear to 
workers, they will not to hesitate to organize corporate defence through 
violence. 
Harijan, 5-4-42, p. 107
 
Every village has to be self-sustained and capable of managing its affairs even 
to the extent of defending itself against the whole world. 
Harijan, 28-7-46, p. 236 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 274   
CHAPTER 44 
CO-OPERATION 
“Without character there is no co-operation”, is a s ound maxim. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, (4th Edn.), p. 356
 
Individual liberty and inter-dependence are both essential for life in society. 
Only a Robinson Crusoe can afford to be all self-sufficient. When a man has 
done all he can for the satisfaction of his essential requirements he will seek 
the co-operation of his neighbours for the rest. That will be true co-operation.  
Harijan, 31-3-46, p. 59
 
Inter-dependence is and ought to be as much the ideal of man as self-
sufficiency. Man is a social being. Without inter-relation with society he cannot 
realize his oneness with the universe or suppress his egotism. His social inter-
dependence enables him to test his faith and to prove himself on the 
touchstone of reality. If man were so placed or could so place himself as to be 
absolutely above all dependence on his fellow-beings, he would become so 
proud and arrogant, as to be a veritable burden and nuisance to the world. 
Dependence on society teaches him the lesson of humility. That a man ought to 
be able to satisfy most of his essential needs himself is obvious; but it is no less 
obvious to me that when self-sufficiency is carried to the length of isolating 
oneself from society it almost amounts to sin. A man cannot become self-
sufficient even in respect of all the various operations from the growing of 
cotton to the spinning of the yarn. He has at some stage or other to take the 
aid of the members of his family. And if one may take help from one’s own 
family why not form one’s neighbours? Or otherwise what is the significance of 
the great saying, “The world is my family”? 
Young India, 13-5-26, p. 179
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 275  The eye that would dispense with the help of the hands does not practice self-
help, but is conceited and self-deceived. And as the different members of the 
body are self-reliant so far as their own functions are concerned and yet are 
mutually helpful and mutually dependent, so are we… each following rule of 
self-help in performing his own function, and yet co-operating with one another 
in all matters of common interest. Only then can we be said to be the servants 
of the country. 
Young India, 13-5-26, p. 179
 
Drops in separation could only fade away; drops in co-operation made the 
ocean which carried on its broad bosom greyhounds. 
Harijan, 7-9-47, p. 311
 
Ultimately, it is the individual who is the unit. This does not exclude 
dependence on and willing help from neighbours or from the world. It will be 
free and voluntary play of mutual forces. 
Harijan, 28-7-46, p. 236
 
Men should live in co-operation and work for the common good. 
Harijan, 2-2-47, p. 3
 
The seven hundred thousand dollars invested in the Imperial Bank of India, 
could be swept away by bomb from a Japanese pane, where as if they were 
distributed among the seven hundred thousand shareholders, nobody could 
deprive them of their assets. There will then be voluntary co-operation 
between these seven hundred thousand units, voluntary co-operation, not co-
operation induced by Nazi methods. Voluntary co-operation will produce real 
freedom and a new order, vastly superior to the new order in Soviet Russia. 
Some say there is ruthlessness in Russia but that it is exercised for the lowest 
and the poorest and is good for that reason. For me, it has very little good in it. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 276  Some day this ruthlessness will create an anarchy, worse than we have ever 
seen. 
Mahatma, Vol. VI, (1953), p. 120
 
Let it be remembered that co-operation should be based on strict non-violence. 
There is no such thing as success of violent co-operation. Hitler was a forcible 
example of the latter. He also talked vainly of co-operation which was forced 
upon the people and everyone knew where Germany had been led as a result. 
It would be a sad thing if India also tries to build up the new society based on 
co-operation by means of violence. Good brought about through force 
destroyed individuality.Only when the change is effected through the 
persuasive power of non-violent non-co-operation, i.e., love, could the 
foundation of individuality be preserved, and real, abiding progress be assured 
for the world.  
Harijan, 9-3-47, p. 58
 
The secret of successful co-operative effort is that the members must be 
honest and know the great merit of co-operation and it must have a definite 
progressive goal. Thus holding a certain sum of money in co-operation for the 
sake of making more money by charging exorbitant rates of interest is a bad 
goal. But co-operative farming or dairying is undoubtedly a good goal promoting 
national interest. Such instances can be multiplied. 
Harijan, 6-10-46, p. 344
 
My knowledge of the technicality of co-operation is next to nothing. My 
brother, Devadhar has made the subject of his own. Whatever he does, 
naturally attracts me and predisposes me to think that there must be something 
good in it and the handling of it must be fairly difficult. Mr. Ewbank very kindly 
placed at my disposal some literature too on the subject. And I have had a 
unique opportunity of watching the effect of some co-operative effort in The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 277  Champaran. I have gone through Mr. Ewbank’s ten main points which are like 
the commandments, and I have gone through the twelve points of Mr. Collins of 
Bihar, which remind me of the law of the Twelve Tables. There are so-called 
agricultural banks in Champaran. They were to me disappointing efforts, if they 
were meant to be demonstrations of the success of co-operation. On the other 
hand, there is quite work in the same direction being done by Mr. Hodge, a 
missionary whose efforts are leaving their impress on those who come in 
contact with him. Mr. Hodge is a co-operative in enthusiast and probably 
considers that the result which he sees flowing from his efforts are due to the 
working of co-operation. I, who was able to watch the efforts, had no 
hesitation in inferring that the personal equation counted for success in the one 
and failure in the other instance. 
I am an enthusiast myself, but twenty-five years of experimenting and 
experience have made me a cautious and discriminating enthusiast. Workers in 
a cause necessarily, though quite unconsciously exaggerate its merits and often 
succeed in turning its very defects into advantages. In spite of my caution I 
consider the little institution I am conducting in Ahmedabad as the finest thing 
in the world. It alone gives me sufficient inspiration. Critics tell me that it 
represents a soulless soul-force and that its severe discipline has made it 
merely mechanical. I suppose both-the critics and I-are wrong. It is, at best, a 
humble attempt to place at the disposal of the nation a home where men and 
women may have scope for free and unfettered development of character, in 
keeping with the national genius, and if its controllers do not take care, the 
discipline that is the foundation of character may frustrate the very end in 
view. I would like venture, therefore, to warn enthusiasts in co-operation 
against entertaining false hopes…. 
The credit which is becoming the money power of the world has little moral 
basis and is not a synonym for Trust or Faith, which are purely moral qualities. 
After twenty years’ experience of hundreds of men, who had dealings with 
banks in South Africa, the opinion I had so often heard expressed has become 
firmly rooted in me, that the greater the rascal the greater the credit he enjoys The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 278  with his banks. The banks do not pry into his moral character; they are satisfied 
that he meets his over-drafts and promissory notes punctually. The credit 
system has encircled this beautiful globe of ours like a serpent’s coil, and if we 
do not mind, it bids fair to crush us out of breath. I have witnessed the ruin of 
many a home through the system, and it has made no difference whether the 
credit was labelled co-operative or otherwise. The deadly coil has made 
possible the devastating spectacle in Europe, which we are helplessly looking 
on. It was perhaps never so true as it is today that, as in law so in war, the 
longest purse finally wins. I have ventured to give prominence to the current 
belief about credit system in order to emphasize the point that the co-
operative movement will be a blessing to India only to the extent that it is a 
moral movement strictly directed by men fired with religious fervor. It follows, 
therefore, that co-operation should be confined to men wishing to be morally 
right, but failing to do so, because of grinding poverty or of the grip of the 
Mahajan-1. Facility for obtaining loans at fair rates will not make immoral men 
moral. But the wisdom of the Estate or Philanthropists demands that they 
should help, on the onward path, men struggling to be good. 
Too often do we believe that material prosperity means moral growth. It is 
necessary that a movement which is fraught with so much good to India should 
not degenerate into one for merely advancing cheap loans…. 
With this standard before us, we will not measure the success of the movement 
by the number of co-operative societies formed, but by the moral condition of 
the co-operators. The registrars will, in that event, ensure the moral growth of 
existing societies before multiplying them. And the Government will make their 
promotion conditional, not upon the number of societies they have registered, 
but the moral success of the existing institutions. This will mean tracing the 
course of every pie lent to the members. Those responsible for the proper 
conduct of co-operative societies will see to it that the money advanced does 
not find its way into the toddy-sellers’ bill or into the pockets of the keepers of 
gambling dens. I would excuse the capacity of the Mahajan it has succeeded in 
keeping the gambling die or toddy the riot’s2 home… The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 279  I note that the movement takes note of all indigenous industries. I beg publicly 
to express my gratitude to Government for helping me in my humble effort to 
improve the lot of the weaver. The experiment I am conducting shows that 
there is a vast field for work in this direction. No well-wisher of India, no 
patriot dare look upon the impending destruction of the handloom weaver with 
equanimity. As Dr. Mann has stated, this industry used to supply the peasant 
with an additional source of livelihood and an insurance against famine. Every 
Registrar who will nurse back to life this important and graceful industry will 
earn the gratitude of India. My humble effort consists firstly in making 
researches as to the possibilities of simple reforms in the orthodox handlooms, 
secondly, in weaning the educated youth from the craving for Government or 
other services and the feeling that education renders him unfit for independent 
occupation and inducing him to take to weaving as a calling as honourable as 
that of a barrister or a doctor, and thirdly by helping those weavers who have 
abandoned their occupation to revert to it. I will not weary the audience with 
any statement on the first two parts of the experiment. The third may be 
allowed a few sentences as it has a direct bearing upon the subject before us. I 
was able to enter upon it only six months ago. Five families that had left off 
the calling have reverted to it and they are doing a prosperous business. The 
Ashram supplies them at their door with the yarn they need; its volunteers take 
delivery of the cloth woven, paying them cash at the market rate. The Ashram 
merely loses interest on the loan advanced for the yarn. It has as yet suffered 
no loss and is able to restrict its loss to a minimum by limiting the loan to a 
particular figure. All future transactions are strictly cash. We are able to 
command a ready sale for the cloth received. The loss of interest, therefore, 
on the transaction is negligible. I would like the audience to note its purely 
moral character from start to finish. The Ashram depends for its existence on 
such help as friends render it. We, therefore, can have no warrant for charging 
interest. The weavers could not be saddled with it. Whole families that were 
breaking to pieces are put together again. The use of the loan is pre-
determined. And we, the middlemen, being volunteers, obtain the privilege of 
entering into the lives of these families. I hope, for their and our betterment. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 280  We cannot lift them without being lifted ourselves. This last relationship has 
not yet been developed; but we hope, at an early date, to take in hand the 
education too of these families and not rest satisfied till we have touched them 
at every point. This is not too ambitious a dream. God willing, it will be a 
reality some day.I have ventured to dilate upon the small experiment to 
illustrate what I mean by co-operation to present it to other s for limitation. 
Let us be sure of our ideal. We shall ever fail to realize it, but we should never 
cease ever fail to realize it, but we should never cease to strive for it. Then 
there need be no fear of ‘Co-operation of scoundrels’ that Ruskin so rightly 
dreaded. 
Speeches and writings of Mahatma Gandhi, (4th Edn.), pp. 356-63
 
The most important question for consideration…. was whether cow farming 
should be in the hands of individuals or done collectively. I myself had no 
hesitation in saying that she could never be saved by individual farming. Her 
salvation, and with her that of buffalo, could only be brought about by 
collective endeavor. It is quite impossible for an individual farmer to look after 
the welfare of his cattle in his own home in a proper and scientific manner. 
Amongst other causes lack of collective effort has been a principal cause of the 
deterioration of the cow and hence of cattle in general. 
The world today is moving towards the ideal of collective or co-operative effort 
in every department of life. Much in this line has been and is being 
accomplished. It has come into our country also, but in such a distorted from 
that our poor have not been able to reap its benefits. Pari Passu with the 
increase in our population land holdings of the average farmer are daily 
decreasing. Moreover what the individual possesses is often fragmentary. For 
such farmers to keep cattle in their homes is a suicidal policy; and yet this is 
their condition today. Those who give the first place to economics and pay 
scant attention to religious, ethical or humanitarian consideration proclaim 
from the housetops that the farmer is being devoured by this cattle due to the The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 281  cost of their feed which is out of all proportion to what they yield. They say it 
is folly not to slaughter wholesale all useless animals. 
What then should be done by humanitarians is the question. The answer 
obviously is to find a way whereby we may not only save the lives of our cattle 
but also see that they do not become a burden. I am sure that co-operative 
effort can help us in a large measure. 
The following comparison may be helpful: 
1. Under the collective system no farmer can keep cattle in his house as he 
does today. They foul the air, and dirty the surroundings. There is neither 
intelligence nor humanitarianism in living with animals. Man was not 
meant to do so. The space taken up by the cattle today would be spared to 
the farmer and his family, if the collective system were adopted.  
2. As the number of cattle increases, life becomes impossible for the farmer 
in his home. Hence he is obliged to sell the calves and kill the male 
buffaloes or else turn them out to starve and die. This inhumanity would 
be averted, if the care of cattle were undertaken on a co-operative basis. 
3. Collective cattle farming would ensure supply of veterinary treatment to 
animals when they are ill. No ordinary farmer can afford this on his own. 
4. Similarly one selected bull can be easily kept for the need of several cows 
under the collective system. This is impossible otherwise except for 
charity. 
5. Common grazing ground or land for exercising the animals will be easily 
available under the co-operative system, whereas today generally there is 
nothing of the kind for individual farmers. 
6. The expense on fodder will be comparatively far less under the collective 
system. 
7. The sale of milk at good prices will be greatly facilitated, and there will be 
no need or temptation for the farmer to adulterate it as he does as an 
individual. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 282  8. It is impossible to carry out tests of the fitness of every head of cattle 
individually, but this could easily be done for the cattle of a whole village 
and would thus make it easier to improve the breed. 
9. The foregoing should be sufficient argument in favour of co-operative 
farming. The strongest argument in its favour is that the individualistic 
system has been the means of making our own condition as well as that of 
our cattle pitiable. We can only save ourselves and them by making this 
essential change. 
I firmly believe too that we shall not derive the full benefits of agriculture until 
we take to co-operative farming. Does it not stand to reason that it is better 
for a hundred families in a village to cultivate their lands collectively and 
divide the income therefrom than to divide the land anyhow into a hundred 
portions? And what applies to land applies equally to cattle. 
It is quite another matter that it may be difficult to convert people to adopt 
this way of life straightway. The straight and narrow road is always hard to 
traverse. Every step in the programme of cow service is strewn with thorny 
problems. But only by surmounting difficulties can we hope to make the path 
easier. My purpose for the time being is to show the great superiority of 
collective cattle farming over the individual effort. I hold further that the 
latter is wrong and the former only is right. In reality even the individual can 
only safeguard his independence through o-operation. In cattle farming the 
individual effort has led to selfishness and inhumanity, whereas the collective 
effort can abate both the evils, if it does not remove them altogether. 
Harijan, 15-2-42, p. 39
 
“Should peasants pool together their land divide the crop in proportion to the 
area of the fields they hold?” 
My notion of co-operation is that the land would be held in co-operation by the 
owners and tilled and cultivated also in co-operation. This would cause a saving 
of labour, capital, tools, etc. The owners would work in co-operation and own 
capital, tools, animals, seeds, etc. in co-operation. Co-operative farming of my The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 283  conception would change the face of the land and banish poverty and idleness 
from their midst. All this is only possible if people become friends of one 
another and as one family. When that happy event takes place there would be 
no ugly sore in the form of a communal problem. 
Harijan, 9-3-47, p. 59 
The system of co-operation is far more necessary for the agriculturists. The 
land belongs to the State; therefore, it yields the largest return when it is 
worked co-operatively. 
Harijan, 9-3-47, p. 59
 
1. Money lender 
2. Tiller of soil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 284   
CHAPTER 45 
TRUSTEESHIP 
To me the Gita become an infallible guide of conduct . It became my dictionary 
of daily reference. Just as I turned to the English dictionary for the meanings of 
English words that I did not understand, I turned to this dictionary of conduct 
for a ready solution of all my troubles and trials. Words like Aparigraha (non-
possession) and Samabhava (equability) gripped me. How to cultivate and 
preserve that equability was the question. How was one to treat a like 
insulting, insolent and corrupt officials, co-workers of yesterday raising 
meaningless opposition, and men who had always been good to one? How was 
one to divest oneself of all possessions? Was not the body itself possession 
enough? Were not wife and children possessions? Was I to destroy all the 
cupboards of books I had? Was I to give up all I had and follow Him?Straight 
came the answer: I could not follow Him unless I gave up all I had. My study of 
English law came to my help. Snell’s discussion of the maxims of Equity came to 
my memory. I understand more clearly in the light of the Gita teaching the 
implication of the word ‘trustee’. My regard for jurisprudence increased, I 
discovered in it religion. I understood the Gita teaching of non-possession to 
mean that those who desired salvation should act like the trustee who, though 
having control over great possessions, regards not an iota of them as his own. It 
became clear to me as daylight that non-possession and equability presupposed 
a change of heart, a change of attitude. 
An Autobiography, (1966), p. 198
 
Everything belonged to God and was from God. Therefore it was for His people 
as a whole, not for a particular individual. When an individual had more than 
his proportionate portion he became trustee of that portion for God’s people. 
God who was all-powerful had no need to store. He created from day to day, 
hence men also should in theory live from day to day and not stock things. If The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 285  this truth was imbibed by the people generally, it would become legalized and 
trusteeship would become a legalized institution. He wished it became a gift 
from India to the world. Then there would be no exploitation and no reserves 
as in Australia and other countries for white men and their posterity. In these 
distinctions lay the seeds of a war more virulent than the last two. As to the 
successor, the trustee in office would have the right to nominate his successor 
subject to legal sanction. 
Harijan, 23-2-47, p. 39
 
My idea of society is that while we are born equal, meaning that we have a 
right to equal opportunity, all have not the same capacity. It is, in the nature 
of things, impossible. For instance, all cannot have the same height, or colour 
or degree of intelligence, etc., therefore, in the nature of things, some will 
have ability to earn more and others less. 
People with talents will have more, and they will utilize their talents for this 
purpose. If they utilize their talents kindly, they will be performing the work of 
the State. Such people exist as trustees, on no other terms. I would allow a 
man of intellect to earn more, I would not cramp his talent. But the bulk of his 
greater earnings must be used for the good of the state, just as the income of 
all earning sons of the father go to the common family fund.They would have 
their earnings only as trustees. 
I am inviting those people who consider themselves as owners today to act as 
trustees, i.e., owners, not in their own right, but owners, in the right of those 
whom they have exploited. I will not dictate to them what commission to take, 
but ask them to take what is fair, e.g., I would ask man who possesses Rs. 
100/-to take Rs. 50/- and give the other Rs 50/-to the workers. But to him who 
possesses Rs. 1,00,00,000/- I would perhaps say, take I percent for yourself. So 
you see that my commission would not be a fixed figure because that would 
result in atrocious injustice. 
Young India, 26-11-31, pp. 368-69
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 286  If however in spite of the utmost effort, the rich do not become guardians of 
the poor in the true sense of the term and the latter are more and more 
crushed and die of hunger, what is to be done? In trying to find out the solution 
of this riddle. I have lighted on non-violent non-co-operation and civil 
disobedience as the right and infallible means. The rich cannot accumulate 
wealth without the co-operation of the poor in society. Man has been 
conversant with violence from the beginning, for has inherited this strength 
from the animal in his nature. It was only when he rose from the state of a 
quadruped (animal) to that of a biped (man) that the knowledge of the strength 
of Ahimsa entered into his souls. This knowledge has grown within him slowly 
but surely. If this knowledge were to penetrate to and spread amongst the 
poor, they would become strong and would become strong and would learn how 
to free themselves by means of non-violence from the crushing inequalities 
which have brought them to the verge of starvation. 
Harijan, 25-8-40, pp. 260-61
 
Supposing I have come by a fair amount of wealth-either by way of legacy, or 
by means of trade and industry, I must know that all that wealth does not 
belong to me, what belongs to me is the right to an honorable livelihood, no 
better than that enjoyed by millions of others. The rest of my wealth belongs 
to the community and must be used for the welfare of the community. I 
enunciated this theory when the Socialist theory was placed before the country 
in respect to the possessions held by zamindars and ruling chiefs. They would 
do away with these privileged classes. I want them to outgrow their greed and 
sense of possession, and to come down in spite of their wealth to the level of 
those who earn their bread by labour. The labourer has to realize that wealthy 
man is less owner of his wealth than the labourer is owner of his own viz., the 
power to work.  
The question how many can be real trustees according to this definition is 
beside the point. If the theory is true, it is immaterial whether many live up to 
it or only one man lives up to it. The question is of conviction. If you accept the The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 287  principle of Ahimsa, you have to strive to live up to it, no matter whether you 
succeed or fail. There is nothing in this theory which can be said to be beyond 
the grasp of intellect, though you may say it is difficult of practice.  
Harijan, 3-6-39, p. 145
 
You may say that trusteeship is a legal fiction. But if people meditate over it 
constantly and try to act up to it, then life on earth would be governed far 
more by love than it is at present. Absolute trusteeship is an abstraction like 
Euclid’s definition of a point, and is equally unattainable. But if we strive for 
it, we shall be able to go further in realizing a state of equality on earth than 
by any other method….It is my firm conviction that if the State suppressed 
capitalism by violence, it will be caught in the evils of violence itself and fail to 
develop non-violence at any time. The State represents violence in a 
concentrated and organized form. The individual has a soul, but as the State is 
a soulless machine, it can never be weaned from violence to which it owes its 
very existence. Hence I prefer to doctrine of trusteeship…. The fear is always 
there that the State may use too much violence against those who differ from 
it. I would be very happy indeed if the people concerned behaved as trustees; 
but if they fail, I believe we shall have to deprive them of their possessions 
through the State with the minimum exercise of violence.…That is why I said at 
the Round Table Conference that every vested interest must be subjected to 
scrutiny, and confiscation ordered where necessary with or without 
compensation as the case demanded. What I would personally prefer would be 
not a centralization of power in the hands of the State, but an extension of the 
sense of trusteeship; as in my opinion the violence of private ownership is less 
injurious than the violence of the State. However, if it is unavoidable, I would 
support a minimum of state-ownership. 
Modern Review, (1935), p. 412
 
My theory of ‘trusteeship’ is no make-shift, certainly no camouflage. I am 
confident that it will survive all other theories. It has the sanction of philosophy The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 288  and religion behind it. That possessors of wealth have not acted up to the 
theory does not prove its falsity; it proves the weakness of the wealthy. No 
other theory is compatible with non-violence. In the non-violent method the 
wrong-doer compasses his own end, if he does not undo the wrong. For, either 
through non-violent non-co-operation he is made to see his error, or he finds 
himself completely isolated. 
Harijan, 16-12-39, p. 376
 
I have no hesitation in endorsing the proposition that generally rich men and for 
that matter most men are not particular as to the way they make money. In the 
application of the method of non-violence, one must believe in the possibility 
of every person, however, depraved, being reformed under humane and skilled 
treatment. We must appeal to the good in human beings and expect response. 
Is it not conductive to the well-being of society that every member uses all his 
talents, only not for personal aggrandizement but for the good of all? We do not 
want to produce a dead equality where every person becomes or is rendered 
incapable of using his ability to the utmost possible extent. Such a society must 
ultimately perish. I therefore suggest that my advice that moneyed men earn 
their crores(honestly only, of course) but so as to dedicate them to the service 
of all is perfectly sound. तेन ᭜यᲦ े न भुंजीथाःis mantra based on uncommon 
knowledge. It is the surest method to evolve a new order of life of universal 
benefit in the place of the present one where each one lives for himself 
without regard to what happens to his neighbour. 
Harijan, 22-2-42, p. 49
 
As for the present owners of wealth, they will have to make their choice 
between class war and voluntarily converting themselves into trustees of their 
wealth. They will be allowed to retain the stewardship of their possessions and 
to use their talent, to increase the wealth, not for their own sakes, but for the 
sake of the nation and, therefore, without exploitation. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 289  The State would regulate the rate of commission which they will get 
commensurate with the service rendered and its value to society. Their 
children will inherit the stewardship only if they prove their fitness for it. 
Supposing India becomes a free country tomorrow, all the capitalists will have 
an opportunity of becoming statutory trustees. But such a statue will not be 
imposed from above. It will have to come from below. 
When the people understand the implications of trusteeship and the 
atmosphere is ripe for it, the people themselves beginning with Gram 
panchayats-1 will begin to introduce such statutes. Such a thing coming from 
below is easy to swallow. Coming from above it is liable to prove a dead 
weight. 
Harijan, 31-3-46, pp. 63-64
 
If the trusteeship idea catches, philanthropy, as we know it, will disappear….A 
trustee has no heir but the public. In a State built on the basis of non-violence, 
the commissions of trustees will be regulated. Princes and zamindars will be on 
a par with the other men and wealth. 
Harijan, 12-4-42, p. 116
 
The doctrine of trusteeship stands on its own merits…. 
We must not underrate the business talent and know-how which the owning 
class have acquired through generations of experience and specialization. Free 
use of it would accrue to the people under my plan. So long as we have no 
power, conversion is our weapon by necessity, but after we get power, 
conversion will be our weapon of choice. Conversion must precede legislation. 
Legislation in the absence of conversion remains dead letter. As an illustration, 
we have today the power to enforce rules of sanitation but we can do nothing 
with it because the public is not ready.  The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 290  “You say conversion must precede reform. Whose conversion? If you mean the 
conversion of the people, they are ready even today. If, on the other hand, you 
mean that of the owning class, we may as well wait till the Greek Kalends?” 
I mean the conversion of both…. 
You see, if the owning class does not accept the trusteeship basis voluntarily, 
its conversion must come under the pressure of public opinion. For that public 
opinion is not yet sufficiently organized. 
“What do you mean by poser?” 
By power I mean voting power for the people -so broad-based that the will of 
the majority can be given effect to. 
“Can the masses at all come into power by parliamentary activity?” 
Not by parliamentary activity alone. My reliance ultimately is on the power of 
non-violent non-co-operation, which I have been trying to build up for the last 
twenty-two years. 
Towards New Horizons, (1959), pp. 90-91
 
(On release of Gandhiji and his associates from detention in the Aga Khan 
Palace, the question of Trusteeship was taken up. Shri K. G. Mashruwala, Shri 
N.D. Parikh drew up a simple practical trusteeship formula which was placed 
before Mahatma Gandhi who made a few changes in it. The final draft read as 
follows :) 
1. Trusteeship provides a means of transforming the present capitalist order 
of society into an egalitarian one. It gives no quarter to capitalism, but 
gives the present owning class a chance of reforming itself. It is based on 
the faith that human nature is never beyond redemption. 
2. It does not recognize any right of private ownership of property except so 
far as it may be permitted by society for its own welfare. 
3. It does not exclude legislative regulation of the ownership and use of 
wealth. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 291  4. Thus under State-regulated trusteeship, an individual will not be free to 
hold or use his wealth for selfish satisfaction or in disregard of the 
interests of society. 
5. Just as it is proposed to fix a decent minimum living wage, even so a limit 
should be fixed for the maximum income that could be allowed to any 
person in society. The difference between such minimum and maximum 
incomes should be reasonable and equitable and variable from time to 
time so much so that the tendency would be towards obliteration of the 
difference. 
6. Under the Gandhian economic order the character of production will be 
determined by social necessity, and not by personal whim or greed. 
Harijan, 25-10-52, p. 301
 
“When transformation of private property into public property has been 
achieved by the application of the doctrine of trusteeship, will the ownership 
vest in the State, which is an instrument of violence, or in associations of a 
voluntary character like village communes and municipalities, which may of 
course derive their final authority from State made laws?” 
The question involves some confusion of thought. Legal ownership in the 
transformed condition shall vest in the trustee, not in the State. It is to avoid 
confiscation that the doctrine of trusteeship comes into play, retaining for 
society the ability of the original owner in his own right. Nor do I hold that the 
State must always be based on violence. It might be so in theory but it is 
possible to conceive a State which in practice would for the most part be based 
on non-violence. 
“How would the successor of a trustee be determined? Will he only have the 
right of proposing a name, the right of finalization being vested in the State?” 
The choice should be given to the original owner, who becomes the first 
trustee, but it must be finalized be the State. Such arrangement puts a check 
on the State as well as on the individual. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 292  This did not mean that pending necessary legislation the transformation of the 
capitalists into trustees would be left to the sweet will of the capitalists. If 
they proved impervious to the appeal to reason, the weapon of non-violent 
non-co-operation would be brought into play. Force of circumstances will 
compel the reform unless they court utter destruction. When Panchayat Raj is 
established, public opinion will do what violence can never do. 
Towards New Horizons, (1957), pp. 86-87
 
1. Village Councils 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 293   
CHAPTER 46 
THE EVIL OF INDUSTRIALISM 
Industrialization on a mass scale will necessarily l ead to passive or active 
exploitation of the villagers as the problems of competition and marketing 
come in. Therefore, we have to concentrate on the village being self-contained 
manufacturing mainly for use. Provided this character of the village industry is 
maintained, there would be no objection to villagers using even the modern 
machines and tools that they can make and can afford to use. Only they should 
not be used as a means of exploitation of others. 
Harijan, 29-8-36, p. 226
 
The present distress is undoubtedly insufferable. Pauperism must go. But 
industrialism is no remedy. The evil does not lie in the use of bullock carts. It 
lies in our selfishness and want of consideration for our neighbours. If we have 
no love for our neighbours, no change however revolutionary, can do us any 
good… 
Indeed, the West has had a surfeit of industrialism and exploitation…. The fact 
is that this industrial civilization is disease because it is all evil. Let us not be 
deceived by catchwords and phrases. I have no quarrel with steamships or 
telegrams. They may stay, if they can, without the support of industrialism and 
all it connotes. They are not an end.  
…They are in no way indispensable for the permanent welfare of the human 
race. Now that we know the use of steam and electricity, we should be able to 
use them on due occasion and after we have learnt to avoid industrialism. Our 
concern is therefore to destroy industrialism at any cost. 
Young India, 7-10-26, p. 348
 
“What is the cause of the present chaos?” The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 294  It is exploitation, I will not say, of the weaker nations by the stronger but of 
sister nations. And my fundamental objection to machinery rests on the fact 
that it is machinery that has enabled these nations to exploit others. In itself it 
is a wooden thing and can be turned to good purpose or bad. But it is easily 
turned to a bad purpose as we know. 
Young India, 22-10-31, p. 318
 
Industrialism is, I am afraid, going to be a curse for mankind. Exploitation of 
one nation by another cannot go on for all time. Industrialism depends entirely 
on your capacity to exploit, on foreign markets being open to you, and on the 
absence of competitors. It is because these factors are getting less and less 
every day for England that its number of unemployed is mounting up daily. The 
Indian boycott was but a flea-bite. And if that is the state of England, a vast 
country like India cannot expect to benefit by industrialization. In fact, India, 
when it begins to exploit other nations-as it must if it becomes industrialized-
will be a curse for other nations, a menace to the world. And why should I think 
of industrialization India to exploit other nations? Don’t you see the tragedy of 
the situation, viz. that we can find work for our 300 millions unemployed, but 
England can find none for its three millions and is faced with a problem that 
baffles the greatest intellects of England. The future of industrialism is dark. 
England has got successful competitors in America, Japan, France, and 
Germany. It has competitors in the handful of mills in India, and as there has 
been an awakening in India, even so, there will be an awakening in India; even 
so, there will be an awakening in South Africa with its vastly richer resources-
natural, mineral and human. The mighty English look quite pigmies before the 
mighty races of Africa. They are noble savages after all, you will say. They are 
certainly noble, but no savages; and in the course of a few years the Western 
nations must cease to find in Africa a dumping ground for their wares. And if 
the future of industrialism is dark for the West, would it not be darker still for 
India? The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 295  Young India, 12-11-31, p. 355
 
Pandit Nehru wants industrialization, because he thinks that, if it is socialized, 
it would be free from the evils of capitalism. My own view is that the evils are 
inherent in industrialism, and no amount of socialization can eradicate them. 
Harijan, 29-9-40, p. 299
 
God forbid that India should ever take to industrialism after that manner of the 
West. The economic imperialism of a single tiny island kingdom (England) is 
today keeping the world in chains. If an entire nation of 300 millions took to 
similar economic exploitation, it would strip the world bare like locusts. 
Harijan, 20-12-28, p. 422 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 296   
CHAPTER 47 
THE PLACCE OF MACHINERY 
Machinery has its place; it has come to stay. But it  must not be allowed to 
displace the necessary human labour. An improved plough is a good thing. But if 
by some chance, one man could plough up by some mechanical invention of his 
the whole of the land of India, and control all the agricultural produce and if 
the millions had no other occupation, they would starve, and being idle, they 
would become dunces, as many have already become. There is hourly danger of 
many more being reduced to that unenviable state. I would welcome every 
improvement in the cottage machine, but I know that it is criminal to displace 
the hand-labour by the introduction of power-driven spindles unless one is at 
the same time ready to give millions of farmers some other occupation in their 
homes. 
Young India, 5-11-25, p. 377
 
That use of machinery is lawful which sub serves the interest of all. 
Young India, 15-4-26, p. 142
 
I would favour the use of the most elaborate machinery if thereby India’s 
pauperism and resulting idleness be avoided. I have suggested hand-spinning as 
the only ready means of driving away penury and making famine of work and 
wealth impossible. The sinning –wheel itself is a piece of valuable machinery, 
and in my own humble way I have tried to secure improvements in it keeping 
with the special conditions of India. 
Young India, 3-11-21, p. 350
 
“Are you against all machinery?” The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 297  My answer is emphatically, ‘No’. But I am against its indiscriminate 
multiplication. I refuse to be dazzled by the seeming triumph of machinery. I 
am uncompromisingly against all destructive machinery. But simple tools and 
instruments and such machinery as saves individual labour and lightens the 
burden of the millions of cottages, I should welcome. 
Young India, 17-6-26, p. 218
 
What I object to, is the craze for machinery not machinery as such. The craze is 
for what they call labour-saving machinery. Men go on ‘saving labour’, till 
thousands are without work and thrown on the open streets to die of 
starvation. I want to save time and labour, not for a fraction of mankind, but 
for all; I want the concentration of wealth, not in the hands of a few, but in the 
hands of all. Today machinery merely helps a few to ride on the back of 
millions. The impetus behind it all is not the philanthropy to save labour, but 
greed. It is against this constitution of things that I am fighting with all my 
might. 
“Then you are fighting not against machinery as such, but against its abuses 
which are so much in evidence today.” 
I would unhesitatingly say ‘yes’; but I would add that scientific truths and 
discoveries should first of all cease to be mere instruments of greed. Then 
labourers will not be over-worked and machinery, instead of becoming a 
hindrance, will be a help. I am aiming, not at eradication of all machinery, but 
their limitation. 
“When logically argued out, that would seem to imply that all complicated 
power-driven machinery should go.” 
It might have to go out but I must make one thing clear. The supreme 
consideration is man. The machine should not tend to make atrophied the limbs 
of man. For instance, I would make intelligent exceptions. Take the case of the 
Singer Sewing machine. It is the one of few useful things ever invented, and 
there is a romance about the device itself. Singer saw his wife laboring over the The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 298  tedious process of sewing and seaming with her own hands, and simply out of 
his love for her he devised the Sewing Machine in order to save her from 
unnecessary labour. He, however, to saved not only her labour but also the 
labour of everyone who could purchase a sewing machine. 
“But in that case there would have to be a factory for making these Singer 
Sewing Machines, and it would have to contain power-driven machinery of 
ordinary type.” 
Yes, but I am socialist enough to say that such factories should be nationalized, 
or State-controlled. They ought only to be working under the most attractive 
and ideal conditions, not for profit, but for the benefit of humanity, love taking 
the place of greed as the motive. It is an alteration in the condition of labour 
that I want. This mad rush for wealth must cease, and the labourer must be 
assured, not only of a living wage, but a daily task that is not a mere drudgery. 
The machinery will, under these conditions, be as much a help to the man 
working it as the State, or the man who owns it. The present mad rush will 
cease, and labourer will work (as I have said) under attractive and ideal 
conditions. This is but one of the exceptions I have in mind. The Sewing 
Machine had love at its back. The individual is one supreme consideration. The 
saving of labour of the individual should be the object, and the honest 
humanitarian consideration, and not greed, the motive. Replace greed by love 
and everything will come right. 
Young India, 13-11-24, p. 378
 
“You are against this machine age, I see.” 
To say that is to caricature my views. I am not against machinery as such, but I 
am totally opposed to it when it masters us. 
“You would not industrialize India?” 
I would indeed, in my sense of the term. The village communities should be 
revived. Indian villages produced and supplied to the Indian towns and cities all 
their wants. India became impoverished when our cities became foreign The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 299  markets and began to drain the villages dry by dumping cheap and shoddy 
goods from foreign lands. 
“You would then go back to the natural economy?” 
Yes. Otherwise I should go back to the city. I am quite capable of running a big 
enterprise, but I deliberately sacrificed the ambition, not as a sacrifice, but 
because my heart rebelled against it. For I should have no share in the 
spoliation of the nation which is going on from day to day. But I am 
industrializing the village in a different way. 
Harijan, 27-2-37, p. 18
 
Granting for the moment that machinery may supply all the needs of humanity, 
still, it would concentrate production in particular areas, so that you would 
have to go about in a roundabout way to regulate distribution, whereas, if 
there is production and distribution both in the respective areas where things 
are required, it is automatically regulated, and there is less chance for fraud 
none for speculation. 
When production and consumption both become localized, the temptation to 
speed up production, indefinitely and at any price, disappears. All the endless 
difficulties and problems that our present-day economic system presents too, 
would then come to an end. 
“Then, you do not envisage mass-production as an ideal future of India?” 
Oh yes, mass-production, certainly, but not based on force. After all, the 
message of the spinning wheel is that. It is mass-production, but mass-
production in people’s own homes. If you multiply individual production to 
millions of time, would it not give you mass-production on a tremendous scale? 
But I quite understand that your ‘mass-production’ is a technical term for 
production by the fewest possible number through the aid of highly 
complicated machinery. I have said to myself that that is wrong. My machinery 
must be of the most elementary type which I can put in the homes of the 
millions. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 300  Harijan, 2-11-34, pp. 301-02
 
I know that man cannot live without industry. Therefore, I cannot be opposed 
to industrialization. But I have a great concern about introducing machine 
industry. The machine produces much too fast, and brings with it a sort of 
economic system which I cannot grasp. I do not want to accept something when 
I see its evil effects which outweigh whatever good it brings with it. I want the 
dumb millions of our land to be healthy and happy and I want them to grow 
spiritually. As yet for this purpose we do not need the machine. There are 
many, too many idle hands. But as we grow in understanding, if we feel the 
need of machines, we certainly will have them. We want industry, let us 
become industrious. Let us become more self-dependent, then we will not 
follow the other people’s lead so much. We shall introduce machines if and 
when we need them. Once we have shaped our life on Ahimsa, we shall know 
how to control the machine. 
Towards New Horizons, (1959), pp. 45-46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 301   
CHAPTER 48 
KHADI AND HAND-SPINNING 
Khadi connotes the beginning of economic freedom and  equality of all in the 
country… It must be taken with all its implications. It means wholesale 
Swadeshi mentality, a determination to find all the necessaries of life in India 
and that too through the labour and intellect of the villagers… The latter 
(villages) will be largely self-contained and will voluntarily serve the cities of 
India and even the outside world in so far as it benefits both the parties. 
This needs a revolutionary change in the mentality and taste of many. Easy 
though the non-violent way is in many respects, it is very difficult in many 
others. It vitally touches the life of every of every single Indian, makes him feel 
aglow with the possession of a power that has lain hidden within himself, and 
makes him proud, of his identify with every drop of the ocean of Indian 
humanity. 
Khadi to me is the symbol of unity of Indian humanity, of its economic freedom 
and equality and therefore, ultimately, in the poetic expression of Jawaharlal 
Nehru, ‘the livery of India’s freedom’. 
Moreover, Khadi mentality means decentralization of the production and 
distribution of the necessaries of life. Therefore, the formula so far evolved is 
every village to produce all its necessaries and a certain percentage in addition 
for the requirements of the cities. 
Constructive Programme, (1961), pp. 12-13
 
The message of the spinning wheel is much wider than its circumference. Its 
message is one of simplicity, service of mankind, living so as not to hurt others, 
creating an indissoluble bond between the rich and the poor, capital and 
labour, the prince and the peasant. 
Young India, 17-9-25, p. 321
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 302  I can only think of spinning as the fittest and most acceptable sacrificial body 
labour. I cannot imagine anything nobler or more national than that, for say 
one hour in the day, we should all do the labour that the poor must do, and 
thus identify ourselves with them and through them with all mankind. I cannot 
imagine better worship of God than that in His name. I should labour for the 
poor even as they do. The spinning wheel spells a more equitable distribution 
of the riches of the earth. 
Young India, 20-10-21, p. 329
 
I feel convinced that the revival of hand-spinning and hand-weaving will make 
the largest contribution to the economic and the moral regeneration of India. 
The millions must have a simple industry to supplement agriculture. Spinning 
was the cottage industry years ago, and if the millions are to be saved from 
starvation, they must be enabled to reintroduce spinning in their homes and 
every village must repossess its own weaver. 
Young India, 21-7-20, p. 4
 
If the reader would visualize the picture of the Indian skeleton, he must think 
of the eighty percent of the population which is working its own fields, and 
which has practically no occupation for at least four months in the year, and 
which therefore lives on the borderland of starvation. This is the normal 
condition. The ever recurring famines make a large addition to this enforced 
idleness. What is the work that these men and women can easily do in their 
own cottages so as to supplement their very slender resources? Does anyone 
still doubt that it is only hand-spinning and nothing else? 
Yong India, 3-11-21, pp. 350-51
 
Cottage manufacture of yarn and cloth cannot be expensive even as domestic 
cookery is not expensive and cannot be replaced by hotel cookery. Over 
twenty-five crores of the population will be doing their own hand-spinning and The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 303  having yarn thus manufactured woven in neighbouring localities. This 
population is rooted to the soil, and has at least four months in the year to 
remain idle. 
If they spin during those hours and have the yarn woven and wear it, no mill-
made cloth can compete with their Khadi. The cloth thus manufactured will be 
the cheapest possible for them.  
Young India, 8-12-21, p. 405
 
What is claimed for spinning is that: 
1. It applies the readiest occupation to those who have leisure and are in 
want of a few coppers. 
2. It is known to the thousands. 
3. It is easily learnt. 
4. It requires practically no outlay of capital. 
5. The wheel can be easily and cheaply made. Most of us do not yet know 
that spinning can be done even with a piece of title and splinter. 
6. The people have no repugnance to it. 
7. It affords immediate relief in times of famine and security. 
8. It alone can stop the drain of wealth which goes outside India in the 
purchase of foreign cloth. 
9. It automatically distributes the millions thus saves among the deserving 
poor. 
10. Even the smallest success means so much immediate gain to the people. 
11. It is the most potent instrument of securing co-operation among the 
people. 
Young India, 21-8-24, p. 277
 
The disease of the masses is not want of money so much as it is want of work. 
Labour is money. He who provides dignified labour for the millions in their 
cottages, provides food and clothing, or which is the same thing, money. The The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 304  Charakha provides such labour. Till a better substitute is found, it must, 
therefore, hold and field. 
Young India, 18-6-25, p. 211
 
Idleness is the great cause, the root of all evil, and if that root can be 
destroyed, most of the evils can be remedied without further effort. A nation 
that is starving has little hope or initiative left in it. It becomes indifferent to 
filth and disease. It says of all reforms, ‘to what good? That winter of despair 
can only be turned into the ‘suns-shine’ of hope, for the millions only through 
in life-giving wheel, the Charkha. 
Young India, 27-8-25, p. 299
 
The spinning wheel is an attempt to produce something out of nothing. If we 
have save sixty crores of rupees to the nation through the spinning wheel, as 
we certainly can, we add that vast amount to the national income. In the 
process we automatically organize our villages. And as almost the whole of the 
amount must be distributed amongst the poorest of the land, it becomes a 
scheme of just and nearly equal distribution of so much wealth. Add to this the 
immense moral value of such distribution, and the case for the Charkha 
becomes irresistible. 
Young India, 17-2-27, p. 52
 
Indeed, in some places, there are to be found weavers who are classed as 
untouchables on account of their occupation. They are mostly weavers of 
coarsest Khadi without any pattern. This class was fast dying out when Khadi 
came to the rescue and there was created a demand for their coarse 
manufacture. It was then discovered that there were numerous Harijan families 
that even subsisted on spinning. Thus Khadi is doubly the poor man’s staff of 
life. It helps the poorest, including the Harijans, who are the most helpless The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 305  among the poorest. They are so because many occupations which are available 
to the others are not available to the Harijans. 
Harijan, 27-4-34, p. 85
 
Spinning would spell the organization of crores into a joint co-operative effort, 
the conservation and utilization of the energy of the millions, and the 
dedication of crores of lives to the service of the motherland. The carrying out 
of such a gigantic task would, further, give us a realization of our own strength. 
It would mean our acquiring a thorough mastery of the detail and innumerable 
knotty problems which it presents, e.g, learning to keep account of every pie, 
learning to live in the villages in sanitary and healthy conditions, removing the 
difficulties that block the way and so on. For, unless we learn all this, we 
would not be able to accomplish this task. The spinning wheel, then, provides 
us with a means for generating this capacity in us.  
Young India, 27-5-26, p. 190
 
The only universal industry for the millions is spinning and no other. That does 
not mean that other industries do not matter or are useless. Indeed from the 
individual standpoint, and other industry would be more remunerative than 
spinning. Watch making will be no doubt a most remunerative and fascinating 
industry. But how many can engage in it? Is it of any use to the millions of 
villagers? But if the villagers can reconstruct their home, begin to live again as 
their forefathers did, if they begin to make good use of their idle hours, all 
else, all the other industries, will revive as a matter of course. 
Young India, 30-9-26, p. 341
 
The revival (of charkha) cannot take place without an army of selfless Indians 
of intelligence and patriotism working with a single mind in the villages to 
spread the message of the Charkha and bring a ray of hope and light in to their 
lusterless eyes. This is a mighty effort at co-operation and adult education of The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 306  the correct type. It brings about a silent and sure revolution like the silent but 
sure and life-giving revolution of the Charkha. 
Twenty years’ experience of Charkha work has convinced me of the correctness 
of the argument here advanced by me. The Charkha has served the poor 
Muslims and Hindus in almost an equal measure. Nearly five crores of rupees 
have been put into the pockets of these lakhs of village artisans without fuss 
and bottoming. 
Hence I say without hesitation that the Charkha must lead us to Swaraj in terms 
of the masses belonging to all faiths. The Charkha restores the villages to their 
rightful place and abolishes distinctions between high and low. 
Harijan, 13-4-40, p. 85
 
The spinning wheel is a symbol not of commercial war but of commercial 
peace. It bears not a message of ill-will towards the nations of the earth but of 
goodwill and self-help. It will not need the protection of a navy threatening a 
world’s peace and exploiting its resources, but it needs the religious 
determination of millions to spin their yarn in their own homes as today they 
cook their food in their own homes. I may deserve the curses of posterity for 
many mistakes of omission and commission, but I am confident of earning its 
blessings for suggesting a revival of the Charkha. I take my all on it. For every 
revolution of the wheel spins peace, goodwill and love. 
Yong India, 8-2-21, p. 406
 
It is my claim that (by reviving Khadi and other village industries) we shall 
evolved so far that we shall remodel national life in keeping with the ideal of 
simplicity and domesticity implanted in the bosom of the masses. We will not 
then be dragged into an imperialism which is built upon exploitation of the 
weaker races of the earth, and the acceptance of a giddy materialistic 
civilization protected by naval and air forces that have made peaceful living 
almost impossible. On the contrary we shall then refine that imperialism in to a The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 307  commonwealth of nations which will combine, if they do, for the purpose of 
giving their best to the world and of protecting, not by brute-force but by self-
suffering, the weaker nations or races of the earth… Such a transformation can 
come only after the complete success of the spinning wheel. India can become 
fit for delivering such a message, when she has become proof against 
temptation and therefore attacks from outside, by becoming self-contained 
regarding two of her chief needs-food and clothing. 
Young India, 29-6-21, p. 206
 
When once we have revived the one industry (Khadi), all the other industries 
will follow. I would make the spinning wheel the foundation on which to build a 
sound village life; I would make the wheel the center round which all other 
activities will revolve. 
Young India, 21-5-25, p. 177
 
My experience tells me that in order to make Khadi universal both in the cities 
and villages, it should be made available only in exchange for yarn. As time 
passes I hope people will themselves insist on buying Khadi through yarn 
currency. If, however, this does not happen and they produce yarn grudgingly, I 
fear Swaraj through non-violence will be impossible. 
Swaraj Through Charkha, (1945), p. 5
 
The Charkha is the symbol of non-violent economic self-sufficiency. If we and 
the people grasp this significance of the Charkha not a pice need be spent on 
propaganda for the Charkha. Nor need we look to the rich for alms. We shall 
without effort become the centre of hope, and the people will come to us of 
their own accord. They will not go elsewhere to seek work.  
Every village will become the nerve-centre of independence India. India will 
then not be known by her cities like Bombay and Calcutta, but by her 400 
millions inhabiting the seven lakhs of villages. The problems of Hindu-Muslim The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 308  differences, untouchability, conflicts, misunderstandings and rivalries will all 
melt away. This is the real function of the Sangh-1 we have to live and die for 
it.  
Khadi-Why and How, (1959), p. 150
 
Now I feel that Khadi alone cannot revive the villages. Village uplift is possible 
only when we rejuvenate village life as a whole, revive all village industries and 
make the entire village industrious. 
Khad- Why and How, (1959), p. 181
 
Our reason for putting forward Khadi is that it is the only way to redeem the 
people from the disease of inertia and indifference, the only way to generate in 
them the strength for freedom. I other crafts are also thus revitalized; our 
villages could be made self-sufficient and self-reliant. 
Khadi-Why and How, (1959), p. 185
 
What we are required to prove above all is the necessity for Khadi for 
establishing a strong, non-violent village economy. 
Khadi-Why and How, (1959), p. 189
 
Ponder and realize wealth this would mean to India, if 300 crores worth of 
cloth is produced by their own hands in the villages. This is a veritable mint of 
gold for them and if Khadi became universal, the villages will rise to unknown 
heights. Today our masses are poverty-stricken, without the luster of hope or 
intelligence in their eyes. The pure hands of the spinners could create this 
miracle for them and everyone could help. They should have understanding 
hearts and seeing eyes to detect the beauty in Khaddar even if it is coarse and 
not be allured by mill finery which could never clothe their nakedness in the 
true sense of the term. The only way to clothe their nakedness and drive away 
the hunger is for them to grow their own food and make their own cloth. If this The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 309  happy consummation can be achieved, the eyes of the whole world will be 
turned towards India. 
Harijan, 22-9-46, p. 322
 
1. All India spinners Association 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 310   
CHAPTER- 49 
VILLAGE INDUSTRIES 
Now I have no historical proof, but I believe that t here was a time in India 
when village economics were organized on the basis of such non-violent 
occupations, not on the basis of the rights of man but on the duties of man. 
Those who engaged themselves in such occupations did earn their living, but 
their labour contributed to the good of the community. A carpenter, for 
instance, ministered to the needs of the village farmer. He got no cash 
payment, but was paid in kind by the villagers. There could be injustice even in 
this system, but it would be reduced to a minimum. I speak from personal 
knowledge of the life in Kathiawad of over sixty years ago. There was more 
luster in people’s eyes, and more life in their limbs, than you find today. It was 
a life founded on unconscious Ahimsa. 
Harijan, 1-9-40, pp. 271-72
 
Bit by bit village people are being confined only to the hand-to-mouth business 
of scratching the, earth. Few know today that agriculture in the small and 
irregular holdings of India is not a paying proposition. The villagers live a 
lifeless life. Their life is a process of slow starvation. They are burdened with 
debts…. 
Mechanization is good when the hands are too few for the work intended to be 
accomplished. It is an evil when there are more hands than required for the 
work, as is the case in India… 
But if the cloth manufactured in mills displaces village hands, rice mills and 
flour mills not only displace thousands of poor women workers, but damage the 
health of the whole population in the bargain. Where people have no objection 
to taking flesh diet and can afford it, white flour and polished rice may do no 
harm, but in India, where millions can get no flesh diet even where they have 
no objection to eating it, if they can get it, it is sinful to deprive them of The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 311  nutritious and vital elements contained in whole wheat meal and unpolished 
rice. It is time medical men and others combined to instruct the people on the 
danger attendant upon the use of white flour and polished rice… 
The way to take work to the villagers is not through mechanization but that it 
lies through revival of the industries they have hitherto followed. 
Hence the function of the All-India Village Industries Association must, in my 
opinion, be to encourage the existing industries and to revive, where it is 
possible and desirable, the dying or dead industries of villages according to the 
village methods, i.e., the villagers working in their own cottages as they have 
done from times immemorial. These simple methods can be considerably 
improved as they have been in hand-ginning, hand-carding, hand-spinning and 
hand-weaving. 
Harijan, 16-11-34, p. 316
 
We shall have to see that the villagers become first of all self-contained and 
then cater for the needs of the city-dwellers. 
Harijan, 7-12-34, p. 341
 
I am not asking the city-dwellers to go to and lives in the villages. But I am 
asking them to render unto the villagers what is due to them. Is there any 
single raw material that the city-dwellers can obtain except from the villager? 
If they cannot, why not teach him to work on it himself, as he used to before 
and as he would do now but for our exploiting inroads? 
Harijan, 7-12-34, p. 340
 
Involuntary and voluntary idleness of villagers make them a perpetual prey of 
exploiters, foreign and indigenous. Whether the exploiter is from outside or 
from the Indian cities, their state would be the same, they would have no 
swaraj.So I said to myself, “Let these people be asked to do something else; If 
they will not interest themselves in Khadi, let them take up some work which The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 312  used to be done by their ancestors, but which has of late died out.” There are 
numerous things of daily use which they used to produce themselves not many 
years age, but for which they now depend on the other world. There are 
numerous things of daily use to the town-dweller for which he depends on the 
villagers, but which he now imports from cities. The moment the villagers 
decide to devote all their spare time to doing something useful and town-
dwellers to use those village products, the snapped link between the villagers 
and the town-dwellers would be restored. 
Harijan, 7-12-34, p. 340
 
khadi is the sum of the village solar system. The planets are the various 
industries which can support Khadi in return for the heat and the sustenance 
they derive from it. Without it, the other industries cannot grow. But during my 
last tour I discovered that, without the revival of the other industries, Khadi 
could not make further progress. For villagers to be able to occupy their spare 
time profitably, the village life must be touched at all points. 
Harijan, 16-11-34, p. 317
 
Other village industries come in as a handmaid to Khadi. They cannot exist 
without Khadi and Khadi will be robbed of its dignity without them. Village 
economy cannot be complete without the essential village industries such as 
hand-grinding, hand-pounding, soap-making, paper-making, match-making, 
tanning, oil-pressing, etc. Congressmen can interest themselves in these and, if 
they are villagers or will settle down in villages, they will give these industries 
a new life and a new dress. All should make it a point of honour to use only 
village articles whenever and wherever available. Given the demand, there is 
no doubt that most of our wants can be supplied from our villages. When we 
have become village-minded, we will not want imitations of the West or 
machine-made products, but we will develop a true national taste in keeping 
with the vision of a new India, in which pauperism, starvation and idleness will 
be unknown. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 313  Constructive Programme, (1961), pp. 16-17
 
The revival of village industries is but an extension of the Khadi effort. Hand-
spun cloth, hand-made paper, hand-pounded rice, home –made bread and Jam, 
are not uncommon in West. Only, there they do not have one hundredth of the 
importance they have in India. For, with us, their revival means life, their 
destruction means death, to the villagers, as he who runs may see. Whatever 
the machine age may do, it will never give employment to the millions whom 
the wholesale introduction of power machinery must displace. 
Harijan, 4-1-35, p. 372
 
The pursuit of the Charkha must become the mainspring of manifold other 
activities like village industries, Nai-Talim-1 etc. If we are able to adopt the 
Charkha intelligently we can revive the entire economic life of our villages once 
more. 
Khadi-Why and How, (1959), p. 151
 
I regard Charkha as the centre of village uplift. In addition, the worker will 
have to see what other village crafts can prosper in his village. The first in 
order among these crafts will be the bullock oil-press. Our workers would have 
to know its technique which has now been scientifically improved at 
Maganwadi. Another industry which may be introduced is hand-made paper. 
This has to be learnt not with the view of supplying paper to the whole country 
but in order to make the village self-sufficient and capable of earning a little 
income. 
Next to oil and hand-made paper we must revive the hand-chakki (grinding 
stone) -a vital thing in every village. Otherwise flour-mills which have been a 
source of anxiety to me for several years will be our fate. Similarly in regard to 
rice, we must get our people in the villages to take to hand-pounding of rice or The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 314  hand-chakkis for husking paddy, for it is a well-established fact that the white 
polished rice put out by mills is harmful to health. 
Khadi Why and How, (1959), pp. 161-62
 
Now we have to do the work anew with the objective of all-round village uplift. 
Let us see how far we can go. Even if our present activities have to be 
slackened or reduced to nought for sometime on account of these changes, it 
does not matter. We have created some sentiment about Khadi among the 
people. But if there is some error in what we told the people about the 
significance of Khadi we must pause. If ours was a wrong claim we must declare 
our error openly and withdraw our claim. 
I would ask city-dwellers to produce their own Khadi. I would forgo the 
temptation to supply Khadi to them. We shall go and settle in the villages. In 
case workers want to leave us on account of this change we shall let them go. 
Unless our head and heart are converted to this extent we cannot achieve the 
desired result. We of the A.I.S.A. will merely direct policy. By decentralizing 
our work as much as possible, we shall free ourselves from day to day Khadi 
work completely. Thereafter we shall concentrate our energy and attention on 
the other activities or crafts carried out in the vicinity of the village we settle 
in. Only then will the real substance of our work be realized…Today our main 
concern should be to lay the foundation for this work as deep as possible. 
Khadi –Why and How, (1959), p. 177
 
I am thinking of ways and means of improving the condition of the people 
through a rehabilitation of agriculture, cattle-breeding and all other village 
industries. My problem will be solved, if I succeed even in half a dozen villages, 
for as is the part so is the whole. 
Khadi-why and How, (1959), p. 181
 
1. Literally, new education; basis education, the aim of which is to develop the whole 
man; education through handicrafts. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 315   
SECTION –VIII: LABOUR RELATIONS 
CHAPTER 50 
THE IDEAL OF LABOUR RELATIONS 
True social economics will teach us that the working man, the clerk and the 
employer are parts of the same indivisible organism. None is smaller or greater 
than the other. Their interests should be not conflicting but identical and 
interdependent… 
There cannot be two opinions as to the fact that mill-owners, no less than 
other business and commercial firms, ought to take a parental interest in the 
welfare of their employees. The relations between the employer and the 
employee have been up to now merely those of the master and servant, they 
should be of father and children. 
Young India, 3-5-28, p. 139
 
I do not think there need be any clash between capital and labour. Each is 
dependent on the other. 
Young India, 4-8-27, p. 248
 
In the west there is still a watertight division between the employer and the 
employees... I should be untrue to myself and be failing in my duty to you, if I 
did not place before you what I regard as the highest ideal. The relation 
between mill-agents and mill-hands ought to be one of father and children or as 
between blood-brothers. I have often heard the mill-owners of Ahmedabad 
refer to themselves as ‘masters’ and their employees as their ‘servants’. Such 
loose talk should be out of fashion in a place like Ahemadabad which prides 
itself on its love of religion and love of Ahimsa. For the attitude is a negation of 
Ahimsa, inasmuch as our ideal demands that all our power, all our wealth and 
all our brains should be devoted solely to the welfare of those who, through 
their own ignorance and our false notions of things, are styled labourers or The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 316  ‘servants’. What I expect of you therefore is that you should hold all your riches 
as a trust to be used solely in the interest of those whom sweat for you, and to 
whose industry and labour you owe all your position and prosperity. I want you 
to make your labourers co-partners of your wealth. I do not mean to suggest 
that unless you legally bind yourselves to do all that, there should be a labour 
insurrection. The only sanction that I can think of in this connection is of 
mutual love and regard as between father and son, not of law. If only you make 
it a rule to respect these mutual obligations of love, there would be an end to 
all labour disputes, the workers would no longer feel the need for organizing 
themselves into unions… But that cannot happen until there is a single mill-
hand who does not regard the mill in which he works as his own, who complains 
of sweating and overwork, and who therefore nurses in his breast nothing but 
ill-will towards his employers. 
Young India, 10-5-28, pp. 145-46
 
Who can deny the reasonableness of the statement that workmen should be 
regarded as equal owners with the shareholders? If conflict between capital and 
labour is to be avoided, as I believe it can and must be, labour should have the 
same status and dignity as capital. Why should a million rupees put together be 
more than a million men or women put together? Are they not infinitely more 
than metal, white or yellow? Or should holders of mental always assume that 
labour cannot be organized and put together as metal can? For the past 
eighteen years, consciously or unconsciously, capital and labour and labour 
have acted in Ahmadabad on the assumption that there is no inherent conflict 
between the two... 
If then labourers are co-equal owners, their organization should have the same 
access to the transactions of mills as the shareholders. Indeed there can be no 
confidence on the part of labour if material information is withheld from it. 
Harijan, 13-2-37, p. 5
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 317  I have always said that my ideal is that capital and labour should supplement 
and help each other. They should be a great family living in unity and harmony, 
capital not only looking to the material welfare of the labourersbut their moral 
welfare also-capitalists being trustees for the welfare of the laboring classes 
under them. 
Young India, 20-8-25, p. 285
 
I have sought the friendship of the capitalists in order to induce them to regard 
themselves as trustees for the benefit to the labourers, and that they may take 
their own food after feeding them. Today capital is afraid of labour and labour 
scouls at capital. I want to replace that relationship by one of mutual trust and 
respect. 
Young India, 20-8-25, p. 291 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 318   
CHAPTER 51 
THE RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF LABOUR 
You must consider every labourer as equal with you a nd as your blood-brother. 
If you can reach that state, you will at once understand what a great power you 
can be for your good and for the good of the country. I would expect you to 
contribute to this cause of self-purification by giving up intoxicating drinks and 
drugs, carrion and beef-eating, gambling and the incurring of debts. And if you 
have in your midst Musalman labourers also, you must deal and live with them 
on terms of affection and absolute equality. You ought to take a personal 
interest in the work which you may be doing. Whilst you have a perfect right to 
demand from your employer’s good treatment, adequate wages and decent 
conveniences, it is expected of you that you will render poorer, honest service 
for the wages that you get. If you will only think a little, you will find that, by 
reason of your being employed as labourers in any individual concern, you 
become part-proprietors of that concern, precisely as are those who invest 
money in that concern. Labour, as a matter of fact, is as much money as 
metallic coin. If some put their money in any particular concern, you put your 
labour in it. Just as without money your labour would be useless, so also all the 
money in the world would be perfectly useless without labour. Therefore, you 
must take pride in working for the concern as if it were your own. Thus, while 
on the one hand you will be asserting your rights as part-proprietors, on the 
other, you will render full service by working honesty. 
Harijan, 2-2-34, p. 6
 
I entertain great respect for the dignity of labour that I have thrown in my lot 
with the labourers and for many, many years now I have lived in their midst like 
them, laboring with my hands and with my feet. In laboring with your bodies 
you are simply following the law of your being, and there is not the slightest 
reason for you to feel dissatisfied with your lot. On the contrary, I would ask 
you to regard yourselves as trustees for the nation for which you are laboring. A The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 319  nation may do without its millionaires and without capitalists, but a nation can 
never do without its labour. But there is one fundamental distinction between 
your labour and my labour. You are laboring for someone else. But I consider 
that I am laboring for myself. Then I am my own master. And in a natural state 
we should all find ourselves our own masters. But such a state of things cannot 
be reached in a day. It therefore becomes a very serious question for you to 
consider how you are to conduct yourselves as labourers serving others. Just as 
there is no shame in being a labourer for one’s self, so also is there no shame in 
laboring for others. 
But it becomes necessary to find out the true relationship between master and 
servant. What are your duties and what are your rights? It is simple to 
understand that your right is to receive higher wages for your labour. And it is 
equally simple to know that your duty is to work to the best of your ability for 
the wage you receive. And it is my universal experience that as a rule labour 
discharges its obligations more effectively and more conscientiously than the 
master who has corresponding obligations towards the labourers. It therefore 
becomes necessary for labour to find out how far labour can impose its will on 
the masters. If we find that we are not adequately paid or housed how are we 
to receive enough wages, and good accommodation? who is to determine the 
standard of wages, and the standard of comfort required by the labourers? The 
best way, no doubt, is that you labourers understand you own rights, 
understand the method of enforcing your own rights and enforce them. But for 
that you require a little previous training - education. You have been brought 
to a central point from the various parts of the country and find yourselves 
congregated together. But you find that you are not getting enough, you are 
not properly housed. I therefore venture to suggest to those who are leading 
you and advising you that their first business is to guide you not by giving you a 
knowledge of letters but of human affairs and human relations. I make this 
suggestion respectfully and in all humility because mu survey of labour in India 
is so far as I have been able to undertake it and my long experience of 
conditions of labour in South Africa lead me to the conclusion that in a large 
majority of cases leaders consider that they have to give labour the knowledge The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 320  of the three R’s. That undoubtedly is a necessity of the case. But it is to be 
preceded by a proper knowledge of your own rights and the way of enforcing 
them. And in conducting many a strike I have found that it is possible to give 
this fundamental education to the labourers within a few days. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, (4th Edn.), p. 1045 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 321   
CHAPTER 52 
STRIKES 
In a well-ordered democratic society there is no roo m, no occasion for 
lawlessness or strikes. In such a society there are ample lawful means for 
vindicating justice. Violence, veiled or unveiled must be taboo. 
Harijan, 1-2-48, p. 15
 
I know that strikes are an inherent right of the working-men for the purpose of 
securing justice, but they must be considered a crime immediately the 
capitalists accept the principle of arbitration.  
Young India, 5-5-20, p. 6
 
How should capital behave when labour strikes? This question is in the air and 
has great importance at the present moment. One way is that of suppression 
named or nicknamed ‘American’. It consists in suppression of labour through 
organized goondaism1. Everybody would consider this as wrong and destructive. 
The other way, right and honourable, consists in considering every strike on its 
merits and giving labour its due-not what capital considers and enlightened 
public opinion acclaim as just. 
One preliminary question will justly arise: why should there be a strike at all in 
any well-regulated concern? Strikes ought to be impossible when there is 
perfect understanding between capital and labour, mutual respect and 
recognition of equality. And since differences there would be sometimes 
between employers and employed even in the best-regulated concerns, why 
should there not be a system of arbitration between the parties so that they 
will always readily carry out in perfect good faith awards of arbitrators? 
But we have to consider things not as they should be, but as they are. As time 
progresses, the labour world is getting more insistent in its demands which are 
daily increasing, and it does not hesitate to resort to violence in its impatient The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 322  enforcement of those demands. New methods of enforcing them are being 
employed. Workers do not hesitate to injure the property of the employers, 
dislocate machinery, harass old men and women who would not join the strike, 
and forcibly keep out blacklegs. In these circumstances, how are the employers 
to behave? 
In my opinion, employers and employed are equal partners even if employees 
are not considered superior. But what we see today is the reverse. The reason 
is that the employers harness intelligence on their side. They have the superior 
advantage which concentration of capital brings with it, and they know how to 
make use of it. One individual rupee has very little potency: but when money 
combines as capital, the combine derives a power different from and far in 
excess of the mere sum total of the individual rupees. A million drops 
individually are negligible. But in combination they make the ocean, carrying 
on its bosom a fleet of ocean hounds. Whilst capital in India is fairly organized, 
labour is still in a more or less disorganized condition in spite of unions and 
their federation. Therefore, it lacks the power that true combination gives. 
Moreover, it lacks intelligence, so much so that individuals fight against 
individuals, unions against unions. Lack of intelligence leads to its exploitation 
by selfish and unscrupulous men even to the point of creating and promoting 
mischief. They know no better, being ignorant of the secret of non-violence. 
The net result is that the workers suffer. If labour were to understand the 
working of non-violence, the power generated by combination would any day 
exceed the power of dead metal in the hands of a few capitalists. 
Hence my advice to the employers should be that they should willingly regard 
workers as the real owners of the concerns which they fancy they have created. 
They should further regard it as their duty to equip the employees with sound 
education that would draw out the intelligence dormant in them and gladly 
promote and welcome the power that this combination of the workers gives 
them. 
This noble work cannot be done in a day by the employers. Meanwhile, what 
should those do who have to face the destruction wrought by strikes in their The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 323  concerns? I would unhesitatingly advise such employers that they should at once 
offer the strikers full control of the concern which is as much the strikers’ as 
theirs. They will vacate their premises not in a huff but because it is right, and, 
to show their goodwill, they would offer the employees the assistance of their 
engineers and other skilled staff. The employers will find in the end that they 
will also nothing. Indeed, their right action will disarm opposition and they will 
earn the blessings of their men. They will have made proper use of their 
capital. I would not consider such action as benevolent. It would be an 
intelligent use by the capitalists of their resources, and honest dealing in 
regard to the employees whom they would have converted into honourable 
partners. 
Harijan, 31-3-46, p. 60
 
Strikes have to-day become a universal plague. There are strikes everywhere, 
American and England not excepted. But, in India, they have a special 
significance. We are living under an unnatural condition. As soon as the lid is 
removed and there is a crevice letting in the flesh air of freedom, there will be 
an increasing number of strikes. The fundamental reason for this spreading 
strike fever is that life, here as elsewhere, is today uprooted from its basis, the 
basis of religion, and what an England writer has called ‘cash nexus’ has taken 
its place. And that is a precarious bond. But even when the religious basis is 
there, there will be strikes, because it is scarcely conceivable that religion will 
have become for all the basis of life. So, there will be attempts at exploitation 
on the one hand, and strikes on the other. But these strikes will then be of a 
purely non-violent character. Such strikes never do harm to anyone. 
Harijan, 22-9-46, p. 321
 
Strikes are now in the air today throughout the world and on the slightest 
pretext labour goes in for strikes. My own experience of the last six months is 
that many strikes have done harm to labour rather than good. I have studied so 
far as I can the strikes in Bombay, a strike at Tata Iron Works, and the The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 324  celebrated strike of the railway labourers in the Punjab. There was a failure in 
all these strikes. Labour was not able to make good its points to the fullest 
extent. What was the reason? Labour was badly led. I want you to distinguish 
between two classes of leaders. You have leaders derived from yourselves and 
they are in their turn advised and led by those who are not themselves 
labourers, but who are in sympathy or expected to be in sympathy with labour. 
Unless there is perfect correspondence between these three, there is bound to 
be a failure. In all these four strikes that perfect correspondence was lacking. 
There is another substantial reason which I discovered. Labourers look to 
pecuniary support from their unions for their maintenance. No labour can 
prolong a strike indefinitely so long as labour depends on the resources of its 
unions and no strikes can absolutely succeed which cannot be indefinitely 
prolonged. In all the strikes that I have ever conducted I have laid down one 
indispensable rule that labourers must find their own support. And therein lies 
the secret of success and therein consists your education You should be able to 
perceive that, if you are able to serve one master and command a particular 
wage, your labour must be worthy and fit to receive that wage anywhere else. 
Strikes therefore cannot expect to be idlers and succeed. Your attempt must be 
just. And there should be no pressure exerted upon those whom you call 
‘blacklegs’. Any force of this kind exerted against your own fellow-labourers is 
bound to react upon yourselves. And I think your advisers will tell you that 
these three conditions being fulfilled no strike need fail. But they at once 
demonstrate to you the necessity of thinking a hundred times before 
undertaking strike. So much for your rights and the method of enforcing them. 
But as labour becomes organized strikes must be few and far between. And as 
your mental and collective development progresses, you will find that the 
principle of arbitration replaces the principle of strikes and the time has now 
arrived when we should reach this state. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, (4th Edn.), pp. 1045-48
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 325  The conditions of a successful strike are simple. And when they are fulfilled, a 
strike need never fail: 
1. The cause of the strike must be just. 
2. There should be practical unanimity among the strikers. 
3. There should be no violence used against non-strikers. 
4. Strikers should be able to maintain themselves during the strike period 
without falling back upon union funds and should therefore occupy 
themselves in some useful and productive temporary occupation. 
5. A strike is no remedy when there is enough other labour to replace 
strikers. In that case, in the event of unjust treatment or inadequate 
wages or the like, resignation is the remedy. 
6. Successful strikes have taken place even when all the above conditions 
have not been fulfilled, but that merely proves that the employers were 
weak and had a guilty conscience. We often make terrible mistakes by 
copying bad examples. The safest thing is not to copy example of which we 
have rarely complete knowledge but to follow the conditions which we 
know and recognize to be essential for success. 
Young India, 16-2-21, pp. 52-53
 
A pacific strike must be limited to those who are labouring under the grievance 
to be redressed. Thus if the match manufacturers, say, of Timbuctoo, who are 
quite satisfied with their lot, strike out of sympathy for mill-hands who are 
getting starvation wages, the match manufacturers’ strike would be a species 
of violence. They may and should help in a most effective manner by 
withdrawing their custom from the mill-owners of Timbuctoo without laying 
themselves open to the charge of violence. 
But it is possible to conceive occasions when those who are not directly 
suffering may be under an obligation to cease work. Thus, if in the instance 
imagined, the masters in the match-factory combine with the mill-owners of 
Timbuctoo, it will clearly be the duty of the workers in the match-factory to 
make common cause with the mill-hands. But I have suggested the addition The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 326  purely by way o illustration. In the last resort every case has to be judged on its 
own merits. Violence is a subtle force. It is not easy always to detect its 
presence through to you may feel it all the same. 
Young India, 18-11-26, p. 400
 
A strike should be spontaneous and not manipulated. If it is organized without 
any compulsion, there would be no chance for Goondasim and looting. Such a 
strike would be characterized by perfect co-operation amongst the strikers. It 
should be peaceful and there should be no show of force. 
The strikers should take up some work either singly or in co-operation with 
each other, in order to earn their bread. The nature of such work should have 
been thought out beforehand. It goes without saying that in a peaceful, 
effective and firm strike of this character, there will be no room for rowdyism 
or looting. I have known of such strikes. I have no presented a Utopian picture. 
Harijan, 2-6-46, p. 158
 
Obviously, there should be no strike which is not justifiable on merits. No 
unjust strike should succeed. All public sympathy must be withheld from such 
strikes. 
The public has no means of judging the merits of a strike unless it is backed by 
impartial persons enjoying public confidence. Interested men cannot judge the 
merits of their own case. Hence, there must be an arbitration accepted by the 
parties or a judicial adjudication. 
As a rule, the matter does not come before the public when there is accepted 
arbitration or adjudication. Cases have, however, happened when haughty 
employers have ignored awards, or misguided employees, conscious of their 
power to assert themselves, have done likewise and have decided upon forcible 
extortion. 
Strikes for economic betterment should never have a political end as ulterior 
motive. Such a mixture never advances the political end and generally brings The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 327  trouble upon strikers, even when they do not dislocate public life, as in the 
case of public utility services, such as the postal strike. 
The Government may suffer some inconvenience, but will not come to a 
standstill. Rich persons will put up expensive postal services, but the vast mass 
of the poor people will be deprived, during such a strike, of a convenience of 
primary importance to which they have become used for generations. Such 
strikes can only take a place when every other legitimate means has been 
adopted and (has) failed. 
Sympathetic strikes must be taboo until it is conclusive proved that the 
affected men have exhausted all the legitimate means at their disposal…. 
It follows from the foregoing that political strikes must be treated on their own 
merits and must never be mixed with or related to economic strikes. Political 
strikes have a definite place in non-violent action. They are never taken up 
haphazard. They must be open, never led by goondaism. They are calculated 
never to lead to violence. 
Harijan, 11-8-46, p. 256
 
Two paths are open before India today, either to introduce the Western 
principles of “Might is Right” or to uphold the Eastern principle that truth alone 
conquers, that truth knows no mishap, that the strong and the weak have 
alikea right to secure justice. The choice is to begin with the laboring class. 
Should the labourers obtain an increment in their wages by violence, even if 
that be possible? They cannot resort to anything like violence howsoever 
legitimate may be their claims. To use violence for securing rights may seem an 
easy path, but it proves to be thorny in the long run. Those who live by sword 
die also by sword. The swimmer often dies by drowning. Look at Europe. No 
one seems to be happy there, for, not one is contented. The labourer does not 
trust the capitalist and the capitalist has no faith in the labourer. Both have a 
sort of vigor and strength but even the bulls have it. They fight to the very 
bitter end. All motion is not progress. We have got no reason to believe that The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 328  the people of Europe are progressing. Their possession of wealth does not argue 
the possession of any moral or spiritual qualities... 
What shall we do then? The labourers in Bombay made a fine stand. I was not in 
a position to know all the facts. But this much I could see that they could fight 
in a better way. The mill-owners may be wholly in the wrong. In the struggle 
between capital and labour, it may be generally said that more often than not 
the capitalists are in the wrong box. But when labour comes fully to realize its 
strength, I know it can become more tyrannical than capital. The mill-owners 
will have to work on the terms dictated by labour if the latter could command 
intelligence of the former. It is clear, however, that labour will never attain to 
that intelligence. If it does, labour will cease to be labour and become itself 
the master. The capitalists do not fight on the strength of money alone. They 
do possess intelligence and tact. 
The question before us is this: When the labourers remaining what they are, 
develop a certain consciousness, what should be their course? It would be 
suicidal if the labourers rely upon their numbers or brute force, i.e., violence. 
By so doing they will do harm to industries in the country. If on the other hand 
they take their stand on pure justice and suffer in their person to secure it, not 
only will they always succeed but they will reform their masters, develop 
industries and both master and men will be as members of one and same 
family. A satisfactory solution of the condition of labour must include the 
following: 
1. The hours of labour must leave the workmen some hours of leisure. 
2. They must get facilities for their own education.  
3. Provision should be made for an adequate supply of milk, clothing and 
necessary education for their children. 
4. There should be sanitary dwellings for the workmen. 
5. They should being a position to save enough to maintain themselves 
during their old age. 
None of these conditions is satisfied today. For this both the parties are 
responsible. The masters care only for the service they get. What becomes of The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 329  the labourer does not concern them. All their endeavors are generally confined 
to obtaining maximum service with minimum payment. The labourer on the 
other hand tries to hit upon all tricks whereby he can get maximum pay with 
minimum work. The result is that although the labourers get an increment 
there is no improvement in the work turned out. The relations between the two 
parties are not purified and the labourers do not make proper use of the 
increment they get. 
A third party has sprung up between these two parties. It has become the 
labourers’ friend. There is need for such a party. Only to the extent to which 
this party has disinterested friendship for the labourers, can it befriend them. 
A time has come now when attempts will be made to use labour as a pawn in 
more ways than one. The occasion demands consideration at the hands of those 
that would take part in politics. What will they choose? Their own interest or 
the service of labour and the nation? Labour stands in sore need of friends. It 
cannot proceed without a lead. What sort of men give this lead will decide the 
condition of labour. 
Strikes, cessation of work and hartal are wonderful things no doubt, but it is 
not difficult to abuse them. Workmen ought to organize themselves into strong 
labour unions, and on no account shall they strike work without the consent of 
these unions. 
Strikes should not be risked without previous negotiation with the mill-owners. 
If the mill-owners resort to arbitration, the principle of Panchayat-2 should be 
accepted. And once the Pancha-3 are appointed, their decision must be 
accepted by both the parties alike, whether they like it or not. 
Readers, if you are interested in ameliorating the condition of labour, if you 
want to befriend the workman and serve him, you will see from the above that 
there is only one royal road before you, viz., to elevate the workmen by 
creating between the two parties family relationship. And to secure this end 
there is no path like truth. Mere increase in wages should not satisfy you, must 
also watch by what means they get it and how they spend it. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 330  Young India, 11-2-20, pp. 7-8
 
1. Hooligram 
2. Arbitration 
3. Arbitrators 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 331   
CHAPTER 53 
LANDLORD AND TENANT 
The kisan-1 is the salt of the earth which rightly b elongs or should belong to 
him, not to the absentee landlord or Zamindar. 
The Bombay Chronicle, 20-10-44
 
Land and all property is his who will work it. Unfortunately the workers are or 
have been kept ignorant of this simple fact. 
Harijan, 2-1-37, p. 375
 
I believe that the land you cultivate should belong to you, but it cannot be your 
own all at once, you cannot force it from the Zamindars. Non-violence is the 
only way, consciousness of your own power is the only way. 
Harijan, 20-5-39, p. 133
 
No man should have more land than he needs for dignified sustenance. Who can 
dispute the fact that the grinding poverty of the masses is due to their having 
no land that they can call their own? 
But it must be realized that the reform cannot be rushed. If it is to be brought 
about by non-violent means, it can only be done by education, both of the 
haves and the have-nots. The former should be assured that there never will be 
force used against them. The have-nots must be educated to know that no one 
can really compel them to do anything against their will, and that they can 
secure their freedom by learning the art of non-violence, i.e., self-suffering. 
Harijan, 20-4-40, p. 97
 
I would tell you that ownership of your land belongs as much to the Ryots-2 as 
to you. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 332  Amrita Bazar Patrika, 2-8-34
 
My objective is to reach your heart and convert you so that you may hold all 
your private property in trust for your tenants and use it primarily for their 
welfare. I am aware of the fact that within the ranks of the Congress a new 
party, called the Socialist party is coming into being, and I cannot say what 
would happen if that party succeeds in carrying the Congress with it. But I am 
quite clear that if strictly honest and unchallengeable referendum of our 
millions were to be taken, they would not vote for the wholesale expropriation 
of the propertied classes. I am working for the co-operation and co-ordination 
of capital and labour, of landlord and tenant. 
Amrita Bazaar Patrika, 2-8-34
 
But I must utter a note of warning. I have always told mill-owners that they are 
not exclusive owners of mills and workmen are equal shares in ownership. In 
the same way, I would tell you that ownership of your land belongs as much to 
the Ryots as to you, and you may not squander your gains in luxurious or 
extravagant living, but must use them for the well-being of Ryots. Once you 
make your Ryots experience a sense of kinship with you and a sense of security 
that their interests as members of a family will never suffer at your hands, you 
may be sure that there cannot be a clash between you and them and no class 
war. 
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 2-8-34
 
The Zamindars would do well to take the time by the forelock. Let them cease 
to be mere rent collectors. They should become trustees and trusted friends of 
their tenants. They should limit their privy purse. Let them forgo the 
questionable perquisites they take from the tenants in the shape of forced gifts 
of marriage and other occasions, or Nazarana-3 on transfer of holdings form one 
Kisan to another or on restoration to the same kisan after eviction for non-
payment of rent. They should give them fixity of tenure, take a lively interest 
in their welfare, provide well-managed schools for adults, hospitals and The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 333  dispensaries for the sick, look after the sanitation of villages and in a variety of 
ways make them feel that they, the Zamindars, are their true friends taking 
only a fixed commission for their manifold services. In short they must justify 
their position… Kisans should scrupulously fulfill their obligations to the 
Zamindars. I mean not necessarily the statutory, but the obligations which they 
have themselves admitted to be just. They must reject the doctrine that their 
holdings are absolutely theirs to the exclusion of the Zamindars. They are or 
should be members of a joint family in which the Zamindar is the head guarding 
their right against encroachment. Whatever the law may be, the Zamindari to 
be defensible must approach the conditions of a joint family. 
I like the ideal of Rama and Janaka. They owned nothing against the people. 
Everything including themselves belonged to the people. They lived in their 
midst a life not above theirs, but in correspondence with theirs. But these may 
not be regarded as historical personages. Then let us take the example of the 
great Caliph Omar. Though he was monarch of a vast realm created by his great 
genius and amazing industry, he lived the life of a pauper and never considered 
himself owner of the vast treasures that lay at his feet. He was a terror to 
those officials who squandered people’s money in luxuries. 
Young India, 28-5-31, pp. 120-21
 
To the landlords I say that if what is said against them is true, I would warn 
them that their days are numbered. They could no longer continue as lords and 
masters. They have a bright future if they become the trustees of the poor 
Kisans. I have in mind not trustees in name but in reality. Such trustees would 
take nothing for themselves that their labour and care did not entitle them to. 
Then they would find that no law would be able to touch them. The Kisans 
would be their friends. 
Harijans, 4-5-47, p. 134
 
1. Tiller of soil, peasant 
2. Tenants 
3. Gift The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 334   
CHAPTER -54 
I
S CLASS WAR INEVITABLE? 
In a free and independent India, antagonism between the classes will be 
removed. I do not envisage a dead and artificial level among the people. There 
will be a variety among them as there is among the leaves of a tree. There will 
certainly be no have-nots, no unemployment, and no disparity between classes 
and masses such as we see today. I have no doubt whatsoever that, if non-
violence in its full measure becomes the policy of the State, we shall reach 
essential equality without strife. 
Harijan, 27-4-40, p. 108
 
If the desired change is brought about through non-violent means, the world 
would not be deprived of the talents of the classes, but then the latter would 
not exercise them at the expense of the labourers. In the non-violent order of 
the future, the land would belong to the State, for has it not been said Sabhi 
bhumi Gopal ki1? Under such dispensation, there would be no waste of talents 
and labour. This would be impossible through violent means. It is, therefore, a 
truism to say that the utter ruin of the landowners, brought about through 
violence, would also involve the ruin of the labourers in the end. If the land-
owners, therefore, acted wisely no party would lose. 
Harijan, 9-3-47, p. 59
 
By the non-violent method we seek not to destroy the capitalist, we seek to 
destroy capitalism. We invite the capitalist to regard himself as a trustee for 
those on whom he depends for the making, the retention and the increase of 
his capital. Nor need the worker wait for his conversion. If capital is power, so 
is work. Either power can be used destructively or creatively. Either is 
dependent on the other. Immediately the worker realizes his strength, he is in 
a position to become a co-sharer of the capitalist instead of remaining his The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 335  slave. If he aims at becoming the sole owner, he will most likely be killing the 
goose that lays the golden eggs. Inequalities in intelligence and even 
opportunity will last till the end of time. A man living on the banks of a river 
has any day more opportunity of growing crops than one living in an arid desert. 
But if inequalities stare us in the face, the essential equality too is not to be 
missed. Every man has an equal right for the necessaries of life even as birds 
and beasts have. And since every right carries with it a corresponding duty and 
the corresponding remedy for resisting any attack upon it, it is merely a matter 
of finding out the corresponding duties and remedies to vindicate the 
fundamental elementary equality. The corresponding duty is to labour with my 
limbs, and the corresponding remedy is to non-co-operate with him who 
deprives me of the fruit of my labour. And if I would recognize the fundamental 
equality, as I must, of the capitalist and the labourer, I must not aim at his 
destruction. I must strive for his conversion. My non-co-operation with him will 
open his eyes to the wrong he may be doing. Nor need I be afraid of someone 
else taking my place when I have non-co-operated. For I expect to influence my 
co-workers so as not to help the wrong doing of my employer. This kind of 
education of the mass of workers is no doubt a slow process, but as it is also 
the surest, it is necessarily the quickest. It can be easily demonstrated that 
destruction of the capitalist must mean destruction in the end of the worker 
and as no human being is so bad as to be beyond redemption, no human being 
is so perfect as to beyond redemption, no human being is so perfect as to 
warrant his destroying to be wholly evil. 
Young India, 26-3-31, p. 49
 
I do not fight shy of capital. I fight capitalism. The West teaches on to avoid 
concentration of capital, to avoid a racial war in another and deadlier form. 
Capital and labour need not be antagonistic to each other.  
Young India, 7-10-26, p. 348
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 336  Exploitation of the poor can be extinguished not by effecting the destruction of 
a few millionaires, but by removing the ignorance of the poor and teaching 
them to non-co-operate with their exploiters. That will convert the exploiters 
also. I have even suggested that ultimately it will lead to both being equal 
partners. Capital as such is not evil; it is its wrong use that is evil. Capital, in 
some form or other, will always be needed. 
Harijan, 28-7-40, p. 219
 
Swaraj as conceived by me, does not mean the end of Kingship. Nor does it 
mean the end of capital. Accumulated capital means ruling power. I am for the 
establishment of right relations between capital and labour, etc. I do not wish 
for the supremacy of the one over the other. I do not think there is any natural 
antagonism between them. The rich and the poor will always be with us. But 
their mutual relations will be subject to constant change. France is a republic, 
but there are all classes of men in France. 
Let us not be deluded by catch-words. Every single corruption which we notice 
in India is equally present in the so-called highly civilized nations of the West, 
if under a variety of names. It is distance that lends enchantment to the view; 
hence things Western become invested with a sort of glamour in our eyes. In 
fact there are perpetual differences even in the West between the rulers and 
the ruled. There, too, people seek for happiness and suffer misery in return. 
Young India, 8-1-25, p. 10
 
Real socialism has been handed down to us by our ancestors who taught: “All 
land belongs to Gopal. Where then is the boundary line? Man is the maker of 
that line and he can therefore unmake it.” Gopal literally means shepherd; it 
also means God. In modern language it means the State, i.e., the people. That 
the land today does not belong to the people is too true. But the fault is not in 
the teaching. It is in us who have not lived up to it. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 337  I have no doubt that we can make as good an approach to it as is possible for 
any nation, not excluding Russia, and that without violence. The most effective 
substitute for violent dispossession is the wheel with all its implications. Land 
and all property is his who will work it. Unfortunately the workers are or have 
been kept ignorant of this simple fact. 
Harijan, 2-1-37, p. 375
 
It can be asked whether the present Rajas-2 and others can be expected to 
become trustees of the poor. If they do not become trustees of their own 
accord, force of circumstances will compel the reform unless they court utter 
destruction. When Panchayat Raj is established, public opinion will do what 
violence can never do. The present power of the Zamindars, the capitalists and 
the Rajas can hold sway only so long as the common people do not realize their 
own strength. If the people non-co-operate with the evil of Zamindari or 
capitalism, it must die of inanition. In Panchayat Raj only the Panchayat will be 
obeyed and the Panchayat can only work through the laws of their making. 
Harijan, 1-6-47, p. 172
 
I do not want to destroy the Zamindar, but neither do I feel that the Zamindar 
is inevitable. I expect to convert the Zamindars and other capitalists by the 
non-violent method, and therefore there is for me nothing like an inevitability 
of class conflict. For it is an essential part of non-violence to go along the line 
of least resistance. The moment the cultivators of the soil realize their power, 
the Zamindari evil will be sterilized. What can the poor Zamindar do when they 
say that they will simply not work the land unless they are paid enough to feed 
and clothe and educate themselves and their children in a decent manner. In 
reality the toiler is the owner of what he produces. If the toilers intelligently 
combine, they will become an irresistible power. That is how I do not see the 
necessity of class conflicts. If I thought it inevitable, I should not hesitate to 
preach it and teach it. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 338  Harijan, 5-12-36, pp. 338-39
 
A model Zamindar would at once reduce much of the burden the Ryot is now 
bearing. He would come in intimate touch with the Ryots and know their wants 
and inject hope into them in the place of despair which is killing the very life 
out of them. He will not be satisfied with the Ryots ignorance of the laws of 
sanitation and hygiene. He will reduce himself to poverty in order that the Ryot 
may have the necessaries of life. He will study the economic condition of the 
Ryots under his care, establish schools in which he will educate his own 
children side by side with those of the Ryots. He will purify the village well and 
the village tank. He will teach the Ryot to sweep his roads and clean his 
latrines by himself doing this necessary labour. He will throw open without 
reserve his own gardens for the unrestricted use of the Ryots. He will use as 
hospital, school, or the like most of unnecessary buildings which he keeps for 
his pleasure. If only the capitalist class will read the signs of the times, revise 
their notions of God-given right to all they possess, in an incredibly short space 
of time the seven hundred thousand dung-heaps which today pass muster as 
villages can be turned into abodes of peace, health and comfort. 
Young India, 5-12-29, p. 396
 
I would like to use the landlords and the capitalists for the service of the 
masses. We must not sacrifice the interests of the masses to the capitalists. We 
must not play their game. We must trust them to the measure of their ability to 
surrender their gains for the service of the masses. They are not insusceptible 
to the higher appeal. It has been my invariable experience that a kind word 
uttered, goes home to them. If we win their confidence and put them at their 
ease, we will find that they are not averse to progressively sharing their riches 
with the masses. 
Moreover, let us ask ourselves how much we have done to identify ourselves 
with the masses. Have we bridged the gulf between the surging millions and us? 
Let us, we who live in glass houses, not throw stones. To what extent do you The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 339  share the life of the masses? I confess that with me, it is still an aspiration. We 
ourselves have not completely shed the habits of living that we say that the 
capitalists are notorious for. 
The idea of class war does not appeal to me. In India a class war is not only not 
inevitable, but it is avoidable if we have understood the message of non-
violence. Those who talk about class war as being inevitable, have not 
understood the implications of non-violence or have understood them only skin-
deep. 
Amrita Bazaar Patrika, 3-8-34
 
The class struggle has always been there. It can be ended if the capitalists 
voluntarily renounce their role and become all labourers. The other way is to 
realize that labour is real capital, in fact, the maker of capital. What the two 
hands of the labourer would achieve, the capitalist would never get with all his 
gold and silver. Can anyone live on gold? But labour has to be made conscious 
of its strength. It has to have in one hand Truth, and in the other Non-violence, 
and it would be invincible. 
Labour and capital, classes and masses, are as old as the hills. The whole 
trouble arises from the fact that neither labour, nor those who are guiding the 
labour movement, realize the dignity and strength of labour. It is like the lame 
leading the blind. 
I got the opportunity and privilege of reading Karl Marx’s Capital whilst I was in 
detention. I entertain high regard for his great industry and acumen. But I 
cannot believe in his conclusion. I have no faith in violence being able to usher 
in non-violence. World thought is moving and is outdistancing Karl Marx. That, 
however, does not detract from the merit of that great man’s labours. 
Hindustan Times, 5-1-46
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 340  Class war is foreign to the essential genius of India, which is capable of evolving 
communism on the fundamental rights of all on equal justice. Ram Raj of my 
dream ensures rights alike of prince and pauper. 
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 2-8-34
 
1. All land belongs to the Lord 
2. Rulers, Princes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 341   
SECTION –IX: POLITICAL IDEAS 
CHAPTER-55 
POLITICS AND RELIGION 
I do not divide life into watertight compartments. T he life of a nation like that 
of individuals is an indivisible whole. 
Harijan, 20-2-37, p. 13
 
For me there is no politics without religion-not the religion of the superstitious 
and the blind, religion that hates and fights, but the universal Religion of 
Toleration. Politics without morality is a thing to be avoided. 
Young India, 27-11-24, p. 391
 
For me, politics bereft of religion are absolute dirt, ever to be shunned. Politics 
concern nations and that which concerns the welfare of nations must be one of 
the concerns of a man who is religiously inclined, in other words, a seeker after 
God and Truth.  
…Therefore, in politics also we have to establish the Kingdom of Heaven. 
Young India, 18-6-25, p. 214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 342   
CHAPTER 56 
THE STATE OF ENLIGHTENED ANARCHY 
To me political power is not an end but one of the m eans of enabling people to 
better their condition in every department of life. Political power means 
capacity to regulate national life through national representatives. If national 
life becomes so perfect as to become self-regulated, no representation 
becomes necessary. There is then a state of enlightened anarchy. In such a 
state everyone is his own ruler. He rules himself in such a manner that is never 
a hindrance to his neighbour. In the ideal state therefore, there is no political 
power because there is no State. But the ideal is never fully realized in life. 
Hence the classical statement of Thoreau that that Government is best which 
governs the least. 
Young India, 2-7-31, p. 162
 
Legislation imposed by people upon themselves is non-violence to the extent it 
is possible in society. A society organized and run on the basis of complete non-
violence would be the purest anarchy…. 
Yes. It is realizable to the extent non-violence is realizable. That State is 
perfect and non-violent where the people are governed the least. The nearest 
approach to purest anarchy would be a democracy based on non-violence. 
Harijan, 21-7-40, p. 211
 
A Government cannot succeed in becoming entirely non-violent, because it 
represents all the people. I do not today conceive of such a golden age. But I do 
believe in the possibility of a predominantly non-violent society. And I am 
working for it. 
Harijan, 9-3-40, p. 31
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 343  It needed the perseverance and genius of so many generations of scientists to 
discover the laws of electricity, but today everybody, even children use electric 
power in their daily life. Similarly, it will not always need a perfect being to 
administer an ideal State once it has come into being. What is needed is a 
thorough social awakening to begin with. The rest will follow. 
Towards New Horizons, (1959), p. 93
 
There remains the question as to whether in an ideal society, there should be 
any or no government. I do not think, we need worry ourselves about this at the 
moment. If we continue to work for such a society, it will slowly come into 
being to an extent, such that the people can benefit by it. Euclid’s line is one 
without breadth, but no one has so far been able to draw it and never will. All 
the same, it is only by keeping the ideal line in mind that we have made 
progress in geometry. What is true here is true of every ideal. 
Harijan, 15-9-46, p. 309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 344   
CHAPTER 57 
THE INDIVIDUAL IS SUPREME 
I cannot pretend to speak for Tolstoy, but my readin g of his works has never led 
me to consider that, in spite of his merciless analysis of institutions organized 
and based upon force, that is governments, he in any way anticipates or 
contemplates that the whole world will be able to live in a state of 
philosophical anarchy. What he has preached, as, in my opinion, have all world 
teachers, is that every man has to obey the voice of his own conscience, and be 
his own master, and seek the Kingdom of God from within. For him there is no 
government that can control him without his sanction. Such a man is superior to 
all government. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. X, p. 249
 
I look upon an increase in the power of the State with the greatest fear, 
because, although while apparently doing good by minimizing exploitation, it 
does the greatest harm to mankind by destroying individuality which lies at the 
root of all progress. 
Selections from Gandhi, (1957), p. 41
 
I value individual freedom, but you must not forget that man is essentially a 
social being. He has risen to present status by learning to adjust his 
individualism to the requirements of social progress. Unrestricted individualism 
is the law of the beast of the jungle. We have learnt to strike the mean 
between individual freedom and social restraint. Willing submission to social 
restraint for the sake of the well-being of the whole society, enriches both the 
individual and the society of which one is a member. 
Harijan, 27-5-39, p. 144
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 345  Complete independence through truth and non-violence means the 
independence of every unit, be it the humblest of the nation, without 
distinction of race, colour or creed. This independence is never exclusive. It is, 
therefore, wholly compatible with interdependence within or without. Practice 
will always fall short of the theory, even as the drawn line falls short of the 
theoretical line of Euclid. Therefore, complete independence will be complete 
only to the extent of our approach in practice to truth and non-violence. 
Constructive Programme, (1961), p. 7
 
We must be content to die, if we cannot live as free men and women. 
Young India, 5-1-22, p. 5
 
Every individual must have the fullest liberty to use his talents consistently 
with equal use by his neighbours, but no one is entitled to the arbitrary use of 
the gains from the talents. He is part of the nation or, say the social structure 
surrounding him. Therefore, he can use his talents not for self only but for the 
social structure of which he is but a part on whose sufferance he lives. 
Harijan, 2-8-42, p. 249
 
If individual liberty goes, then surely all is lost, for, if the individual ceases to 
count, what is left of society? Individual freedom alone can make a man 
voluntarily surrender himself completely to the service of society. If it is 
wrested from him, he becomes automaton and society is ruined. No society can 
possibly be built on a denial of individual freedom. It is contrary to the very 
nature of man. 
Harijan, 1-2-42, p. 27 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 346   
CHAPTER 58 
SWARAJ 
The word Swaraj is a sacred word, a Vedic word, mean ing self-rule and self 
restraint, and not freedom from all restraint which ‘independence’ often 
means. 
Young India, 19-3-31, p. 38
 
As every country is fit to eat, to drink and to breathe, even so is every nation 
fit to manage its own affairs, no matter how badly. 
Young India, 15-10-31, p. 305
 
Self-government depends entirely upon our internal strength, upon our ability 
to fight against the heaviest odds. Indeed, self government which does not 
require that continuous striving to attain it and to sustain it is not worth of 
name. I have, therefore, endeavoured to show both in word and deed, that 
political self-government, that is, self-government for a large number of men 
and women, is no better than individual self government, and, therefore, it is 
to be attained precisely the same means that the required for individual self-
government or self-rule. 
Young India, 1-12-27, p. 402
 
The outward freedom that we shall attain will only be in exact proportion to 
the freedom to which we may have grown at a given moment. And if this is the 
correct view of freedom, our chief energy must be concentrated upon achieving 
reform from within. 
Young India, 1-1-28, p. 363
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 347  Self-government means continuous effort to be independent of government 
control, whether it is foreign government or whether it is national Swaraj 
government will be a sorry affair if people look up to it for the regulation of 
every detail of life. 
Young India, 6-8-25, p. 276
 
Under Swaraj based on non-violence nobody is anybody’s enemy, everybody 
contributes his or her due quota to the common goal, all can read and write, 
and their knowledge keeps growing from day to day. Sickness and disease are 
reduced to the minimum. No one is a pauper and labour can always find 
employment. There is no place under such a government for gambling, drinking 
and immorality or for class hatred. The rich will use their riches wisely and 
usefully, and not squander them in increasing their pomp and worldly 
pleasures. It should not happen that a handful of rich people should live in 
jewelled palaces and the millions in miserable hovels devoid of sunlight or 
ventilation. 
In non-violent Swaraj there can be no encroachment upon just rights; 
contrariwise no one can possess unjust rights. In a well-organized State, 
usurpation should be impossibility and it should be unnecessary to resort to 
force for dispossessing an usurper. 
Harijan, 25-3-39, p. 65
 
My swaraj is to keep intact the genius of our civilization. I want to write many 
new things, but they must be all written on the Indian slate. 
Young India, 26-6-24, p. 210
 
Swaraj for me means freedom for the meanest of our countrymen…. I am not 
interested in freeing India merely from the English yoke. I am bent upon freeing 
India from any yoke whatsoever. I have no desire to exchange ‘king log’ for 
‘king stork’. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 348  Young India, 12-6-24, p. 195
 
In Swaraj based on Ahimsa, people need not know their rights, but it is 
necessary for them to know their duties. There is no duty but creates a 
corresponding right, and those only are true rights which flow from a due 
performance of one’s duties. Hence rights of true citizenship accrue only to 
those who serve the State to which they belong. And they alone can do justice 
to the rights that accrue to them. Everyone possesses the right to tell lies or 
resort to goondasim. But the exercise of such a right is harmful both to the 
exerciser and society. But to him who observes Truth and Non-violence comes 
prestige, and prestige brings rights. And people who obtain rights as a result of 
performance of duty, exercise them only for the service of society, never for 
themselves. Swaraj of a people means the sum total of the Swaraj (self-rule) of 
individuals. And such Swaraj comes only from performance by individuals of 
their duty as citizens. In it, no one thinks of his rights. They come, when they 
are needed, for better performance of duty.  
Harijan, 25-3-39, p. 64
 
The true source of rights is duty…. If we all discharge our duties, rights will not 
be far to seek. If leaving duties unperformed we run after rights, they escape 
us like a will-o’-the wisp. The more we pursue them, the farther they fly. The 
same teaching has been embodied by Krishna in a immortal words: “Action 
alone is thine. Leave thou the fruit severely alone.” Action is duty; fruit is the 
right. 
Young India, 8-1-25, pp. 15-16
 
National independence is not fiction. It is as necessary as individual 
independence. Btu neither, if it is based on non-violence, may ever be a 
menace to the equal independence of the nation or the individual as the case 
may be. As with individual and national independence, so with the 
international. The legal maxim is equally moral. Sic utere tuo ut alienum non The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 349  laedas-1. It has been well said that the universe is compressed in the atom. 
There is not one law for the atom and another for the universe. 
Young India, 30-1-30, p. 37
 
The Swaraj of my dream recognizes no race or religious distinctions. Nor is it to 
be the monopoly of lettered persons, not yet of monied men. Swaraj is to be 
for all, including the former, but emphatically including the maimed, the blind, 
the starving, toiling millions. A stout-hearted, honest, sane, illiterate man may 
well be the first servant of the nation. 
Young India, 1-5-30, p. 149
 
Swaraj can be maintained, only where there is majority of loyal and patriotic 
people to whom the good of the nation is paramount above all other 
considerations whatever, including their personal profit. Swaraj means 
government by the many. Where the many are immoral or selfish, their 
government can spell anarchy and nothing else. 
Young India, 28-7-21, p. 238
 
Let there can be no mistake as to what Purna Swaraj means... It is full 
economic freedom for the toiling millions. It is no unholy alliance with any 
interest for their exploitation. Any alliance must mean their deliverance. 
Young India, 16-4-31, p. 77
 
By political independence I do not mean an imitation of the British House of 
Commons or the Soviet rule of Russia or the Fascist rule of Italy or the Nazi rule 
of Germany. They have systems suited to their genius. We must have ours 
suited to ours. What that can be is more than I can tell. I have described it as 
Ramaraj, i.e., sovereignty of the people based on pure moral authority. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 350  Harijan, 2-1-37, p. 374
 
It has been said that Indian Swaraj will be the rule of the majority community, 
i.e., the Hindus. There could not be a greater mistake than that. If it were to 
be true, I for one would refuse to call it Swaraj and would fight it with all the 
strength at my command, for to me Hind Swaraj is the rule of all the people, is 
the rule of justice. 
Young India, 16-4-31, p. 78
 
Every community would be on a par with every other under the Swaraj 
constitution.  
Young India, 14-5-31, p. 108
 
Purna Swaraj is the common sacred possession of all of us, __‘Purna’ complete 
because it is as much for the prince as for the peasant, as much for the rich 
land-owner as for the landless tiller of the soil, as much for the Hindus as for 
the Musalmans, as much for the Parsis and Christians as for the Jains, Jews and 
Sikhs, irrespective of any distinction of caste or creed or status in life. The very 
connotation of the word and the means of its attainment to which we are 
pledged, _Truth and Non-violence _precludes all possibility of that Swaraj being 
more for someone than for the other, being partial to someone and prejudicial 
to the other. Truth and Non-violence leave no room for fraud or falsehood…. 
Swaraj under this method, therefore, can never be achieved by usurping the 
rights of any community, big or small but by ensuring even-handed justice and 
fair treatment to all -even the poorest and the weakest in the land.  
Young India, 19-3-31, p. 42
 
Independence of my connection means nothing less than the realization of the 
‘Kingdom of God’ within you and on this earth. I would rather work for and die The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 351  in the pursuit of this dream, though it may never be realized. That means 
infinite patience and perseverance. 
Hindustan Standard, 1-4-40. 
 
1. Use your own rights so that you do not hurt those of another. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 352   
CHAPTER 59 
TRUE DEMOCRACY 
By its very nature, non-violence cannot ‘seize’ powe r, nor can that be its goal. 
But non-violence can do more; it can effectively control and guide power 
without capturing the machinery of government. That is its beauty. 
Towards New Horizons, (1959), pp. 91-92
 
Science of non-violence can alone lead one to pure democracy.  
Young India, 30-6-20, p. 3
 
Democracy must in essence… mean the art and science of mobilizing the entire 
physical, economic and spiritual resources of all the various sections of the 
people in the service of the common good of all. 
Harijan, 27-5-39, p. 143
 
Democracy disciplined and enlightened is the finest thing in the world. A 
democracy prejudiced, ignorant, superstitious, will land itself in chaos and may 
be self-destroyed. 
Young India, 30-7-31, p. 199
 
In true democracy every man and woman is taught to think for himself or 
herself. How this real revolution can be brought about I do not know except 
that every reform, like charity must begin at home. 
Harijan, 14-7-46, p. 220
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 353  My notion of democracy is that under it the weakest should have the same 
opportunity as the strongest. That can never happen except through non-
violence. 
Mahatma, Vol. V, (1952), p. 343
 
True democracy or the Swaraj of the masses can never come through untruthful 
and violent means, for the simple reason that he natural corollary to their use 
world be to remove all opposition through the suppression or extermination of 
the antagonists. That does not make for individual freedom. Individual freedom 
can have the fullest play only under a regime of unadulterated Ahimsa. 
Harijan, 25-5-39, p. 143
 
Democracy and violence can ill go together. The States that are today 
nominally democratic have either to become frankly totalitarian or, if they are 
to become truly democratic, they must become courageously non-violent. It is 
a blasphemy to say that non-violence can only be practices by individuals and 
never by nations which are composed of individuals. 
Harijan, 12-11-38, p. 328
 
The golden rule of conduct, therefore, is mutual toleration, seeing we will 
never all think alike and that we shall always see Truth in fragment and from 
different angles of vision. Conscience is not the same thing for all. Whilst, 
therefore, it is a good guide for individual conduct, imposition of that conduct 
upon all will be an insufferable interference with everybody else’s freedom of 
conscience. 
Young India, 23-9-26, p. 334
 
Difference of opinion should never mean hostility. If they did, my wife and I 
should be sworn enemies of one another. I do not know two persons in the 
world who had no difference of opinion, and as I am a follower of the Gita, I The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 354  have always attempted to regard those who differ from me with the some 
affection as I have for my nearest and dearest. 
Young India, 17-3-27, p. 82
 
For me the only training in Swaraj we need is the ability to defend ourselves 
against the whole world and to live our natural life in perfect freedom, even 
though it may be full of defects. Good government is no substitute for self-
government. 
Young India, 22-9-20, p. 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 355   
CHAPTER 60 
DECENTRALIZATION 
Centralization as a system is inconsistent with non- violent structure of society.  
Harijan, 18-1-42, p. 5
 
The centre of power now is in New Delhi, or in Calcutta and Bombay, in the big 
cities. I would have it distributed among the seven hundred thousand villages of 
India. 
Mahatma Gandhi the last Phase, Vol. 2, (1958), p. 614
 
In this structure composed of innumerable villages, there will be ever widening, 
never ascending circles. Life will not be a pyramid with the apex sustained by 
the bottom. But it will be an oceanic circle whose center will be the individual 
always ready to perish for the village, the latter ready to perish for the circle 
of villages, till at last the whole becomes one life composed of individuals, 
never aggressive in their arrogance but ever humble, sharing the majesty of the 
oceanic circle of which they are integral units. 
Therefore, the outermost circumference will not wield power to crust the inner 
circle but will give strength to all within and derive its own strength from it. I 
may be taunted with the retort that this is all Utopian and, therefore, not 
worth a single thought. If Euclid’s point, though incapable of being drawn by 
human agency, has an imperishable value, my picture has its own for mankind 
to live. Let India live for this true picture, though never realizable in its 
completeness. We must have a proper picture of what we want, before we can 
have something approaching it. If there ever is to be a republic of every village 
in India then I claim verity for my picture in which the last is equal to the first 
or, in other words, no one is to be the first and none the last. 
Harijan, 28-7-46, p. 236 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 356   
CHAPTER 61 
VILLAGE PANCHAYATS 
True democracy cannot be worked by twenty men sittin g at the centre. It has 
to be worked from below by the people of every village… 
In my opinion there is no law which can stop a Panchayat from functioning 
wherever the people want it. Every group (of villages) or its member can have 
the Panchayat system whether the rest of India has it or not. True rights come 
as a result of duty done. No one can snatch away such rights. The Panchayat is 
there is to serve the people. In the true democracy of India, the unit is the 
village. Even if one village wants Panchayat Raj, which is called republic in 
English, no one can stop it. 
Harijan, 18-1-48, p. 519
 
Panchayat has an ancient flavour; it is a good word. It literally means an 
assembly of five elected by villagers. It represents the system, by which the 
innumerable village republics of India were governed. But the British 
Government, by its ruthlessly though method of revenue collection, almost 
destroyed these ancient republics. 
Young India, 28-5-31, p. 123
 
Independence must begin at the bottom. Thus, every village will be a republic 
or Panchayat having full powers. It follows, therefore, that every village has to 
be self-sustained and capable of managing its affairs even to the extent of 
defending itself against the whole world. It will be trained and prepared to 
perish in the attempt to defend itself against any onslaught from without. Thus, 
ultimately, it is the individual who is the unit. This does not exclude 
dependence on and willing help from neighbours or from the world. It will be 
free and voluntary play of mutual forces. Such a society is necessarily highly 
cultured in which every man and woman knows what he or she wants and, what The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 357  is more, knows that no one should want anything that others cannot have with 
equal labour. 
Harijan, 28-7-46, p. 236
 
Distinguished travelers from the world came to India in the days of yore from 
China and other countries. They came in quest of knowledge and put up with 
great hardships in travelling. They had reported that in India there was no 
theft, people were honest and industries. They needed no locks for their doors. 
In those days, there was no multiplicity of castes as at present. It is the 
function of the Panchayats to revive honesty and industry. It is the function of 
the Panchayats to teach the villagers to avoid disputes, if they have to settle 
them. That would ensure speedy justice without any expenditure... 
Then, the Panchayats should see to cattle improvement. They should show 
steady increase in the milk yield. 
The Panchayats should also see to an increase in the quantity of foodstuffs 
grown in their village. That is to be accomplished by properly manuring the 
soil… Then, they must see to the cleanliness of their village and its inhabitants. 
They must be clean and healthy in body and mind. I hope that they would have 
no cinema house. People say that the cinema can be a potent means of 
education. That might come true some day, but at the moment I see how much 
harm the cinema is doing. They have their indigenous games. They should 
banish intoxicating drinks and drugs from their midst. I hope they will eradicate 
untouchability if there is any trace of it still left in their village. The Hindus, 
the Muslims, the Sikhs, the Parsis and the Christians should all live as brothers 
and sisters. 
Harijan, 4-1-48, pp. 499-500
 
The greater the power of the Panchayats, the better for the people. Moreover, 
for Panchayats to be effective and efficient, the level of people’s education The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 358  has to be considerably raised. I do not conceive the increase in the power of 
the people in military, but in moral terms. 
Harijan, 21-12-47, p. 473 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 359   
CHAPTER 62 
PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACY 
I shall strive for a constitution, which will releas e India from all thralldom and 
patronage, and give her, if need be, the right to sin. I shall work for an India, in 
which the poorest shall feel that it is their country in whose making they have 
an effective voice; an India in which all communities shall live in perfect 
harmony. There can be no room in such an India for the curse of untouchability, 
or the curse of intoxicating drinks and drugs. Women will enjoy the same rights 
as men. Since we shall be at peace with all the rest of the world, neither 
exploiting, nor being exploited, we should have the smallest army imaginable. 
All interests not in conflict with the interests of the dumb millions will be 
scrupulously respected, whether foreign or indigenous. Personally, I hate 
distinction between foreign or indigenous. Personally, I hate distinction 
between foreign and indigenous. This is the India of my dreams. I shall be 
satisfied with nothing less. 
Young India, 10-9-31, p. 255
 
By Swaraj I mean the government of India by the consent of the people as 
ascertained by the vote of the largest number of the adult population, male or 
female, native born or domiciled, who have contributed by manual labour to 
the service of the State and who have taken the trouble of having their names 
registered as voters… I hope… to achieve the end by demonstrating that real 
Swaraj will come not by the acquisition of authority by a few but by the 
acquisition of the capacity by all to resist authority when it is abused. In other 
words, Swaraj is to be attained by educating the masses to a sense of their 
capacity to regulate and control authority. 
Young India, 29-1-25, pp. 40
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 360  Mere withdrawal of the English is not independence. It means the consciousness 
in the average villager that he is the maker of his own destiny, he is his own 
legislator through his chosen representatives. 
Young India, 13-02-’30, p. 52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 361   
CHAPTER 63 
FRANCHISE AND VOTERS 
I cannot possibly bear the idea that a man who has g ot wealth should have the 
vote, but that a man who has got character but no wealth or literacy should 
have no vote, or that a man who works honestly by the sweat of his brow day in 
and day out should not have the vote for the crime of being a poor man… I am 
not enamoured of the doctrine of literacy, that voter must at least have a 
knowledge of the three R’s. I want for my people a knowledge of the three R’s, 
but I know also that if I have to wait until they have got a knowledge of the 
three R’s before they can be qualified for voting, I shall have to wait until the 
Greek Kalends, and I am not prepared to wait all that time. 
Young India, 8-10-31, p. 297
 
I am wedded to adult suffrage... Adult suffrage is necessary for more reasons 
than one, and one of the decisive reasons to me is that it enables me to satisfy 
all the reasonable aspirations, not only of the Musalmans, but also of the so-
called untouchables, of Christians, of labourers and all kinds of classes. 
Young India, 8-10-31, p. 297
 
Elector’s private relations with the candidates have often weighed with them 
more than the candidates’ qualifications. It would be well if we set up a better 
standard for the elections to the legislative councils. Only thus shall we be able 
to make the best use of the councils. I suggest also that voters should not 
identify themselves with any party or its quarrels. They should consider 
candidates’ views and not their party. Their character should weigh more even 
than their views. A man of character will make himself worthy of any position 
he is given. Even his mistakes will not much matter. I consider it impossible for 
a man without character to do higher national service so that if I were a voter The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 362  from among the list, I would first select men of character and then I would 
understand their views. 
Young India, 9-6-20, p. 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 363   
CHAPTER 64 
THE SEAT OF REAL POWER 
It must be granted that it is possible to render som e service to the State by 
entering these councils. But it is my firm belief that many can serve the 
country better by remaining outside. The late Mr. Keir Hardie used to say that 
it was practically impossible for a true Christian to remain in the British 
Parliament. Carlyle called it the talking shop. When there are many candidates, 
those who have accepted service of the land as an article of faith would do well 
to stand outside the lists, and they will find that they will be better occupied 
by educating the electorate and keeping the elected members to their promises 
at the polls. 
Young India, 19-5-20, p. 5
 
It is an illusion to think that M.L.A.’ are the guides of the voters. Voters do not 
send representatives to the Assemblies in order to be guided by them, On the 
contrary, they are sent there loyally to carry out the people’s wishes. The 
people are, therefore, the guides, not the M.L.A.’s. The latter are servants, the 
former masters. 
If we look around the world we shall find that the best guidance is given by 
those outside. If that were not so, a rot would set in all governments, because 
the field for guidance is vast and the Assembly is a very small thing. 
Parliaments are, after all a mere drop in the ocean of national life. 
Harijan, 28-4-46, p. 112
 
Under a Free Government, the real power will be held by the people... The 
mightiest Government will be rendered absolutely impotent if the people 
realizing their power use it in a disciplined manner and for the common good… 
It must be remembered that only an infinitesimal proportion of the people can 
hold positions of responsibility and power in a country’s government. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 364  Experience all the world over shows that the real power and wealth are 
possessed by people outside the group that holds the reins of Government. 
Young India, 24-4-30, p. 137 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 365   
CHAPTER 65 
LEGISLATURES 
We shall benefit by our people entering the councils  if they are true men filled 
with humility and love of the country, courageous, fearless and versed in the 
subject they have to handle. 
Young India, 19-5-20, p. 5
 
Two hundred and fifty of these legislators let loose on the people in a province 
without opposition, are, in my opinion, the worse plague. Is it after all for 
replacing the white rapacity by the black that so many noble souls, who are no 
more with us, suffered and sacrificed everything worth living for in their lives? 
There must be an escape out of this morass. If these legislatures are not so 
numerous, the evils would be less. Fifty members in the lower house and half 
that number in the upper house, for each province, which is going to be smaller 
on the linguistic basis, would minimize the nuisance. 
Mahatma, Vol. VIII, (1954), p. 292
 
The other use of legislatures is to prevent undesirable legislation and bring in 
laws which are useful for the public, so that as much help as possible can be 
given to the constructive programme. 
Harijan, 17-12-46, p. 13
 
The congress should not have to spend money on the elections. Nominees of a 
popular organization should be elected without any effort on the latter’s 
part... 
An organization which looks to money for everything can never serve the 
masses. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 366  Harijan, 17-2-46, p. 13
 
I am certainly not enamored or I do not swear by two legislatures. I have no 
fear of a popular legislature running away with itself, and hastily passing some 
laws of which afterwards it will have to repent. I would not like to give a bad 
name to it and then hang the popular legislature. I think that a popular 
legislature can take care of itself, and since we are dealing with the poorest 
country in the world, the less expenses we have to bear the better it is for us. 
Gandhian Constitution for Free India, p. 93
 
The whole of the constructive programme including unity, removal of 
untouchability, prohibition-is in pursuit of truth and non-violence. If there can 
be any interest for us in going to the legislatures, it can be only for this reason 
and for nothing else. Truth and non-violence are both the means and the end, 
and given the right type of men and the end, and given the right type of men 
the legislatures can be the means of achieving the concrete pursuit of truth and 
non-violence. If they cannot be that, it will be our fault and not theirs. If we 
have a real hold on the masses, the legislatures are bound to be that and 
nothing else. 
In making room for the parliamentary programme we are advancing a step 
further in the direction of non-violence… Truth and non-violence are no 
cloistered virtues but applicable as much in the forum and the legislatures as in 
the market place. 
Harijan, 8-5-37, pp. 97-98
 
If fighting for the legislatures meant a sacrifice of truth and non-violence, 
democracy would not be worth a moment’s purchase. The voice of the people 
is the voice of God, and it is the voice of 300 million that we have to represent. 
It is not possible to do so with truth and non-violence? The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 367  Harijan, 1-5-37, p. 89
 
In my opinion Congressmen who are members of Assemblies, whether as mere 
members or Ministers or speakers, have in every act of theirs to bear in mind 
the fact that they have, in virtue of the Congress Constitution, to confirm to 
truth and non-violence. Thus the conduct of a congressman in an Assembly 
would have to be that strictest honesty and courtesy in dealing with its 
opponents. He will not resort to shabby politics, will not hit below the belt, will 
never take a mean advantage of his adversary. The greater his position in the 
Assembly, the greater is his responsibility in these matters. A member in the 
Assembly no doubt represents his constituency and his party but also represents 
the whole of his province. A minister no doubt advances his own party never at 
the expense of the nation as a whole. 
Looked at from the point of view here suggested, the Speaker’s position 
assumes very high importance, greater than that of the Prime Minister. For he 
has to discharge the functions of a judge while he occupies the chair. He has to 
give impartial and just rulings. He has to enforce decorum and laws of courtesy 
between members. He has to be clam in the midst of storms. He has 
opportunities of winning over opponents which no other member of the House 
can possibly have. 
Harijan, 16-7-38, p. 184 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 368   
CHAPTER 66 
MAJORITY AND MINORITY 
If we want to cultivate a true spirit of democracy, we cannot afford to be 
intolerant. Intolerance betrays want to faith in one’s cause. 
Young India, 2-2-21, p. 33
 
Claiming the right of free opinion and free action as we do, we must extend the 
same to others. The rule of majority when it becomes coercive, is as 
intolerable as that of a bureaucratic minority. We must patiently try to bring 
round the minority to our view by gentle persuasion and argument. 
Young India, 26-1-22, p. 54
 
The rule of majority has a narrow application, i.e., one should yield to the 
majority in matters of detail. But it is slavery to be amendable to the majority, 
no matter what its decisions are. Democracy is not a state in which people act 
like a sheep. Under democracy, individual liberty of opinion and action is 
jealously guarded. I therefore, believe that the minority has a perfect right to 
act differently from the majority. 
Young India, 2-3-22, p. 129
 
In matters of conscience the law of majority has no place. 
Young India, 4-8-20, p. 3
 
The rule of majority does not mean that it should suppress the opinion of even 
an individual if it is sound. The opinion of an individual should have greater 
weight than the opinion of many, if that opinion is sound on merits. That is my 
view of real democracy. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 369  Mahatma, Vol. VI, (1953), p. 354
 
One of the speakers said again that “the true solution of the Asiatic question 
lay in the application of the maxim, ‘the greatest good for the greatest 
number. “ We must confess that we are not blind believers in that maxim; we 
think it has worked untold mischief in many cases, and is yet likely to do so in 
the history of the world’s progress. 
The collected of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. IV, p. 237 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 370   
CHAPTER 67 
A CODE OF CONDUCT FOR GOVERNORS AND MINISTERS 
1. A n Indian Minister or Governor should use as far as possible only Indian 
made goods… He and his family should wear nothing but Khadi, so that 
India’s poor can eke out a living. He should also ply the spinning wheel-the 
banner of non-violence. 
2. He should learn both the scripts (Hindi and Urdu), and avoid talking with 
his colleagues in English, freely use his regional language instead. 
Government communiques, orders and circulars should be issued, if 
possible in Hindustani only, which would create a widespread enthusiasm 
among the people to learn it and gradually, through such a natural 
process, it would become the national language. 
3. He should be completely free from all prejudices against any caste or 
creed, and from any favoritism towards his own relatives and friends. To 
the Minister, his own son or brother should rank no higher than any other 
ordinary citizen, including the poorest artisan or labourer. 
4. His private life should be so simple that it inspires respect, or even 
reverence. He should give one hour to productive physical labour as an 
incentive to the people. He should either spin for an hour or increase the 
agricultural output of the country by growing cereals or fruits and 
vegetables in his compound. 
5. Bungalows and motor cars should be ruled out of course; if he has to go far 
or on an urgent business, he should certainly use a car; but its use should 
be, definitely, very limited. I see that a car may perhaps be quite 
necessary. 
6. I wish that he live along with his colleagues in a compact colony, so that a 
group feeling is established easily. His family, too, can thereby cultivate 
close personal relationship with those of others Ministers. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 371  7. The other members of his family, including children should do the entire 
household work themselves, servants should be used as sparingly as 
possible. 
8. His rooms should not be furnished with expensive foreign-made furniture 
such as sofas, cupboards and chairs, especially at present, when crores of 
his countrymen do not have a single cotton mattress to sit upon even a 
piece of cloth to wear. 
9. Finally, he should neither drink nor smoke. 
Biharni Komi Agman, (Gujarati), pp. 227-28 
 
1. An Indian Governor should, in his own person and in his surroundings, be a 
teetotaller. Without this, prohibition of the fiery liquid is well nigh 
inconceivable. 
2. He and his surroundings should represent hand-spinning as a visible token 
of identification with the dumb millions of India, a token of the necessity 
of ‘bread labour’ and organized non-violence as against organized violence 
on which the society of today seems to be based. 
3. He must dwell in a cottage accessible to all, though easily shielded from 
gaze, if he is to do efficient work. The British Governor naturally 
represented British might. For him and his was erected a fortified 
residence-a palace to be occupied by him and his numerous vassals who 
sustained his Empire. The Indian prototype may keep somewhat 
pretentious buildings for receiving princess and ambassadors of the world. 
For these, being guests of the Governor should constitute an education in 
what “Even Unto This Last” equality of all-should mean in concrete terms. 
For him no expensive furniture, foreign or indigenous. Plain living and high 
thinking must be his motto, not to adorn his entrance but to be 
exemplified in daily life. 
4. For him there can be no untouchability in any form whatsoever, no caste 
or creed or colour distinction. He must represent the best of all religious 
and all things Eastern or Western. Being a citizen of India, he must be a The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 372  citizen of the world. Thus simply, one reads, did the Khalif Omar, with 
millions of treasure at his feet, live; thus lived Janaka of ancient times; 
thus lived, as I saw him, the Master of Eton in his residence in the midst 
of, and surrounded by, the sons of the Lords and Naobobs of the British 
Isles. Will the Governors of India of the famished millions do less? 
5. He will speak the language of the province of which he is the Governor and 
Hindustani, the lingua franca of India written in the Nagari or Urdu script. 
This is neither Sanskritzed Hindi nor Persianized Urdu. Hindustani is 
emphatically the language which is spoken by the millions north of the 
Vindhya Range. 
This does not pretend to be an exhaustive list of the virtues, that an Indian 
Governor should represent. It is merely illustrative. 
Harijan, 24-8-47, p. 289 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 373   
CHAPTER 68 
THE POPULAR MINISTERS 
But it seems to me that my numerous correspondents w ho have been writing 
voluminously think that ministerships are prizes for past services and that 
certain Congressmen can demand their inclusion. I venture to suggest to them 
that ministerships are avenues to service which those who are called to it 
should render cheerfully and to the best of their ability. There can therefore 
never be a scramble for these offices. 
It would be decidedly wrong to create ministerships for the sake of conciliating 
interests. If I were a Prime Minister and I was pestered with such claims I 
should tell my electors to choose another leader. These offices have to be held 
lightly, not tightly. They are or should be crowns of thorns, never of renown. 
Offices have been taken in order to see if they enable us to quicken the pace at 
which we are moving towards our goal. 
Harijan, 7-8-37, p. 204
 
Today you have worn on your head a crown of thorns. The seat of power is a 
nasty thing. You have to remain ever wakeful on that seat. You have to be 
more non-violent, more humble and more for bearing. You had been put to test 
during the British regime. But in a way it was no test at all. But now there will 
be no end to your being tested. Do not fall a prey to lure of wealth. May God 
help you. You are there to serve the villages and the poor. 
The Miracles of Calcutta, (1959), pp. 32-33
 
They (Ministers) may not make private gains either for themselves or for their 
relatives or friends. If the relatives or friends get any appointment, it must be 
only because they are the best amongst the candidates, and their market value 
is always greater than what they get under the Government. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 374  Harijan, 28-4-38, p. 88
 
Ministers should not be sensitive (to public criticism). They would take in good 
part even carping criticism... The critics expect much more from these chosen 
servants of the people than from others in the way of simplicity, courage, 
honesty and industry. 
Harijan, 21-9-47, p. 325
 
Our ministers are of the people, from the people. Let them not arrogate to 
themselves greater knowledge than those experienced men who do not happen 
to occupy ministerial chairs.  
Harijan, 16-11-47, p. 409
 
The leaders have the reins of Government and the disposal of millions of rupees 
is in their hands. They have to be vigilant. They must be humble. People often 
think nothing of not keeping their word. They should never promise what they 
cannot do. Once a promise is made, it must be kept at all cost. 
Harijan, 14-12-47, p. 467
 
A popular ministry is responsible to the legislatures and cannot do anything 
without their consent. Every elected member in a popular legislature is 
responsible to his voters. Therefore, the voter who represents the public should 
ponder well before embarking on any criticism of the Government. The tax-
payer gets full return for his money, as for example, the water tax in cities. No 
tax-payer could get water on his own for the same payment. But even so, and 
in spite of the fact that the tax is levied by the popular will, tax-payers always 
resent even paying such taxes. It is, of course, true that one cannot prove the 
benefit of all taxes as easily as the one I have cited as an examples. But as 
society grows in size and complexity and the field of service also grows, it is 
difficult to explain to the individual tax-payer, how he gets his return for any The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 375  particular tax. This much, however, is clear that taxes as a whole should stand 
for the general benefit of society. If this were not so, the argument that taxes 
were levied by popular will would not hold. 
Harijan, 8-9-46, p. 293
 
The legislative assemblies should be there only law-makers. Ministers were 
liable to be changed at will. Their acts should be subject to review by their 
courts. They should do all in their power to make justice cheap, expeditions 
and incorruptible. For that purpose Panchayat Raj had been suggested. It was 
not possible for a high court to reach lakhs and lakhs of people. Only 
extraordinary situations required emergency legislation. Legislative assemblies, 
even though the procedure might entail some delay, must not be superseded by 
the Executive. 
Harijan, 19-10-47, pp. 377-78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 376   
CHAPTER 69 
THE POLICE, CRIMES AND JAILS 
Civil liberty is not criminal liberty. 
H
arijan, 23-10-37, p. 308
 
Nevertheless, I have conceded that even in a non-violent State a police force 
may be necessary. This, I admit, is a sign of my imperfect Ahimsa. I have not 
the courage to declare that we can carry on without police force as I have in 
respect of any army. Of course, I can and do envisage a State where the police 
will not be necessary. But whether we shall succeed in realizing it, the future 
alone will show. 
The police of my conception will, however, be of a wholly different pattern 
from the present-day force. Its ranks will be composed of believers in non-
violence. They will be servants, not masters of the people. The people will 
instinctively render them any help, and through mutual co-operation they will 
easily deal with the ever-decreasing disturbances. The police force will have 
some kind of arms, but they will be rarely used, if at all. In fact the police men 
will be reformers. Their police work will be confined primarily to robbers and 
dacoits. 
Harijan, 1-9-40, p. 265
 
In independence India of the non-violent type, there will be crime but no 
criminals. They will not be punished. Crime is a disease like any other malady 
and is a product of the prevalent social system. Therefore, all crime including 
murder will be treated as a disease. Whether such as India will ever come into 
being is another question. 
Harijan, 5-5-46, p. 124
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 377  What should our jails be like in free India? All criminals should be treated as 
patients and the jails should be hospitals admitting this class of patients for 
treatment and cure. No one commits crime for the fun of it. It is a sign of a 
diseased mind. The causes of a particular disease should be investigated and 
removed. They need not have palatial buildings when their jails become 
hospitals. No country can afford that, much less can a poor country like India. 
But the outlook of the jail staff should be that of physicians and nurses in a 
hospital. The prisoners should feel that the officials are their friends. They are 
there to help them regain their mental health and not to harass them in any 
way. The popular governments have to issue necessary orders, but meanwhile 
the jail staff can do not a little to humanize their administration. 
Harijan, 2-11-47, pp. 395-96 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 378   
SECTIONS-X: SOCIAL IDEAS 
CHAPTER 70 
THE SOCIAL IDEAL 
Human society is a ceaseless growth, an unfoldment i n terms of spirituality. 
Mahatma, Vol. II, (1951), p. 296
 
All society is held together by non-violence, even as the earth is held in her 
position by gravitation. But when the law of gravitation was discovered, the 
discovery yielded results of which our ancestors had no knowledge. Even so 
when society is deliberately constructed in accordance with the law of non-
violence; its structure will be different in material particulars from what it is 
today. 
Harijan, 11-2-39, p. 8
 
I remember to have read, I forget whether in the Delhi Fort or in the Agra Fort, 
when I visited them in 1896, a verse on one of the gates, which when translated 
reads thus: “If there is a paradise on earth, it is here, it is here, it is here.” 
That fort with will all its magnificence at its best, was no paradise in my 
estimation. But I should love to see that verse with justice inscribed on the 
gates of Pakistan, at all the entrance. In such paradise, whether it is in the 
Union or in Pakistan, there will be neither paupers, nor beggars, nor high, nor 
low, neither millionaire employers, nor half-starve employees, nor intoxicating 
drinks or drugs. There will be the same respect for women, as vouchsafed to 
men, and the chastity and the purity of men and women will be jealously 
guarded. Where every woman, expect one’s wife will be treated by men of all 
religions, as mother or sister or daughter, according to her age. Where there 
will be no untouchability, and where there will be equal respect for all faiths. 
They will be all proudly, joyously and voluntarily bread labourers. I hope that 
everyone who listens to me or reads these lines, will forgive me, if stretched on The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 379  my bed and basking in the sun, inhaling the life-giving sunshine, I allow myself 
to indulge in this ecstasy. 
Harijan, 18-1-48, p. 526 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 380   
CHAPTER 71 
FOURFOLD DIVISION O FSOCIETY AND FOUR STAGES OF LIFE 
Everyone will admit that Hinduism is nothing without  the law of Varna1 and 
Ashrama-2. It would be impossible to find any Smriti-3 work of which a large 
part was not devoted to Varnashrama Dharma. This law of Varna and Ashrama is 
to be traced to our most ancient scriptures-the Vedas, and so no one who calls 
himself a Hindu may ignore it. It is his duty to study it in all its bearings, and to 
reject it if it is an excrescence, and to foster it and restore it to its pristine 
purity, if represents a universal law. 
So far as the law of Ashrama is concerned it is extinct, alike in profession and 
observance. Hinduism lays down four Ashramas or stages-the life of a 
Brahmachari (continent student), the life of Grihastha (house holder), the life 
of a Vanaprastha (who is retired) and the life of a sannyasi (renunciator)- 
through which every Hindu has to pass to fulfill his purpose in life. But the first 
and the third are practically non-existent today, the fourth may be said to be 
observed in name to a small extent. The second is professed to be observed by 
all today, but it is observed in name, not in spirit. Grihasthas or householders 
of a kind we are all, inasmuch as we eat and drink and propagate our kind, like 
all created beings. But in doing so, we fulfill the law of the flesh and not of the 
spirit. Only those married couples who fulfill the law of the spirit can be said to 
observe the law of Grihathashrama. Those who live the mere animal life do not 
observe the law. The life of householders of today is one of indulgence. And as 
the four stages represent a ladder of growth and are interdependent, one 
cannot leap to the stage of a Vanaprastha or a Sannyasi, unless he or she 
fulfilled the law of the first two Ashramas-Brahmacharya and Grihastha. The 
law of the Ashrama, therefore, is a dead letter today. It can be revived only if 
the law of Varna, with which it is intimately interlinked, is revived. 
That brings us to a consideration of the law of Varna. Varna is intimately, if not 
indissolubly connected with the birth, and the observance of the law of Varna 
means the following on the part of us all of the hereditary and traditional The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 381  calling of our forefathers in a spirit of duty. Those who thus fulfill the law of 
their Varna can be counted on one’s fingers’ ends. This performance of one’s 
hereditary function is done as a matter of duty, though it naturally carries with 
it the earning of one’s livelihood. Thus, the function of a Brahmana is to study 
and to teach the science of Brahman (or spiritual truth). He performs the 
function as he cannot do otherwise, as it is the law of his being. That secures 
him his livelihood, but he will take it as a gift from God. A Kshatriya will 
perform the function of protecting the people in the same spirit, accepting for 
his livelihood whatever the people can afford to give him. A Vaishya will pursue 
wealth-producing occupations for the welfare of the community, keeping for 
himself enough for his own maintenance and rendering the balance to the 
community it one shape or other. A Shudra will perform physical is labour in the 
same spirit of service. 
Varna is determined by birth, but can be retained only by observing its 
obligation. One born of Brahaman parents will be called a Brahamana, but if his 
life fails to reveal the attributes of a Brahamana when he comes of age, he 
cannot be called a Brahmana. He will have fallen from Brahmanahood. On the 
other hand, one who is born not a Brahmana but reveals in his conduct the 
attributes of a Brahamana will be regarded as a Brahamana, though he will 
himself disclaim the label. 
Varna thus conceived is no man-made institution but the law of life universally 
governing the human family. Fulfillment of the law would make life livable, 
would spread peace and content, end all clashes and conflicts, put an end to 
starvation and pauperization, solve the problem of population and even end 
disease and suffering. 
But if Varna reveals the law of one’s being and thus the duty of one has to 
perform, it confers no right, and the idea of superiority or inferiority is wholly 
repugnant to it. All Varnas are equal, for the community depends no less on one 
than on another. Today Varna means gradations of high and low. It is a hideous 
travesty of the original. The law of Varna was discovered by our ancestors by 
stern austerities. They sought to live up to the law to the best of their The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 382  capacity. We have distorted it today and have made ourselves the laughing 
stock of the world. No wonder that we have today amongst the Hindus a section 
which is bending its energies to a destruction of the institution which in their 
opinion spells the ruin of the Hindus. And certainly one need have no mercy for 
the hideous distortion, which means nothing but destruction of Hinduism. 
Harijan, 28-9-34, pp. 260-61
 
Varnashram Dharma defines man’s mission on this earth. He is not born day 
after day to explore avenues for amassing riches and to explore different means 
of livelihood; on the contrary man is born in order that he may utilize every 
atom of his energy for the purpose of knowing his Maker. It restricts him, 
therefore, for the purpose of holding body and soul together, to the occupation 
of holding body and soul together, to the occupation of his forefathers. That 
and nothing more or nothing less is Varnashrama Dharma 
Young India, 27-10-27, p. 357
 
Though the law of Varna is a special discovery of some Hindu seer, it has 
universal application. Every religion has some distinguishing characteristic, but 
if it expresses a principle or law, it ought to have universal application. That is 
how I look at the law of Varna. The world may ignore it today but it will have to 
accept it in the time to come. 
The four Varnas have been compared in the Vedas to the four members of the 
body, and no simile could be happier. If they are members of one body, how 
can one be superior or inferior to another? If the members of the body had the 
power of expression and each of them were to say that it was higher and better 
than the rest, the body would go to pieces. Even so, our body politic, the body 
of humanity, would go to pieces, if it were to perpetuate the canker of 
superiority or inferiority. It is this canker that is at the root of the various ills of 
our time, especially class-wars and civil strife. It should not be difficult for 
even the meanest understanding to see that these wars and strifes could not be 
ended except by the observance of the law of Varna. For it ordains that The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 383  everyone shall fulfill the law of one’s being by doing in a spirit of duty and 
service that to which one is born. 
Harijan, 28-9-34, pp. 261-262
 
Varnashrama, as I interpret it, satisfies the religious social and economic needs 
of a community. It satisfies the religious needs, because a whole community 
accepting the law is free to devote ample time to spiritual perfection. 
Observance of the law obviates social evils and entirely prevents the killing 
economic competition. And if it is regarded as a law laying down, not the rights 
or the privileges of the community governed by it, but their duties, it ensures 
the fairest possible distribution of wealth, though it may not be an ideal, i.e., 
strictly equal, distribution. Therefore, when people in disregard of the law 
mistake duties for privileges and try to pick and choose occupations for self-
advancement, it leads to confusion o f Varna and ultimate disruption of society. 
In this law, there is no question of compelling any person to follow the parental 
occupation against his or her aptitude that is to say, there can be no 
compulsion from without as there was none for, perhaps, several thousand 
years, during which the law of Varnashrama worked without interruption. By 
training, the people had recognized the duty and the justice of the law, and 
they voluntarily lived under it. Today, nations are living in ignorance and 
breach of that law and they are suffering for it. The so-called civilized nations 
have by no means reached a state which they can at all regard with equanimity 
and satisfaction. 
Harijan, 4-3-33, p. 5
 
Varna has nothing to do with caste. Down with the monster of caste that 
masquerades in the guise of Varna. It is that masquerades in the guise of Varna. 
It is this travesty of Varna that has degraded Hinduism and India. Our failure to 
follow the law of Varna is largely responsible both for our economic and 
spiritual ruin. It is one cause of unemployment and impoverishment, and it is 
responsible for untouchability and defections from our faith. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 384  Young India, 24-11-27, p. 390
 
Man being a social being has to devise some method of social organization. We 
in India have evolved caste: they in Europe have organized class. Neither has 
the solidarity and naturalness of a family which perhaps is a God-ordained 
institution. If caste had produced certain evils, class has not been productive of 
anything less. 
If class helps to conserve certain social virtues, caste does the same in equal, if 
not greater, degree. The beauty of the caste system is that it does not base 
itself upon distinctions of wealth possessions. Money, as history has proved, is 
the greatest disruptive force in the world. Even the sacredness of family ties is 
not safe against the pollution of wealth, says Shankaracharya. Caste is but an 
extension of the principle of the family. Both are governed by blood and 
heredity. Western scientists are busy trying to prove that heredity is an illusion 
and that milieu is everything. The solid experience of many lands goes against 
the conclusion of this scientist; but even accepting their doctrine of milieu, it is 
easy to prove that milieu can be conserved and developed more through caste 
than through class. 
Young India, 29-12-20, p. 2
 
1. Colour; one of the four divisions of Hindu society (i.e., Brahman, Kshatriya, Vaishya 
and Shudra) based on hereditary occupations. 
2. Stage of life; abode of spiritual teacher; place for disciplined community living. 
3. The codes, based on recollection of the Shastras. 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 385   
CHAPTER 72 
THE ROLE AND STATUS OF WOMAN 
My own opinion is that, just as fundamentally man an d woman are one, their 
problem must be one in essence. The soul in both is the same. The two live the 
same life and have the same feelings. Each is a complement of the other. The 
one cannot live without the other’s active life…. 
But somehow or other man has dominated woman from ages past, and so 
woman has developed an inferiority complex. She has believed in the truth of 
man’s interested teaching that she is inferior to him. But the seers among men 
have recognized her equal status. 
Nevertheless there is no doubt that at some point there is bifurcation. Whilst 
both are fundamentally one, it is also equally true that in the form there is a 
vital difference between the two. Hence the vocations of the two must also be 
different. The duty of motherhood, which the vast majority of women will 
always undertake, requires qualities which man need not possess. She is 
passive, he is active. She is essentially mistress of the house. He is the bread 
winner. She is the keeper and distributor of the bread. She is the care-taker in 
every sense of the term. The art of bringing up the infants of the race is her 
special and sole prerogative. Without her care the race must become extinct. 
In my opinion it is degrading both for man and woman that woman should be 
called upon or included to forsake the hearth and shoulder the rifle for the 
protection of that hearth. It is a reversion to barbarity and the beginning of the 
end. In trying to ride the horse that man rides, she brings herself and him 
down. The sin will be on man’s head for tempting or compelling his companion 
to desert her special calling. There is as much bravery in keeping one’s home in 
good order and condition as there is in defending it against attack from 
without. As I have watched millions of peasants in their natural surroundings 
and as I watch them daily in little Segaon, the natural division of spheres of 
work has forced itself on my attention. There are no women black-smiths and The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 386  carpenters. But men and women work on the fields, the heaviest work being 
done by the males. The women keep and manage the homes. They supplement 
the meager resources of the family, but man remains the main bread-winner. 
The division of the spheres of work being recognized, the general qualities and 
culture required are practically the same for both the sexes. 
My contribution to the great problem lies in my presenting for acceptance Truth 
and Ahimsa in every walk of life, whether for individuals or nations. I have 
hugged the hope that in this woman will be the unquestioned leader and having 
thus found her place in human evolution, will shed inferiority complex…. 
I have suggested in these columns that woman is the incarnation of Ahimsa. 
Ahimsa means infinite love, which again means infinite capacity for suffering. 
Who but woman, the mother of man, shows this capacity in the largest 
measure? She shows it as she carries the infant and feeds it during nine months 
and derives joy in the suffering involved. What can beat the suffering caused by 
the pangs of labour? But she forgets them in the joy of creation. Who again 
suffers daily so that her babe may wax from day to day? Let her transfer that 
love to the whole of humanity, let her forget she ever was or can be the object 
of man’s lust. And she will occupy her proud position by the side of man as his 
mother, maker and silent leader. It is given to her to teach the art of peace to 
the warring world thirsting for that nectar. She can become the leader in 
Satyagraha which does not require the learning that books give but require the 
stout heart that comes from suffering and faith. 
My good nurse in the Sassoon Hospital, Poona, as I was lying on a sick-bed years 
ago, told me the story of a woman who refused to take chloroform because she 
would not risk the life of the babe she was carrying. She had to undergo a 
painful operation. The only anesthetic she had was her love for the babe, to 
save whom no suffering was too great. Let not women, who can count many 
such heroines among them, ever despise their sex or deplore that they were 
not born men. The contemplation of that heroine often makes me envy woman 
the status that is hers, if she only knew. There is as much reason for man to 
wish that he was born a woman as for woman to do otherwise. But the wish is The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 387  fruitless. Let us be happy in the state to which we are born and do the duty for 
which nature has destined us. 
Harijan, 24-2-40, pp. 13-14
 
As Nature has made men and women different, it is necessary to maintain a 
difference between the educations of the two. True, they are equals in life, 
but their functions differ. It is woman’s right to rule the home. Man is master 
outside it. Man is the earner, woman saves and spends. Woman looks after the 
feeding of the child. She shapes its future. She is responsible for building its 
character. She is her children’s educator, and hence, mother to the Nation. 
Man is not father (in that sense). After a certain period, a father ceases to 
influence his son; the mother never abdicates her place. The son, even after 
attaining manhood, will play with the mother even as the child does. He cannot 
do that with his father. 
If this is the scheme of Nature, and it is just as it should be, woman should not 
have to earn her living. A state of affairs in which women have to work as 
telegraph clerks, typists or compositors can be, I think, no good, such a people 
must be bankrupt and living on their capital.  
Hence just as, on the one hand, it is wrong to keep women in ignorance and 
under suppression ; so, on the other, it is a sign of decadence and it is 
tyrannical to burden them with work which is ordinarily done by men. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, vol. XIV, p. 31
 
I do not need to be a girl to be wild over man’s atrocities towards woman. I 
count the law of inheritance among the least in the list. The Sarda Bill deals 
with an evil far greater than one which the law of inheritance connotes. But I 
am uncompromising in the matter of woman’s rights. In my opinion she should 
labour under no legal disability not suffered by man. I should treat the 
daughters and sons on a footing of perfect equality. As women being to realize 
their strength, as they must in proportion to realize their strength, as they The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 388  must in proportion to the education they receive, they will naturally resent the 
glaring inequalities to which they are subjected. But to remove legal 
inequalities will be a mere palliative. The root of the evil lies much deeper 
than most people realize. It lies in man’s greed of power and fame and deeper 
still in mutual lust. Man has always desired power. Ownership of property gives 
this power. Man hankers also after posthumous fame based on power. This 
cannot be had, if property is progressively cut up in pieces as it must be if all 
the posterity become equal co-shares. Hence the descent of property for the 
most part on the eldest male issue. Most women are married. And they are co-
shares, in spite of the law being against them, in their husband’s power and 
privileges. They delight in being ladies-this and what not simply for the fact of 
being the wives of particular lords. Though therefore they may vote for radical 
reform in academic discussions over inequalities, when it comes to acting up to 
their vote, they will be found to be unwilling to part with the privileges. 
Whilst therefore I would always advocate the repeal of all legal 
disqualifications, I should have the enlightened women of India to deal with the 
root cause. Woman is the embodiment of sacrifice and suffering, and her 
advent to public life should therefore result in purifying it, in restraining 
unbridled ambition and accumulation of property. Let them know that millions 
of men have no property to transmit to posterity. Let us learn from them that it 
is better for the few to have no ancestral property at all... 
The privilege of the awakened women should be to spot and eradicate ago-long 
evils. 
Young India, 17-10-29, p. 340
 
Man, the law-giver, will have to pay a dreadful penalty for the degradation he 
has imposed upon the so-called weaker sex. When woman, freed from man’s 
snares, rises to the full height and rebels against man’s legislation and 
institutions designed by him, her rebellion, no doubt non-violent will be 
nonetheless effective. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 389  Young India, 16-4-25, p. 133
 
Man has regarded woman as his tool. She has learnt to be his tool, and in the 
end found it easy and pleasurable to be such, because when one drags another 
in hi s fall in the descent is easy. 
Harijan, 25-1-36, p. 396
 
Of all the evils for which man has made himself responsible, none to me, is so 
degrading, so shocking or so brutal as his abuse of the better half of humanity, 
the female sex, not the weaker sex. It is the nobler of the two, for it is even 
today the embodiment of sacrifice, silent suffering, humility, faith and 
knowledge. 
Young India, 15-9-21, p. 292
 
To call woman the weaker sex is a libel; it is man’s injustice to woman. If by 
strength is meant brute strength, then indeed is woman less brute than man. If 
by strength is meant moral power, than woman is immeasurably man’s 
superior. Has she not greater intuition, is she not more self-sacrificing, has she 
not greater powers of endurance, has she not greater courage? Without her 
man could not be. If non-violence is the law of our being, the future is with 
woman…. Who can make a more effective appeal to the heart than woman? 
Young India, 10-4-30, p. 121
 
I believe in the proper education of woman. But I do believe that woman will 
not make her contribution to the world by mimicking or running a race with 
man. She can run the race, but she will not rise to the great heights she is 
capable of by mimicking man. She has to be the complement of man. 
Harijan, 27-2-37, p. 19
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 390  Woman, I hold, is the personification of self sacrifice, but unfortunately today 
she does not realize what a tremendous advantage she has over man. As Tolstoy 
used to say, they are laboring under the hypnotic influence of man... If they 
would realize the strength of non-violence they would not consent to be called 
the weaker sex. 
Young India, 14-1-32, p. 19
 
Refuse to be the slaves of your own whims and fancies, and the slaves of men. 
Refuse to decorate yourselves, don’t go in for scents and lavender waters; if 
you (women) want to give out the proper scent, it must come out of your heart, 
and then you will captivate not man, but humanity. It is your birth-right. Man is 
born of woman, he is flesh of her and bone of her bone. Come to your own and 
deliver your message again. 
Young India, 8-12-27, p. 406
 
Woman must cease to consider herself the object of man’s lust. The remedy is 
more in her hands than man’s. She must refuse to adorn herself for men, 
including her husband, if she will be an equal partner with man. I cannot 
imagine Sita even wasting a single moment on pleasing Rama by physical 
charms.  
Young India, 21-7-21, p. 229
 
The woman who knows and fulfils her duty realizes her dignified status. She is 
the queen not the slave, of the household over which she presides. 
Harijan, 12-10-34, p. 277
 
Equality of sexes does not mean equality of occupations. There may be no legal 
bar against a woman hunting or wielding a lance. But she instinctively recoils 
from a function that belongs to man. Nature has created sexes as complements 
of each other. Their functions are defined as are their forms. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 391  Harijan, 2-12-39, p. 359
 
I make no distinction between man and woman. Woman should feel just as 
independent as man. Bravery is not man’s monopoly. 
Harijan, 5-1-47, p. 478
 
Today few women take part in politics and most of these do not do 
independent thinking. They are content to carry out their parents’ or their 
husbands’ behests. Realizing their dependence, they cry out for women’s 
rights. Instead of doing this, however, women workers should enroll women as 
voters, impart or have imparted to them practical education, teach them to 
think independently, release them from the chains of caste that bind them, so 
as to bring about a change in them which will compel men to realize woman’s 
strength and capacity for sacrifice and give her places of honour. 
Harijan, 21-4-46, p. 96
 
Therefore, I advise women to resort to civil rebellion against all undesirable 
and unworthy restraints. All restraints to be beneficial must be voluntary. 
There is no possibility of harm resulting from civil rebellion. It presupposes 
purity and reasoned resistance. 
Harijan, 23-3-47, p. 80
 
Women may not look for protection to men. They must rely on their own 
strength and purity of character and on God. 
Harijan, 15-9-46, p. 312
 
Man should learn to give place to women and a community or country in which 
women are not honoured cannot be considered as civilized. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 392  Harijan, 11-1-48, p. 508
 
Chastity is not a hot-house growth. It cannot be superimposed. It cannot be 
protected by the surrounding wall of the purdah-1.It must grow from within, 
and to be worth anything, it must be capable of withstanding every unsought 
temptation. 
Young India, 3-2-27, p. 37
 
Women are special custodians of all that is pure and religious in life. 
Conservative by nature, if they are slow to shed superstitious habits, they are 
also slow to give up all that is pure and noble in life. 
Harijan, 25-3-33, p. 2
 
I do believe that it is woman’s mission to exhibit Ahimsa at its highest and 
best… For woman is more fitted than man to make explorations and take bolder 
action in Ahimsa… For the courage of self-sacrifice woman is any day superior 
to man, as I believe man is to woman for the courage of the brute. 
Harijan, 5-11-38, p. 317
 
Purda-Veil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 393   
CHAPTER 73 
THE IDEAL OF MARRIAGE 
Absolute renunciation, absolute Brahmacharya, is the  ideal state. If you dare 
not think of it, marry by all means, but even then live a life of self-control. 
Harijan, 7-9-35, p. 234
 
It is wholly wrong of parents to force marriage on their daughters. It is also 
wrong to keep their daughters unfit for earning their living. No parent has a 
right to turn a daughter out on to the street for refusal to marry. 
Harijan, 15-9-46, pp. 311-12
 
Marriage is a natural thing in life, and to consider it derogatory in any sense is 
wholly wrong…. The idea is to look upon marriage as a sacrament, and, 
therefore, to lead a life of self-restraint in the married estate. 
Harijan, 22-3-42, p. 88
 
The ideal that marriage aims at is that of spiritual union though the physical. 
The human love that it incarnates is intended to serve as a stepping stone to 
divine or universal love. 
Young India, 21-5-31, p. 115
 
Rightly speaking, the true purpose of marriage should be and is intimate 
friendship and companionship between man and woman. There is in it no room 
for sexual satisfaction. That marriage is no marriage which takes place for the 
satisfaction of the sex desire. That satisfaction is a denial of true friendship. 
Harijan, 7-7-46, p. 214
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 394  Those who see in Sita a willing slave under Rama do not realize the loftiness of 
either her independence or Rama’s consideration for her in everything. Sita was 
no helpless, weak woman incapable of protection herself or her honour. 
Harijan, 2-5-36, p. 93
 
The wife is not the husband’s bondslave, but his companion and his help-mate, 
and an equal partner in all his joys and sorrows-as free as the husband to 
choose her own path. 
An Autobiography, (1966), p. 18
 
I hold that the right education in this country is to teach woman the art of 
saying ‘no’ even to her husband, to tech her that it is no part of her duty to 
become a mere tool or a doll in her husband’s hands. She has rights as well as 
duties. 
Harijan, 2-5-36, p. 93
 
A correspondent laid down the following conditions of marriage: (1).Mutual 
attraction or love; (2) Eugenic fitness; (3) Approval and consent of the 
respective families concerned; and consideration for the interest of the social 
order to which one belongs; (4) spiritual development. I accept generally the 
conditions for an ideal marriage enumerated by my correspondent. But I would 
change their order of importance and put ‘love’ last in the list. By giving it the 
first place, the other conditions are liable to be overshadowed by it altogether 
and rendered more or less nugatory. Therefore, spiritual development ought to 
be given the first place in the choice for marriage. Service should come next, 
family considerations and the interest of the social order should have the third 
place, and mutual attraction or ‘love’ the fourth and last place. This means 
that ‘love’ alone, where the other four conditions are not fulfilled, should not 
be held as a valid reason for marriage. At the same time, marriage where there 
is no love should equally be ruled out even though all the other conditions are The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 395  fully complied with. I should score out the condition of eugenic fitness, because 
the begetting of offspring being the central purpose of marriage eugenic fitness 
cannot be treated merely as a ‘condition’, is the sine qua non of marriage. 
Harijan, 5-6-37, pp. 133-34
 
Manu has described the first child as dharmaja -born out of a sense of duty, and 
children born after the first as kamaja-carnally born. That gives in a nutshell 
the law of sexual relations. 
Harijan, 24-4-37, p. 83
 
Innumerable persons eat in order to satisfy the palate, but such indulgence 
does not, therefore, become one’s duty. Very few eat to live, but they are ones 
who really know the law of eating. Similarly, those only really marry who marry 
in order to experience the purity and sanctity of the marriage tie and thereby 
realize the divinity within. 
Harijan, 7-7-46, p. 214
 
You will guard your wife’s honour and be not her master, but her true friend. 
You will hold her body and her soul as sacred as I trust she will hold your body 
and your soul. To that end you will have to live a life of prayerful toil, and 
simplicity and self-restraint. Let not either of you regard another as the object 
of his or her lust. 
Young India, 2-2-28, p. 35
 
I admit that between husband and wife there should be no secrets from one 
another…. I hold that husband and wife merge in each other. They are one in 
two or two in one. 
Harijan, 9-3-40, p. 30
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 396  What is Kanyadan-1 in the case of little children? Has a father any rights of 
property over his children? He is their protector not owner. And he forfeits the 
privilege of protection when he abuses it by seeking to barter away the liberty 
of his ward. 
The least that a parent, who has so abused his trust as to give in marriage an 
infant to an old man in his dotage or to a boy hardly out of his teens, can do, is 
to purge himself of his sin by remarrying the daughter when she becomes 
widowed. As I have said, such marriages should be declared null and void from 
the beginning. 
Young India, 11-11-26, p. 388
 
The system has to go. Marriage must cease to be a matter of arrangement made 
by parents for money. The system is intimately connected with caste. So long 
as the choice is restricted to a few hundred young men or young women of a 
particular caste, the system will persist no matter what is said against it. The 
girls or boys or their parents will have to break the bonds of caste if the evil is 
to be eradicated... All this means education of a character that will 
revolutionize the mentality of the youth of the nation. 
Harijan, 23-5-36, p.117
 
…A strong public opinion should be created in condemnation of the degrading 
practice of dowry and young men who soil their fingers with such ill-gotten gold 
should be ex-communicated from society. Parents of girls should cease to be 
dazzled by English degrees and should not hesitate to travel outside their little 
castes and provinces to secure true, gallant young men for their daughters. 
Young India, 21-6-28, p. 207
 
If we would be pure, if we would save Hinduism, we must rid ourselves of this 
poison of enforced widowhood. The reform must begin by those who have girl-
widows taking courage in both their hands and seeing that the child-widows in The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 397  their charge are duly and well married not - remarried. They were never really 
married.  
Young India, 5-8-26, p. 276
 
1. Giving away of daughter in marriage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 398   
CHAPTER 74 
CHILDREN 
If I am to identify myself with the grief of the lea st in India, aye, if I have the 
power, the least in the world, let me identify myself with the sins of the little 
ones who are under my care. And so doing in all humility, I hope someday to 
see God-Truth-face to face. 
Young India, 3-12-25, p. 422
 
Children inherit the qualities of the parents, no less than their physical 
features. Environment does play an important part, but the original capital on 
which a child starts life is inherited from its ancestors. I have also seen children 
successfully surmounting the effects of an evil inheritance. That is due to 
purity being an inherent attribute of the soul. 
An Autobiography, (1966), p. 234
 
A real property that a parent can transmit to all equally is his or her character 
and educational facilities. Parents should seek to make their sons and 
daughters self-reliant, well able to earn an honest livelihood by the sweat of 
the brow. 
Young India, 17-10-29, p. 340
 
If we are to reach real peace in this world and if we are to carry on a real war 
against war, we shall have to begin with children; and if they will grow up in 
their natural innocence, we won’t have to struggle, we won’t have to pass 
fruitless idle resolutions. But we shall go from love to love and peace to peace, 
until at last all the corners of the world are covered with that peace can love 
for which, consciously or unconsciously, the whole world is hungering. 
Young India, 19-11-31, p. 361 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 399   
CHAPTER 75 
BIRTH –CONTROL 
I think is the height of ignorance to believe that t he sexual act is an 
independent function, necessary like sleeping or eating. The world depends for 
its existence on the act of generation, and as the world is the play-ground of 
God and a reflection of His glory, the act of generation should be controlled for 
the ordered growth of the world. He who realizes this will control his lust at 
any cost, equip himself with the knowledge necessary of the physical, mental 
and spiritual well-being of his progeny, and give the benefit of that knowledge 
to posterity. 
An Autobiography, (1966), p. 153
 
The union is meant not for pleasure, but for bringing forth progeny. And union 
is a crime when the desire for progeny is absent. 
Young India, 12-3-25, p. 88
 
Once the idea that the only and grand function of the sexual organ is 
generation, possesses man and woman, union for any other purpose they will 
hold as criminal waste of the vital fluid and the consequent excitement caused 
to man and woman as an equally criminal waste of energy. 
Harijan, 21-3-36, p. 48
 
Sex urge is a fine and noble thing. There is nothing to be ashamed of in it. But 
it is meant only for the act of creation. Any other use of it is a sin against God 
and humanity. 
Harijan, 28-3-36, p. 53
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 400  It is wrong and immoral to seek to escape the consequences of one’s acts. It is 
good for a person who over-eats to have an ache and a fast. It is bad for him to 
indulge his appetite and then escape the consequence by taking tonics or other 
medicine. It is still worse for a person to indulge in his animal passions and 
escape the consequences of his acts. Nature is relentless and will have full 
revenge for any such violation of her laws. Moral results can only be produced 
my moral restraints. All other restraints defeat the very purpose for which they 
are intended. 
Young India, 12-3-25, pp. 88-89
 
There can be no two opinions about the necessity of birth-control. But only 
method handed down from ages past is self-control or Brahmacharya. It is an 
infallible sovereign remedy doing good to those who practice it. And medical 
men will earn the gratitude of mankind, if instead of devising artificial means 
of birth control, they will find out the means of self control….  
Artificial methods are like putting premium upon vice. They make man and 
woman reckless. And respectability that is being given to the methods must 
hasten the dissolution of the restraints that public opinion puts one. Adoption 
of artificial methods must result in imbecility and nervous prostration. The 
remedy will be found to be worse than the disease. 
Young India, 12-3-25, pp. 88-89
 
If it is contended that birth-control is necessary for the nation because of over-
population, I dispute the proposition. It has never been proved. In my opinion, 
by a proper land system, better agriculture and a supplementary industry, this 
country is capable of supporting twice as many people as there are in it today. 
Young India, 2-4-25, p. 118
 
The bogey of increasing birth-rate is not a new thing. It has been often trotted 
out. Increase in population is not and ought not to be regarded as calamity to The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 401  be avoided. Its regulation or restriction by artificial methods is a calamity of 
the first grade, whether we know it or not. It is bound to degrade the race if, it 
becomes universal which, thank God, it is never likely to be. Pestilence, war 
and famines are cursed antidotes against cursed lust which is responsible for 
unwanted children. If we would avoid this threefold curse, we would avoid too 
the curse if unwanted children by the sovereign remedy of self-control. The evil 
consequences of artificial methods are being seen by discerning men even now. 
Without, however, encroaching upon the moral domain, let me say that 
propagation of the race rabbit-wise must undoubtedly be stopped; but no so as 
to bring greater evils in its train. It should be stopped by methods which in 
themselves ennoble the race. In other words, it is all a matter of proper 
education which would embrace every department of life; and dealing with one 
curse will take in its orbit all the others. A way is not to be avoided because it 
is upward and therefore uphill. Man’s upward progress necessarily means ever-
increasing difficulty, which is to be welcomed. 
Harijan, 31-3-46, p. 66
 
Man must choose either of the two curses, the upward or the downward; but as 
he has the brute in him, he will more easily choose the downward course than 
the upward, especially when the downward course is presented to him in a 
beautiful garb. Man easily capitulates when sin is presented in the garb of 
virtue, and that is what Marie-Stopes and others are doing.  
Harijan, 1-2-35, p. 410
 
This little globe of ours is not a toy of yesterday. It is not suffered from the 
weight of over-population through its age of countless millions. How can it be 
that the truth has suddenly dawned upon some people that it is in danger of 
perishing of shortage of food unless the birth rate is checked through the use of 
contraceptives?  
Harijan, 14-9-35, p. 244
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 402  I urge the advocates of artificial methods to consider the consequences. Any 
large use of the methods is likely to result in the dissolution of the marriage 
bond and in free love. If a man may indulge in animal passion for the sake of it, 
what is he to do whilst he is, say, away from his home for any length of time, 
or when he is engaged as a soldier in a protracted war or when he is widowed, 
or when his wife is too ill to permit him the indulgence without injury to her 
health, notwithstanding the use of artificial methods? 
Young India, 2-4-25, P. 118
 
To ask India’s women to take to contraceptives is, to say the least, putting the 
cart before the horse. The first thing is to free her from mental slavery, to 
teach her the sacredness of her body, and to teach her the dignity of national 
service and the service of humanity. 
Harijan, 2-5-36, p. 93
 
It is the philanthropic motive that no doubt impels many birth-control 
reformers to a whirlwind campaign in the favour of the use of contraceptives. I 
invite them to contemplate the ruinous consequences of their misplaced 
philanthropy. Those whom they want to reach never use them in any 
appreciable numbers. Those who ought not to use them will, without doubt, 
use them to the undoing of themselves and their partners. This would not 
matter in the least if the use of contraceptives was incontestably proved to be 
right physically and morally. 
Harijan, 12-9-36, p. 244
 
…I have felt that during the years still left to me if I can drive home to women’s 
minds the truth that they are free, we will have to birth-control problem in 
India. If they will only learn to say ‘no’ to their husbands when they approach 
them carnally…all will be well… The real problem is that they do not want to The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 403  resist them… I want woman to learn the primary right of resistance. She thinks 
now that she has not got it. 
Harijan, 25-1-36, p. 396
 
It is a sin to bring forth unwanted children, but I think it is a greater sin to 
avoid the consequences of one’s own action. It simply unmans man. 
Harijan, 7-9-35, p. 234
 
And so is a woman guilty of criminal folly who will receive the seed in her life-
producing field with the deliberate intention of letting it run to waste. Both he 
and she will be judged guilty of misuse of the talents given to them and they 
will be dispossessed of what they have been given. 
Harijan, 28-3-36, p. 53
 
I suggest that it is cowardly to refuse to face the consequences of one’s acts. 
Persons who use contraceptives will never learn the virtue of self-restraint. 
They will not need it. Self-indulgence with contraceptives may prevent the 
coming of children but will sap the vitality of both men and women, perhaps 
more of men than of women. It is unmanly to refuse battle with the devil. 
Harijan, 17-4-37, p. 77
 
I know what havoc secret vice has played among school boys and school girls. 
The introduction of contraceptives under the name of science and the 
imprimatur of known leaders of society has intensified the complication and 
made the task of reformers who work for purity of social life well-nigh 
impossible... 
Harijan, 28-3-36, p. 53
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 404  I know that there are modern women who advocate these methods. But I have 
little doubt that the vast majority of women will reject them as inconsistent 
with their dignity. If man means well by her, let him exercise control over 
himself. It is not she who tempts. In reality, man being the aggressor is the real 
culprit and the tempter. 
Young India, 2-4-25, p. 118
 
And my plea based on positive experience is that even as truth and Ahimsa are 
not merely for the chosen few but for the whole of humanity, to be practiced 
in daily life, so, exactly is self-control not merely for a few Mahatma-1 but for 
the whole of humanity. And even as, because many people will be untruthful 
and violent, humanity may not lower its standard, so also, though many, even 
the majority, may not respond to the message of self-control, we may not 
lower our standard. 
Harijan, 30-5-36, p. 126
 
1. Great Souls 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 405   
SECTION XI BASIC EDUCATION AND STUDENTS 
CHAPTER-76 
BASIC EDUCATION 
The ancient aphorism1, “Education is that which liberate”, is as true today as it 
was before. Education here does not mean mere spiritual knowledge, nor does 
not liberation signify only spiritual liberation after death. Knowledge includes 
all training that is useful for the service of mankind and liberation means 
freedom from all manner of servitude even in the present life. Servitude is of 
two kinds: slavery to domination from outside and to one’s own artificial needs. 
The knowledge acquired in the pursuit of this ideal alone constitutes true 
study. 
Harijan, 10-3-46, p. 38
 
Persistent questioning and healthy inquisitiveness are the first requisite for 
acquiring learning of any kind. Inquisitiveness should be tempered by humility 
and respectful regard for the teacher. It must not degenerate into impudence. 
The latter is the enemy of the receptivity of mind. There can be no knowledge 
without humility and the will to learn. 
Harijan, 8-9-46, p. 306
 
Education must be of a new type for the sake of the creation of a new world. 
Harijan, 19-1-47, p. 494
 
Every one of us has good inherent in the soul, it needs to be drawn out by the 
teachers, and only those teachers can perform this sacred function whose own 
character is unsullied, who are always ready to learn and to grow from 
perfection to perfection. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 406  Harijan, 7-1-36, p. 309
 
Useful manual labour, intelligently performed is the means par excellence for 
developing the intellect... A balanced intellect presupposes a harmonious 
growth of body, mind and soul… An intellect that is developed through the 
medium of socially useful labour will be an instrument for service and will not 
easily be led astray or fall into devious paths. 
Harijan, 8-9-46, p. 306
 
Craft, art, health and education should all be integrated into one scheme. Nai 
Talim is a beautiful blend of all the four and covers the whole education of the 
individual from the time of conception to the moment of death... Instead of 
regarding craft and industry as different from education, I will regard the 
former as the medium for the latter. 
Harijan, 10-11-46, p. 394
 
Our system of (Basic) education leads to the development of the mind, body 
and soul. The ordinary system cares only for the mind.  
Harijan, 9-11-47, p. 401
 
The teachers earn what they take. It stands for the art of living. Therefore, 
both the teacher and the pupil have no produce in the very act of teaching and 
learning. It enriches life from the commencement. It makes the nation 
independent of the search for employment. 
Harijan, 11-5-47, p. 145
 
It is popularly and correctly described as education through handicrafts. This is 
part of the truth. The root of this new education goes much deeper. It lies in 
the application of truth and love in every variety of human activity, whether in The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 407  individual life or a corporate one. The notion of education through handicrafts 
rises from the contemplation of truth and love permeating life’s activities. Love 
requires that true education should be easily accessible to all, and should be of 
use to every villager in his daily life. Such education is not derived from, nor 
does it depend upon books. It has no relation to sectional religion. If it can be 
called religious, it is universal religion from which all sectional religions are 
derived. Therefore, it is learnt from the Book of Life which costs nothing and 
which cannot be taken away from one by any force on earth. 
Harijan, 21-12-47, p. 480
 
I hold that, as the largest part of our time is devoted to labour for earning our 
bread, our children must from their infancy be taught the dignity of such 
labour. Our children should not be so taught as to despise labour. There is no 
reason why a peasant’s son, after having gone to school, should become useless 
as he does become, as and agricultural labourer. 
Young India, 1-9-21, p. 277
 
Literary education should follow the education of the hand-the one gift that 
visible distinguishes man from beast. It is a superstition to think that the fullest 
development of man is impossible without a knowledge of the art of reading 
and writing. That knowledge undoubtedly adds grace to life, but it is in no way 
indispensable for man’s moral, physical, or material growth. 
Harijan, 8-3-35, p. 28
 
Man is neither mere intellect, nor the gross animal body, nor the heart or soul 
alone. A proper and harmonious combination of all the three is required for the 
making of the whole man and constitutes the true economics of education...  
I hold that true education of the intellect can only come through a proper 
exercise and training of the bodily organs, e.g., hands, feet, eyes, nose, etc. In 
order words an intelligent use of the bodily organs in a child provide the best The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 408  and quickest way of developing his intellect. But unless the development of the 
mind and body goes hand in hand with a corresponding awakening of the soul, 
the former alone would prove to be poor lop-sided affair. By spiritual training I 
mean education of the heart. A proper and all-round development of the mind, 
therefore, can take place only when it proceeds pari passu with the education 
of the physical and spiritual faculties of the child. They constitute an invisible 
whole. According to this theory, therefore, it would be a gross fallacy to 
suppose that they can be developed piecemeal or independently of one 
another. 
Harijan, 8-5-37, p. 104
 
By education I mean an all-round drawing out of the best in child and man-
body, mind and spirit. Literacy is not the end of education nor even the 
beginning. It is only one of the means whereby man and woman can be 
educated. Literacy in itself is no education.I would therefore begin the child’s 
education by teaching it a useful handicraft and enabling it to produce from 
moment it begins its training. Thus every school can be made self-supporting, 
the condition being that the State takes over the manufactures of these 
schools. 
I hold that the highest development of the mind and the soul is possible under 
such a system of education. Only every handicraft has to be taught not merely 
mechanically as is done today but scientifically, i. e., the child should know the 
why and the wherefore of every process. I am not writing this without some 
confidence, because it has the backing of experience. This method is being 
adopted more or less completely wherever spinning is being taught to workers. 
I have myself taught sandal-making and even spinning on these lines with good 
results. This method does not exclude a knowledge of history and geography. 
But I find that this is the best taught by transmitting such general information 
by word of mouth. One imparts ten times as much in this manner as by 
regarding and writing. The signs of the alphabet may be taught later when the 
pupil has learnt to distinguish wheat from the chaff and when he has somewhat The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 409  developed his or her tastes. This is a revolutionary proposal, but it saves 
immense labour and enables a student to acquire in one year what he may take 
much longer to learn. This means all round economy. Of course the pupil learns 
mathematics whilst he is learning his handicraft. 
Harijan, 31-7-37, p. 197
 
Given the right kind of teachers, our children will be taught the dignity of 
labour and learn to regard it as an integral part and a means of their 
intellectual growth, and to realize that it is patriotic to pay for their training 
through their labour. The core of my suggestion is that handicrafts are to be 
taught, not merely for productive work, but for developing intellect of the 
pupils. Surely, if the State takes charge of the children between seven and 
fourteen, and trains their bodies and minds through productive labour, the 
public schools must be frauds and teachers idiots, if they cannot become self-
supporting. 
Harijan, 11-9-37, p. 256
 
When it is remembered that the primary aim of all education is, or should be, 
the moulding of the character of pupils, a teacher who has a character to keep 
need not lost heart. 
Harijan, 1-2-33, p. 3
 
In the schools I advocate, boys have all that boys learn in high schools less 
English but plus drill, music, drawing, and of course, a vocation. 
Harijan, 18-9-37, p. 265
 
I am firm believer in the principle of free and compulsory primary education for 
India. I also hold that we shall realize this only by teaching the children a 
useful vocation and utilizing it as a means for cultivating their mental, physical 
and spiritual faculties. Let no one consider these economic calculations in The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 410  connection with education as sordid or out of place. There is nothing essentially 
sordid about economic calculations. 
Harijan, 9-10-37, p. 292
 
If we want to impart education best suited to the needs of villagers, we should 
take the Vidyapith-1 to the villages. We should convert it into a training school 
in order that we might be able to give practical training to teachers in terms of 
the needs of villagers. You cannot instruct the teachers in the needs of villagers 
through a training school in a city. Nor can you so interest them in the 
condition of villages. To interest city-dwellers in villages and make them live in 
them is no easy task. I am finding daily confirmation of this in Segaon. I cannot 
give you the assurance that our year’s stay in Segaon has made of us villagers or 
that we have become one with them for the common good. 
Then as to primary education, my confirmed opinion is that the commencement 
of training by teaching the alphabet and reading and writing hampers their 
intellectual growth. I would not teach them the alphabet till they have had an 
elementary knowledge of history, geography, mental arithmetic and the art 
(say) of spinning. Through these three I should develop their intelligence. 
Question may be asked how intelligence can be developed through the takli-2 
or the spinning wheel. It can to a marvelous degree if it is not taught merely 
mechanically. When you tell a child the reason for each process, when you 
explain the mechanism of the takli or the wheel, when you give him the history 
of cotton and its connection with civilization itself and take him to the village 
field where it is grown, and teach him to count the rounds he spins and method 
of finding the evenness and strength of his yarn, you hold his interest and 
simultaneously train his hands, his eyes and his mind. I should give six months 
to this preliminary training. The child is probably now ready for learning how to 
read the alphabet, and when he is able to do so rapidly, he is ready to learn 
simple drawing, and when he has learnt to draw geometrical figures and the 
figures of the birds etc., he will draw, nor scrawl the figures of the alphabet. I 
can recall the days of my childhood when I was being taught the alphabet. I The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 411  know what a drag it was. Nobody cared why my intellect was rusting. I consider 
writing as a fine art. We kill it by imposing the alphabet on little children and 
making it the beginning of learning. Thus we do violence to the art of writing 
and stunt the growth of the child when we seek to teach him the alphabet 
before its time. 
Harijan, 5-6-37, p. 130
 
What kind of vocations are the fittest for being taught to children in urban 
schools? There is no hard and the fast rule about it. But my reply is clear. I 
want to resuscitate the villages of India. Today our villages have become a 
mere appendage to the cities. They exist, as it were, to be exploited by the 
latter and depend on the latter’s sufferance. This is unnatural. It is only when 
the cities realize the duty of making an adequate return to the villages for the 
strength and sustenance which they derive from them, instead of selfishly 
exploiting them, that a healthy and moral relationship between the two will 
spring up. And if the city children are to play their part in this great and noble 
work of social reconstruction, the vocations, through which they are to receive 
their education ought to be directly related to the requirements of the villages. 
So far as I can see the various processes of cotton manufacture from ginning 
and cleaning of cotton to the spinning of yarn, answer this test as nothing else 
does. Even today cotton is grown in the villages and is ginned and spun and 
converted into cloth in the cities. But the chain of process which cotton 
undergoes in the mills from the beginning to the end constitutes a huge tragedy 
of waste in men, materials and mechanical power.  
My plan to impart primary education through the medium of village handicrafts 
like spinning and carding, etc., is thus conceived as the spearhead of a silent 
social revolution fraught with the most far reaching consequences. It will 
provide a healthy and moral basis of relationship between the city and the 
village and thus go a long way toward eradicating some of the worst evils of the 
present social insecurity and poisoned relationship between the classes. It will 
check the progressive decay of our villages and the lay the foundation of a The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 412  juster social order in which there is no unnatural division between the ‘haves’ 
and ‘have-nots’ and everybody is assured of a living wage and the right to 
freedom. And all this would be accomplished without the horrors of a bloody 
class war or a colossal capital expenditure such as would involve in the 
mechanization of a vast continent like India. Nor would it entail a helpless 
dependence on foreign imported machinery or technical skill. Lastly, by 
obviating the necessity for highly specialized talent, it would place the destiny 
of the masses, as it were, in their own hands. But who will bell the cat? Will the 
city-folk listen to me at all? Or, will mine remain a mere cry in the wilderness? 
Replies to these and similar questions will depend more on lovers of education 
living in cities than on me. 
Harijan, 9-10-37, p. 293
 
As to the necessity and value of regarding the teaching of village handicrafts as 
the pivot and centre of education I have no manner of doubt. The method 
adopted in the institutions in India I do not call education, i.e., drawing out the 
best in the man, but a debauchery of the mind. It informs the mind anyhow, 
whereas the method of training the mind through village handicrafts from the 
very beginning as the central fact would promote the real, disciplined 
development of the mind resulting in conservation of the intellectual energy 
and indirectly also the spiritual. 
Harijan, 5-6-37, p. 131
 
In my scheme of things the hand will handle tools before it draws or traces the 
writing. The eyes will read the pictures of letters and words as they will know 
other things in life, and the ears will catch the names and meanings of things 
and sentences. The whole training will be natural, responsive and therefore the 
quickest and the cheapest in the land. The children of my school will therefore 
read much more quickly than they will write. And when they write they will not 
produce daubs as I do even now (thanks to my children) but they will trace 
correct letters even as they will trace correct figures of the objects they may The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 413  see. If the schools of my conception ever come into being, I make bold to say 
that they will vie with the most advanced schools in quickness, so far as reading 
is concerned, and even writing if it is common ground that the writing must be 
correct and not incorrect as now is in the vast majority of cases. 
Harijan, 28-8-37, p. 225
 
The Basic education is meant to transform village children into model villagers. 
It is principally designed for them. The inspiration for it has come from the 
villages. Congressmen who want to build up the structure of Swaraj from its 
very foundation dare not neglect the children. Foreign rule has unconsciously, 
though none the less surely, begun with the children in the field of education. 
Primary education is a farce designed without regard to the wants of the India 
of the villages and for that matter even of the cities. Basic education links the 
children, whether of the cities or the villages, to all that is best and lasting in 
India. It developed both the body and the mind, and keeps the child rooted to 
the soil with a glorious vision of the future in the realization of which he or she 
begins to take his or her share from the very commencement of his or her 
career in school.  
Constructive Programme, (1961), p. 18
 
The utterly false idea that intelligence can be developed only through book-
reading should give place to the truth that the quickest development of the 
mind can be achieved by artisan’s work being learnt in a scientific manner. 
True development of the mind commences immediately the apprentice is 
taught at every step why a particular manipulation of the hand or a tool is 
required. The problem of the unemployment of students can be solved without 
difficulty, if they will rank themselves among the common labourers. 
Harijan, 9-1-37, p. 386
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 414  We have up to now concentrated on stuffing children’s minds with all kinds 
information, without ever thinking of stimulating and developing them. Let us 
now cry a halt and concentrate on education the child properly through manual 
work, not as a side activity, but as the prime means of intellectual training…. 
You have to train the boys in one occupation or another. Round this special 
occupation you will train up his mind, his body, his handwriting, his artistic 
sense, and so on. He will be master of the craft he learns. 
Harijan, 18-9-37, p. 261
 
Literary training by itself adds not an inch to one’s moral height and that 
character-building is independent of literary training. 
Young India, 1-6-21, p. 172
 
Let students realize that learning without courage is like a waxen statue 
beautiful to look at but bound to melt at the least touch of a hot substance. 
Young India, 12-7-28, p. 236
 
Music should form part of the syllabus of primary education. I heartily endorse 
this proposition. The modulation of the voice is as necessary as the training of 
the hand. Physical drill, handicrafts, drawing and music should go hand in hand 
order to draw the best out of the boys and girls and create in them real interest 
in their tuition. 
Harijan, 11-9-37, p. 250
 
A wise parent allows the children to make mistakes. It is good for them once in 
a while to burn their fingers. 
Mahatma Gandhi-The Last Phase, Vol. 1, (1956), p. 44
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 415  I attach the greatest importance to primary education which according to my 
conception should be equal to the present matriculation less English. If all the 
collegians were all of a sudden to forget their knowledge, the loss sustained by 
the sudden lapse of the memory of say a few lakhs of collegians would be as 
nothing compared to the loss that the nation has sustained and is sustaining 
through the ocean of darkness that surrounds three hundred millions. 
Harijan, 31-7-37, p. 197
 
If such education is given, the direct result will be that it will be self-
supporting. But the test of success is not it self-supporting character, but that 
the whole man has been drawn out through the teaching of the handicraft in a 
scientific manner. In fact I would reject a teacher who would promise to make 
it self-supporting under any circumstances. The self supporting part will be the 
logical corollary of the fact that the pupil has learnt the use of every one of his 
faculties. If a boy who works at a handicraft for three hours a day will surely 
earn his keep, how much more a boy who adds to the work a development of 
his mind and soil! 
Harijan, 11-6-38, p. 143
 
English is today admittedly the world language. I would therefore accord it a 
place as a second, optional language, not in the school, but in the university 
course. That can only be for the select few not for the millions… It is our 
mental slavery that makes us feel that we cannot do without English. I can 
never subscribe to that defeatist creed. 
Harijan, 25-8-46, p. 284
 
I must not be understood to decry English or its noble literature. The columns 
of the Harijan are sufficient evidence of my love of English. But the nobility of 
its literature cannot avail the Indian nation any more than the temperate 
climate or the scenery of England can avail her. India has to flourish in her own The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 416  climate, and scenery, and her own literature, even though all the three may be 
inferior to the English climate, scenery and literature. We and our children 
must build on our own heritage. If we borrow another, we impoverish our own. 
We can never grow on foreign victuals. I want the nation to have treasures 
contained in that language and, for that matter, in other languages of the 
world, through its own vernaculars. I do not need to learn Bengali in order to 
know the beauties of Rabindranath’s matchless productions. I get them through 
good translations. Gujarati boys and girls do not need to learn Russian to 
appreciate Tolstoy’s short stories. They learn them through good translations. 
It is the boast of Englishmen that the best of the world’s literary output is in 
the hands of that nation in simple English inside of a week of its publication. 
Why need I learn English to get at the best of what Shakespeare and Milton 
thought and wrote? 
Harijan, 9-7-38, p. 177
 
I do not believe that the State can concern itself or cope with religious 
education. I believe that religious education must be the sole concern of 
religious associations. Do not mix up religion and ethics. I believe that 
fundamental ethics is common to all religions. Teaching of fundamental ethics 
is undoubtedly a function of the State. By religion I have not in mind 
fundamental ethics but what goes by the name of denominationalism. We have 
suffered enough from State-aided religion and a State Church. A society or a 
group, which depends party or wholly on State aid for the existence of its 
religion, does not deserve or, better still, does not have any religion worth the 
name. 
Harijan, 23-3-47, p. 76
 
“Should religious instruction from part of the school curriculum as approved by 
the State? Do you favour separate schools for children belonging to different 
denominations for facility of religious instructions? Or should religious The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 417  instruction be left in the hands of private bodies? If so, do you think it is right 
for the State to subsidize such bodies?” 
I do not believe in State religion even though the whole community has one 
religion. The State interference would probably always be unwelcome. Religion 
is purely a personal matter. There are in reality as many religions as minds. 
Each mind has a different conception of God from that of the other. 
I am also opposed to State aid, partly or wholly, to religious bodies. For I know 
that an institution or group which does not manage to finance its own religious 
teaching, is a stranger to true religion. This does not mean that the State 
schools would not give ethical teaching. The fundamental ethics are common to 
all religions. 
Harijan, 16-3-47, p. 63
 
A curriculum of religious instruction should include a study of the tenets of 
faiths other man one’s own. For this purpose the students should be trained to 
cultivate the habit of understanding and appreciating the doctrines of various 
great religions of the world in a spirit of reverence and broad-minded 
tolerance. This if properly done would help to give them a spiritual assurance 
and a better appreciation of their own religion. There is one rule, however, 
which should always be kept in mind while studying all great religion and that 
is, that one should study them only through the writings of known votaries of 
the respective religions. 
Young India, 6-12-28, p. 406
 
Real education has to draw out the best from the boys and girls to be educated. 
This can never be done by packing ill-assorted and unwanted information into 
the heads of the pupils. It becomes a dead weight crushing all originality in 
them and turning them into mere automata. 
Harijan, 1-12-33, p. 3
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 418  The suggestion has often been made that in order to make education 
compulsory, or even available to every boy or girl wishing to receive education, 
our schools and colleges should become almost, if not wholly, self-supporting, 
not through donations or state aid fees exacted from students, but through 
remunerative work done by the students themselves. This is only be done by 
making industrial training compulsory. Apart from the necessity which is daily 
being more and more recognized of students having an industrial training side 
by side with literary training, there is in this country, the additional necessity 
of pursing industrial training in order to make education directly self-
supporting. This can only be done when our students begin to recognize the 
dignity of labour and when the convention is established of regarding ignorance 
of manual occupation a mark of disgrace. In America, which is the richest 
country in the world and where, therefore, perhaps there is the least need for 
making education self-supporting, it is the most usual thing for students to pay 
their way wholly or partially… 
If America has to model her schools and colleges so as to enable students to 
earn their scholastic expenses, how much more necessary it must be for our 
schools and colleges? Is it not far better that we find work for poor students 
than that we pauperize them by providing free studentships? It is impossible to 
exaggerate the harm we do to India’s youth by filling their minds with the false 
notion that it is ungentlemanly to labour with one’s hands and feet for one’s 
livelihood or schooling. The harm done is both moral and material, indeed 
much more moral than material. A free scholarship lies and should lies like a 
load upon a conscientious lad’s mind throughout his whole life. No one likes to 
be reminded in after life that he had to depend upon charity for his education. 
Contrarily where is the person who will not recall with pride those days if he 
had the good fortune to have had them when he worked in a carpentry-shop or 
the like for the sake of educating himself-mind, body and soul? 
Young India, 2-8-28, p. 259
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 419  The aim of university education should be to turn out true servants of the 
people who will live and die for the country’s freedom. I am therefore of 
opinion that university education should be co-ordinate and brought into line 
with basic education. 
Harijan, 25-8-46, p. 283 
 
I would revolutionize college education and relate it to national necessities. 
There would be degrees for mechanical and other engineers. They would be 
attached to the different industries which should pay for the training of the 
graduates they need. Thus the Tatas would be expected to run a college for 
training engineers under the supervision of the State, the mill associations 
would run among them a college for training graduates whom they need. 
Similarly for the other industries that may be named. Commerce will have its 
college. There remain arts, medicine and agriculture. Several private arts 
colleges are today self-supporting. The State would, therefore, cease to run its 
own. Medical colleges would be attached to certified hospitals. As they are 
popular among moneyed men they may be expected by voluntary contribution 
to support medical colleges. And agricultural colleges to be worthy of the name 
must be self-supporting. I have painful experience of some agricultural 
graduates. Their knowledge is superficial. They lack practical experience. But if 
they had their apprenticeship on farms which are self-sustained and answer the 
requirements of the country, they would not have to gain experience after 
getting their degrees and at the expense of their employers. 
Harijan, 31-7-37, p. 197
 
There seems to be a mania for establishing new universities in the provinces. 
Gujarat wants one for Gujarati, Maharashtra for Marathi, Carnatic for Kannad, 
Orissa for Oriya, Assam for Assami and whant not. I do believe that there should 
be such universities if these rich provincial languages and the people who speak 
them are to attain their full height. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 420  At the same time I fear that we betray ourselves into undue haste in 
accomplishing object. The first step should be linguistic political redistribution 
of provinces. Their separate administration will naturally lead to the 
establishment of universities where there are none... 
There should be a proper background for new universities. They should have 
feeders in the shape of schools and colleges which will impart instruction 
through the medium of their respective provincial languages. They only can 
there be a proper milieu. University is at the top. A majestic top can only be 
sustained if there is a sound foundation. 
Though we are politically free, we are hardly free from the subtle domination 
of the West. I have nothing to say to that school of politicians who believe that 
knowledge can only come from the West. Nor do I subscribe to the belief that 
nothing good can come out of the West. I do fear, however, that we are unable 
as yet to come to a correct decision in the matter. It is to be hoped that no one 
contends that because we seem to be politically free from foreign domination, 
the mere fact gives us freedom from the more subtle influence of the foreign 
language and foreign thought. Is it not wisdom, does not duty to the country 
dictate that before we embark on new universities we should stop and fill our 
own lungs first with the ozone of our mewly got freedom? A university never 
needs a pile of majestic buildings and treasures of gold and silver. What it does 
need most of all is the intelligent backing of public opinion. It should have a 
large reservoir of teachers to draw upon. Its founders should be far-seeing. 
In my opinion it is not for a democratic State to find money for founding 
universities. If the people want them they will supply the funds. Universities so 
founded will adorn the country which they represent. Where administration is 
in foreign hands, whatever comes to the people comes from top and thus they 
become more and more dependent. Where it is broad- based on popular will, 
everything goes from bottom upward and hence it lasts. It is good- looking and 
strengthens the people. In such a democratic scheme money invested in the 
promotion of learning gives a tenfold return to the people even as a seed sown 
in good soil returns a luxuriant crop. Universities founded under foreign The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 421  domination have run in the reverse direction. Any other result was perhaps 
impossible. Therefore, there is every reason for being cautious about founding 
new universities till India has digested the newly- acquired freedom. 
Harijan, 2-11-47, p.392
 
I have never been an advocate of our students going abroad. My experience 
tells me that such, on returns, find themselves to be square pegs in round 
holes. That experience is the richest and contributes most to growth which 
springs from the soil. 
Harijan, 8-9-46, p. 308
 
The dry knowledge of the three R’s is not even now, it can never be, a 
permanent part of the villagers’ life. They must have knowledge given to them 
which they must use daily. It must not be thrust upon them. They should have 
the appetite for it. What they have today is something they neither want nor 
appreciate. Give the villagers village arithmetic, village geography, village 
history, and the literary knowledge that they must use daily, i.e. reading and 
writing letters, etc. They will treasure such knowledge and pass on to the other 
stages. They have no use for books which give them nothing of daily use. 
Harijan, 22-6-’40, p.173 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 422   
CHAPTER 77 
MEDIUM OF EDUCATION 
I find daily proof of increasing and continuing wron g being done to the millions 
by our false de-Indianizing education… 
We seem to have come to think that no one can hope to be like a Bose unless 
he knows English. I cannot conceive a grosser superstition than this. No 
Japanese feels so helpless as we seem to do… 
The medium of instruction should be altered at once, and, at any cost, the 
provincial languages being given their rightful place. I would prefer temporary 
chaos in higher education to the criminal waste that is daily accumulating. 
Harijan, 9-7-’38, p.177
 
Education through a foreign language entails a certain degree of strain, and our 
boys have to pay dearly for it. To a large extent, they lose the capacity of 
shouldering any other burden afterwards, for, they become a useless lot who 
are weak of body, without any zest for work and mere imitators of the West. 
They have little interest in original research or deep thinking, and the qualities 
of courage, perseverance, bravery and fearlessness are lacking. That is why we 
are unable to make new plans or carry out projects to meet our problems. In 
case we make them we fail to implement them. A few who do show promise 
usually die young... 
We the English-educated people, alone are unable to assess the great loss that 
this factor has caused. Some idea of its immensity would be had if we could 
estimate how little we have influenced the general mass of our people.  
The school must be an extension of home; there must be concordance between 
the impressions which a child gathers at home and at school, -if the best results 
are to be obtained. Education through the medium of a strange tongue breaks 
the concordance which should exist. Those who break this relationship are the 
enemies of the people even though their motives may be honest. To be a The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 423  voluntary victim of this system of education is as good as the betrayal of our 
duty to our mothers. The harm done by this a line type of education does not 
stop here; it goes much further. It has produced a gulf between the educated 
classes and the masses. The people look on us as beings apart from them.  
True education, (1962), pp. 12-13
 
It is my considered opinion that English education in the manner it has been 
given has emasculated the English-educated Indian, it has put a severe strain 
upon the Indian students’ nervous energy, and has made of us imitators. The 
process of displacing the vernaculars has been one of the saddest chapters in 
the British connection. Rammohan Rai would have been a greater reformer, and 
Lokmanya Tilak would have been a greater scholar, if they had not to start with 
the handicap of having to think in English and transmit their thoughts chiefly in 
English. Their effect on their own people, marvellous as it was, would have 
been greater if they had been brought up under a less unnatural system. No 
doubt they both gained from their knowledge of the rich treasures of English 
literature. But these should have been accessible to them through their own 
vernaculars. No country can become a nation by producing a race of imitators. 
Young India, 27-4-21, p. 130
 
English is today studied because of its commercial and so-called political value. 
Our boys think, and rightly in the present circumstances, that without English 
they cannot get Government service. Girls are taught English as a passport to 
marriage. I know several instances of women wanting to learn English so that 
they may be able to talk to learn talk to English men in English. I know 
husbands who are sorry that their wives cannot talk to them and their friends in 
English. I know families in which English is being made the mother tongue. 
Hundred of youth believes that without a knowledge of English, freedom for 
India is practically impossible. The canker has so eaten into the society that in 
many cases, the only meaning of education is a knowledge of English. All these 
are for me signs of our slavery and degradation. It is unbearable to me that the The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 424  vernaculars should be crushed and straved as they have been. I cannot tolerate 
the idea of parents writing to their children, or husbands writing to their wives, 
not in their own vernaculars but in English.  
Young India, 1-6-21, p. 177
 
The foreign medium has caused brain fag, put an undue strain upon the nerves 
of our children, made them crammers and imitators, unfitted them for original 
work and thought, and disabled them for filtrating their learning to the family 
or the masses. The foreign medium has made our children practically foreigners 
in their own lands. It is the greatest tragedy of the existing system. The foreign 
medium has prevented the growth of our vernaculars. If I had the powers of a 
despot, I would today stop the tuition of our boys and girls through a foreign 
medium, and require all the teachers and professors on pain of dismissal to 
introduce the change forthwith. I would not wait for the preparation of text-
books. They will follow the change. It is an evil that needs a summary remedy. 
Young India, 1-9-21, p. 277
 
Among the many evils of foreign rule, this blighting imposition of a foreign 
medium upon the youth of the country will be counted by history as one of the 
greatest. It has sapped the energy of the nation, it has shortened the lives of 
the pupils. It has estranged them from the masses; it has made education 
unnecessarily expensive. If this process is still persisted in, it bids fair to rob 
the nation of its soul. The sooner, therefore, educated India shakes itself free 
from the hypnotic spell of the foreign medium, the better it would be for them 
and the people. 
Young India, 5-7-28, p. 224 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 425   
CHAPTER 78 
TO STUDENTS 
Character cannot be built with mortar and stone. It cannot be built by hands 
other than your own. The Principal and the Professor cannot give you character 
from the pages of books. Character building comes from their very lives really 
speaking, it must come from within yourselves. 
With Gandhiji in Ceylon, (1928), pp. 89-90
 
Put all your knowledge, learning, and scholarship in one scale and truth and 
purity in the other and the latter will by far outweigh the other. The miasma of 
moral impurity has today spread among our school-going children and like a 
hidden epidemic is working havoc among them. All your scholarship, all your 
study of the scriptures will be in vain if you fail to translate their teachings into 
your daily life... 
If teachers impart all the knowledge in the world to their students but 
inculcate not truth and purity among them, they will have betrayed them and 
instead of raising them set them on the downward road to perdition. 
Knowledge without character is a power for evil only, as seen in the instances 
of so many talented thieves and ‘gentlemen rascals’ in the world. 
Young India, 21-2-29, p. 58
 
As to use of the vacation by students, if will they approach the work with zeal, 
they can undoubtedly do many things. I enumerate a few of them: 
1. Conduct night and day schools with just a short course well-conceived, to 
last for the period of the vacation. 
2. Visit Harijan quarters and clean them, talking the assistance of Harijans if 
they would give it. 
3. Talking Harijan children for excursions, showing them sights near their 
villages and teaching them how to study Nature, and generally interesting The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 426  them in their surroundings, giving them by the way a working knowledge of 
geography and history. 
4. Reading to them simple stories from the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. 
5. Teaching them simple Bhajans-1. 
6. Cleaning the Harijan boys of all the dirt that they would find about their 
persons and giving both the grown-ups and the children simple lessons in 
hygiene. 
7. Taking a detailed census in selected areas of the condition of Harijans 
8. Taking a medical aid to the ailing Harijans. 
This is but a sample of what is possible to do among the Harijans. It is a list 
hurriedly made, but a thoughtful student will, I have no doubt, add many other 
items. 
Harijan, 1-4-33, p. 5
 
You are the hope of the future. You will be called upon, when you are 
discharged from your colleges and schools, to enter upon public life to lead the 
poor people of this country. I would, therefore, like you, students, to have a 
sense of your responsibility and show it in a much more tangible manner. It is a 
remarkable fact, and a regrettable fact, that in the case of the vast majority of 
students, whilst they entertain noble impulses during their student days, these 
disappear when they finish their studies. The vast majority of them look out for 
loaves and fishes. Surely, there is something wrong in this. There is one reason 
which is obvious. Every educationalist, everyone who has had anything to do 
with the students, has realized that our educational system is faulty. It does 
not correspond to the requirements of the country, certainly not to the 
requirements of pauper India. There is no correspondence between the 
education that is given and the home life and the village life. 
Young India, 8-9-27, p. 297
 
These are not necessities of life. There are some who manage to take ten cups 
of coffee a day. Is it necessary for their healthy development and for keeping The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 427  them awake for the performance of their duties? If it is necessary to take 
coffee or tea to keep them awake, let them not dirnk coffee or tea but go to 
sleep. We must not become slaves to these things. But the majority of the 
people who drink coffee or tea are slaves to them.Cigars and cigarettes, 
whether foreign or indigenous must be avoided. 
Cigarette smoking is like an opiate and the cigars that you smoke have a touch 
of opium about them. They get to your nerves and you cannot leave them 
afterwards. How can single students foul his mouth by converting it into a 
chimney? If you give up these habits of smoking cigars and cigarettes and 
drinking coffee and tea you will find out for yourselves how much you are able 
to save. 
A drunkard in Tolstoy’s story is hesitating to execute his design of murder so 
long as he has not smoked his cigar. But he puffs it, and then gets up smiling 
and saying, “What a coward am I!” takes the dagger and does the deed. Tolstoy 
spoke from experience. He has written nothing without having had personal 
experience of it. And he is much more against cigars and cigarettes than 
against drink. But do not make the mistake that between drink and tobacco, 
drink is a lesser evil. No. If cigarette is Beelzebub then drink is Satan. 
Young India, 15-9-27, p. 315
 
The students should be, above all, humble and correct... The greatest to 
remain great has to be the lowliest by choice. If I can speak from my knowledge 
of Hindu belief, the life of a student is to correspond to the life of a Sannyasi 
up to the time his studies end. He is to be under the strictest discipline. He 
cannot marry, nor indulge in dissipation. He cannot indulge in drinks and the 
like. His behavior is to be a pattern of exemplary self-restraint. 
Harijan, 7-9-47, p. 314
 
1. Devotional songs 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 428   
SECTION XII : UNTO THIS LAST 
CHAPTER 79 
UNTO THIS LAST 
I stand by what is implied in the phrase, ‘Unto This  Last’. That book marked the 
turning point in my life. We must do even unto this last as we would have the 
world do by us. 
Harijan, 17-1146, p. 404
 
And I know that God is found more often in the lowliest of His creatures than in 
the high and mighty. I am struggling to reach the status of these. I cannot do so 
without their service. Hence my passion for the service of the suppressed 
classes. And as I cannot render this service without entering politics I find 
myself in them. Thus I am no master. I am but a struggling, erring, humble 
servant of India and there through of humanity. 
Harijan, 11-9-24, p. 298
 
And He hath His footstool where live ‘the humble, the lowliest and lost’. 
Spinning, therefore, for such is the greatest prayer, the greatest worship, the 
greatest sacrifice. 
Young India, 24-9-25, p. 331
 
God alone is great. We his creatures are but dust. Let us be humble and 
recognize the place of the lowliest of His creatures. Krishna honoured Sudama 
in his rags as he honoured no one else. 
Young India, 26-12-24, p. 423
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 429  Daridranarayan is one of millions of names by which humanity knows God who is 
unnamable and unfathomable by human understanding, and it means God of 
the poor, God appearing in the hearts of the poor. 
Young India, 4-4-29, p. 110
 
I read Ruskin’s Unto This Last during a train journey to Durban it gripped me 
immediately. I saw clearly that, if mankind was to progress and to realize the 
ideal of equality and brotherhood, it must adopt and act on the principle of 
‘Unto This Last’. It must take along with it even the dumb, the halt and the 
lame. 
Harijan 25-8-46, p. 281
 
I have always held that social justice, even unto the least and the lowliest, is 
impossible of attainment by force. I have further believed that it is possible by 
proper training of the lowliest by non-violent means to secure address of the 
wrongs suffered by them. That means is non-violent none-co-operation.  
Harijan, 20-4-40, p. 97
 
I am working for winning Swaraj… for those toiling and unemployed millions 
who do not get even a square meal a day and have to scratch along with a 
piece of stale roti and a pinch of salt. 
Young India, 26-3-31, p. 53
 
I think of the poor of India every time I draw a thread on the wheel. The poor 
of India today have lost faith in God, more so in the middle classes or the rich. 
For a person suffering from the pangs of hunger, and desiring nothing but to fill 
his belly, his belly is his God. To him anyone who gives him bread is his Master. 
Though him he may even see God. To give alms to such persons, who are sound 
in all their limbs, is to debase oneself and them. What they need is some kind 
of occupation, and the occupation that will give employment to millions can The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 430  only be hand-spinning... I have described my spinning as a penance or 
sacrament. And since I believe that where there is pure and active love for the 
poor there is God also. I see God in every thread that I draw on the spinning-
wheel. 
Young India, 20-5-26, p. 187
 
I will give you a talisman. Whenever you are in doubt, or when the self 
becomes too much with you, try the following expedient: 
Recall the face of the poorest and the most helpless man whom you may have 
seen and ask yourself, if the step you contemplate is going to be of any use to 
him. Will he be able to gain anything by it? Will it restore him to a control over 
his own life and destiny? In other words, will it lead to Swaraj or self-rule for 
the hungry and also spiritual starved millions of our countrymen? 
Then you will find your doubts and your self-melting away. 
This Was Bapu, (1959), p. 46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 431   
CHAPTER 80 
ADIVASIS 
The Adivasis are the original inhabitants whose mate rial position is perhaps no 
better than that of Harijans and who have long been victims of neglect on the 
part of the so-called high classes. And Adivasis should have found a special 
place in the constructive programme. Non-mention was an oversight…. The 
Christian missionary has been more or less in sole occupation of the field. Great 
as his labour has been it has not proposed as it might have because of his 
ultimate aim being the Adivasis conversion to his fold and their becoming de-
Indianized. Anyway no one who hopes to construct Swaraj on the foundation on 
non-violence can afford to neglect even the least of India’s sons. Adivasis are 
too numerous to be counted among the least. 
Harijan, 18-1-42, p. 5
 
Adivasis have become the fourteenth item in the constructive programme. But 
they are not the least in point of importance. Our country is so vast and the 
races so varied that the best of us in spite of every effort cannot know all there 
is to know of men and their condition. As one comes upon layer after layer of 
things one ought to know as a national servant, one realize how difficult it is to 
make good our claim to be one nation whose every unit has a living 
consciousness of being one with every other. 
Harijan, 15-2-42, p. 38 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 432   
CHAPTER 81 
LANDLESS LABOUR AND HARIJANS 
The Kisan or the peasant whether as a landless labou rer or a labouring 
proprietor comes first. He is the salt or the earth which rightly belongs or 
should belong to him, not to the absentee landlord or Zamindar. But in the non-
violent way the labourers cannot forcibly eject the absentee landlord. He has 
so to work as to make it impossible for the landlord to exploit him. 
Mahatma, Vol. VI, (1953), p. 364
 
Harijan means ‘a man of God’. All the religious of the world describe God pre-
eminently as the Friend of the friendless, Help of the helpless and Protector of 
the weak. The rest of the world apart, in India who can be more friendless, 
helpless or weaker than the forty millions or more Hindus of India who are 
classified as ‘untouchables’? If therefore, anybody of people can be fitly 
described as men of God they are surely these helpless, friendless and despised 
people.  
Harijan, 11-2-33, p. 7
 
Swaraj for me means freedom for the meanest of our countrymen. If the lot of 
the Panchama-1 is not improved when we are all suffering it is not likely to be 
better under the intoxication of Swaraj. 
Young India, 12-6-24, p. 195
 
It is idle to talk of Swaraj so long as we do not protect the weak and the 
helpless or so long as it is possible for a single Swarajist to injure the feelings of 
any individual. Swaraj means that not a single Hindu or Muslim shall for a 
moment arrogantly think that he can crush with impunity meek Hindus or 
Muslims. Unless this condition is fulfilled we will gain Swaraj only to lose it the The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 433  next moment. We are no better than the brutes until we have purged ourselves 
of the sins we have committed against our weaker brethren. 
So long as the Hindus willfully regard untouchability as part of their religion, so 
long as the mass of Hindus consider it a sin to touch a section of their brethren, 
Swaraj is impossible of attainment. 
Young India, 4-5-21, p. 143
 
Untouchability is not a sanction of religion, it is a device of Satan. The devil has 
always quoted scriptures. But scriptures cannot transcend reason and truth. 
They are intended to purify reason and illuminate truth. 
Young India, 19-1-21, p. 22
 
A man’s Karma-2 is responsible for what he is, they say. But my Karma does not 
compel me to throw stones at a sinner. Religion is made to uplift and not to 
keep a man crushed under the weight of his Karma. 
Young India, 22-9-21, p. 302
 
A religion that establishes the worship of the cow cannot possibly countenance 
or warrant a cruel and inhuman boycott of human beings. And I should be 
content to be torn to pieces rather than disown the suppressed classes. Hindus 
will certainly never deserve freedom, nor get it if they allow their noble 
religion to be disgraced by the retention of the taint of untouchability. And as I 
love Hinduism dearer than life itself, the taint has become for me an 
intolerable burden. Let us not deny God by denying to a fifth of our race the 
right of association on an equal footing. 
Young India, 6-10-21, p. 319
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 434  The moment we have restored real living equality between man and man, we 
shall able to establish equality between man and the whole creation. When 
that day comes we shall have peace on earth and goodwill to men. 
Harijan, 28-3-36, p. 51
 
The Bhangis have hitherto done their work uncomplainingly, and therefore the 
caste men have not cared to know how these have served society for centuries. 
If we had not regarded these servants of society as ’untouchables’, we would 
not have shut our eyes upon them or their work. Having chosen to do so and 
having confined them to infernos, we ourselves daily descend to these infernos 
called privies and do not care to look at the dirt about us or to notice the stink 
that pervades these places. 
Harijan, 18-3-33, p. 4
 
The ideal Bhangi of my conception would be a Brahmin par excellence, possible 
even excel him. It is possible to envisage the existence of a Bhangi without a 
Brahmin. But without the former the latter could not be. It is the Bhangi who 
enables society to live. A Bhangi does for society what a mother does for her 
baby. A mother washes her baby of the dirt and insures his health. Even so the 
Bhangi protects and safeguards the health of the entire community by 
maintaining sanitation for it. The Brahmin’s duty is to look after the sanitation 
of the soul, the Bhangi’s that of the body of society. But there is a difference in 
practice; the Brahmin generally does not live up to his duty, the Bhangi does 
willy-nilly no doubt. Society is sustained by several services. The Bhangi 
constitutes the foundation of all services. 
And yet our woebegone Indian society has branded the Bhangis as a social 
Pariah-3 set him down at the bottom of the scale, held him fit only to receive 
kicks and abuse, a creature who must subsist on the leavings of the caste-
people and dwell on the dung-heap. He is without a friend, his very name has 
become a term of reproach. This is shocking. It is perhaps useless to seek the 
why and wherefore of it. I certainly am unaware of the origin of the inhuman The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 435  conduct, but I know this much that by looking down upon the Bhangi we-
Hindus, Mussalmans, Chirstians and all have deserved the contempt of the 
whole world. Our villages have today becomes seats of dirt and insanitation and 
the villages come to an early and untimely death. If only we had given due 
recognition to the status of the Bhangi as equal to that of a Brahmin as in fact 
and justice he deserves, our villages today no less than their inhabitants would 
have looked a picture of cleanliness and order. We would have to a large extent 
been free from the ravages of a host of diseases which directly spring from our 
uncleanliness and lack of sanitary habits. 
I therefore make bold to state without any manner of hesitation or doubt that 
not till the invidious distinction between the Brahmin and the Bhangi is 
removed, will our society enjoy health, prosperity and peace, and be happy. 
Harijan, 28-11-36, p. 336
 
1. Literally, belonging to the fifth caste; an out caste 
2. Action 
3. Out caste 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 436   
SOURCES 
An Autobiography or The Story of My Experiments with Truth : M.K. Gandhi; 
Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1966. 
Amrita Bazar Patrika : English daily published from Calcutta. 
Among the Great : Dilip Kumar Roy; Jaico Publishing House, Bombay, 1950. 
The Art of living : M.K. Gandhi; Bhartiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay-7, 1961. 
Ashram observances in Action : M.K. Gandhi; Translated from Gujarati by V.G. 
Desai, Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1959. 
The Bombay Chronicle : English daily of Bombay 
Biharni Komi Agman (Gujarati):  Manubahen Gandhi; Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, 1956. 
Bapu’s Letters to Ashram Sisters: Edited by Kaka Kalelkar; Navajivan Publishing 
House, Ahmedabad, 1952. 
A Bunch of Old Letters : Jawaharlal Nehru; Asia Publishing House, Bombay, 1958. 
Conversations of Gandhiji : Chandrashankar Shukla; Vora & Co. Publishers Ltd., 
Bombay, 1949. 
Constructive Programme  : Its Meaning and Place : M. K. Gandhi, Navajivan 
Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1961. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi : The Publication Division, Govt. of 
India, New Delhi. 
The Diary of Mahadev Desai-I : Translated from Gujarati & Edited by V. G. Desai; 
Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1953. 
Discourses on the Gita : M. K. Gandhi; Translated from Gujarati by V. G. Desai; 
Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1960. 
An Atheist with Gandhi : Gora; Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1958. 
From Yervada Mandir : M. K. Gandhi; Translated from Gujarati by V. G. Desai; 
Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1957. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 437  The Gita According to Gandhi : Mahadev Desai; Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, 1956. 
Gandhian Constitution For Free India : Shriman Narayan; Kitabistan, Allahabad, 
1948. 
Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government, 1942-44 : Navajivan Publishing 
House, Ahmedabad, 1957. 
Gandhiji in Indian Villages: Mahadev Desai; S. Ganesan, Triplicane, Madras, 1927. 
Gandhiji’s view of Life : Chandrashankar Shukla; Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay, 
1954. 
Harijan (1933-1956) : English weekly; was then published from Ahmedabad. 
The Hindustan Times : English daily Published from Delhi. 
Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule : M. K. Gandhi; Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, 1962. 
In Search of The Supreme : Vol. III, Edited by V.B. Kher; Navajivan Publishing 
House, Ahmedabad, 1963. 
The Ideology of the Charkha : Compiled by Shrikrishnadas Jaju; Sarva Seva Sangh, 
Varanasi, 1951. 
Khadi-Why and How : M. K. Gandhi; Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 
1959. 
The Miracle of Calcutta : Manubahen Gandhi; Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, 1959. 
Mahatma Gandhi: His Life, Writings & Speeches ; Ganesh and Co., Madras, 1921.  
Mahatma Gandhi: The Last Phase Vol. I & II : Pyarelal; Navajivan Publishing 
House, Ahmedabad, Edns. 1956 & 1958 respectively. 
Mahatma: Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (8 Vol.) : D. G. Tendulkar; 
Vithalbhai K. Jhaveri and D. G. Tendulkar, Bombay, 1951-54. 
The Mind Of Mahatma Gandhi : Edited by R. K. Prabhu & U. R. Rao; Navajivan 
Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1967. 
My Non-violence : M. K. Gandhi; Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1960. The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 438  Modern Review : English Monthly Journal Published from Calcutta. 
The Nation’s Voice : M. K. Gandhi; Edited by C. Rajagopalachari & J. C. 
Kumarrappa, Navjivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1958. 
A Pilgrimage for Peace : Pyarelal; Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1950. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi : G. A. Natesan and Co., Madras, 
1933. 
Satyagraha in South Africa : M. K. Gandhi; Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, 1950. 
Selections From Gandhi : Edited by N. K. Bose; Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, 1957. 
Swaraj Through Charkha : Complied by Kanu Gandhi; All India Spinners’ 
Association, Sevagram, 1945. 
True Education : M. K. Gandhi; Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1962. 
Towards New Horizons : Pyarelal; Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1959. 
With Gandhiji in Ceylon : Mahadev Desai; S. Ganeshan, Triplicane, Madras, 1928. 
Young India (1919-31):  English weekly-was published from October 1919 under 
Gandhiji’s supervision from Ahmedabad. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 439   
GLOSSARY  
Advaita : monism; non-duality or identity of the soul with Brahman 
Advaitism : doctrine of non-duality 
Advaitist  : a believer in non-duality 
Ahimsa  : non-violence; love 
Ananda  : Joy; bliss 
Anekantavadi: a believer in many-sidedness of Reality  
Aparigraha  : non-possession 
Ashrama  : one of the four stages of life according to Hinduism; 
    a hermitage; a place for disciplined community living 
Asteya  : non-stealing 
Atman  : spirit; soul 
Avatar  : incarnation 
 
Bhajan  : a religious song 
Bhakti  : devotion 
Bhaktiyoga  : the path of devotion 
Bhangi  : a sweeper, a scavenger 
Brahma  : the Divine Reality; the Universal Spirit 
Brahmachari : a celibate 
Brahmacharya:  celibacy; pursuit in quest of god  
 
Chapati  : thin flat cake made of flour; unleavened bread 
Charkha  : a spinning wheel 
Chit  : Knowledge The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 440   
Daridranarayan:  God in the form of poor 
Dharma  : religion; Duty 
Dvaitism  : doctrine of duality 
 
Ganja  : narcotic from the flower of Indian hemp 
Goonda  : hooligan 
Goondaism  : hooliganism 
Guru  : a teacher, a spiritual guide 
 
Harijans  : literally, the people of Hari, i.e. God; the name which  
   Gandhiji gave to untouchables 
Hathayoga  : a system of yoga in which the exercises of physical postures,  
   poses and breathing are chiefly treated to discipline body  
   and mind towards self-realization 
Hijarat  : exodus or going away from one’s native land 
Himsa  : violence 
 
Jam-i-Jam : universal provider 
 
Kalma  : basic Muslim prayer 
Kalpadruma : a tree supposed to grant all desires 
Kamadhenu : the cow of plenty, supposed to fulfill all desires 
Kanyadana  : giving away of daughter in marriage 
Karma  : action 
Khaddar, Khadi: hand-spun and hand-woven cloth  
Kisan  : peasant The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 441   
Mahatma  : a great soul 
Mantra  : a sacred formula, a sacred text used for repetition and  
   meditation, a sacred incantation 
Moksha : salvation; freedom from birth and death  
Mukti : salvation 
 
Namaz  : Muslim prayer 
Neti, Neti  : not this, not this 
Nirvana  : state of salvation, i.e., of absolute bliss & calm according to  
   Buddihist thought  
Niyamas  : rules; observances 
 
Pancha : arbitrator 
Panchama  : one belonging to fifth caste, an outcaste  
Panchayat  : village council consisting of five persons elected by the  
   people 
Panchayat Raj:  administration through Panchayat, i.e. the people 
Pariah  : an outcaste 
Purna Swaraj : complete independence 
Raj  : kingdom ; administration 
Ramanama  : name of Rama—incarnation of God in Hindu religion,  
   recitation of God’s name 
Rama Raj  : Kingdom of Rama, beneficent rule  
Rishi  : a seer 
 
Sadavrata  : a place where free meals are served The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 442  Sadhana  : striving; practice, persistent effort 
Samadhi : state of ecstasy 
Sat  : truth; that which exists 
Satya  : truth 
Satyagraha  : literally, holding on the truth; truth-force or soul-force 
Satyagrahi  : one who practices Satyagraha 
Savarna  : belonging to one of the four castes 
Shastra  : a scripture 
Sthitaprajna : a man of steady wisdom 
Swadeshi  : literally of one’s own country; insistence on the use of goods  
   made in one’s own country, preferably hand-made and those  
   too of the neighbours first 
Swaraj  : self-government, home rule, independence 
Syadvad : the doctrine of “May be” in Jaina philosophy; an assertion of  
   probability (in philosophy) 
Syadvadi : a believer in Syadvad 
 
Tabligh : religious propaganda and conversion 
Tapas  : penance; religious austerity 
Tapasya : austerity, penance or asceticism 
 
Upanishadas : ancient philosophical writings of the Hindus 
 
Vaishnava : a devotee of Vishnu 
Varna  : occupational division of Hindu society 
Varnadharma : duty enjoined by caste rules The Voice of Truth 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 443  Varnashrama : four divisions of society according to occupations and of life  
   into four stages, viz., student’s, householder’s, forest  
   dweller’s and that of a recluse 
Vedas : scriptures of the Hindus 
 
Yajna : a sacrifice 
Yogi : one practicing religious discipline; an ascetic  
 
Zamindar  : a landlord 
 