 
What Jesus Means To Me 
 
 
 
By :  M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Compiled by :  R. K. Prabhu 
 
 
 
First published : September 1959 
 
 
 
 
 
Rs. 12/-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: 079 – 27540635 
E-mail: jitnavjivanlO@gmail.com 
Website: www.navajivantrust.org 
What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
CHAPTER 1 
MY EARLY STUDIES IN CHRISTIANITY 
It was more than I could believe that Jesus was the  only incarnate son of God, 
and that only he who believed in Him would have eve rlasting life. If God could 
have sons, all of us were His sons. If Jesus was li ke God, or God Himself, then 
all men were like God and could be God Himself. My reason was not ready to 
believe literally that Jesus by his death and by hi s blood redeemed the sins of 
the world. Metaphorically there might be some truth  in it. Again, according to 
Christianity only human beings had souls, and not o ther living beings, for whom 
death meant complete extinction; while I held a con trary belief. I could accept 
Jesus as a martyr, an embodiment of sacrifice, and a divine teacher, but not as 
the most perfect man ever born. His death on the Cr oss was a great example to 
the world, but that there was anything like a myste rious or miraculous virtue in 
it, my heart could not accept. The pious lives of C hristians did not give me 
anything that the lives of men of other faiths had failed to give. I had seen in 
other lives just the same reformation that I had he ard of among Christians. 
Philosophically there was nothing extraordinary in Christian principles. From 
the point of view of sacrifice, it seemed to me tha t the Hindus greatly 
surpassed the Christians. It was impossible for me to regard Christianity as a 
perfect religion or the greatest of all religions. 
An Autobiography, pp. 98-99, Edn. 1958 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3   
CHAPTER 2 
THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT 
I could not possibly read through the  Old Testament. I read the book of  
Genesis , and the chapters that followed invariably sent me  to sleep But just for 
the sake of being able to say that I had read it, I  plodded through the other 
books with much difficulty and without the least in terest or understanding. I 
disliked reading the book of  Numbers.  
But the  New Testament  produced a different impression, especially the Se rmon 
on the Mount which went straight to my heart. I com pared it with the  Gita. The 
verses, "But I say unto you, that ye resist not evi l: but whosoever shall smite 
thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also . And if any man take away 
thy coat let him have thy cloak too," delighted me beyond measure and put me 
in mind of Shamal Bhatt's "For a bowl of water, giv e a goodly meal", etc. 
An Autobiography,  p. 49, Edn. 1958 
 
I have not been able to see any difference between the Sermon on the Mount 
and the  Bkagavadgita.  What the Sermon describes in a graphic manner, the  
Bkagavadgita  reduces to a scientific formula. It may not be a s cientific book in 
the accepted sense of the term, but it has argued o ut the law of love — the law 
of abandon as I would call it — in a scientific man ner. The Sermon on the Mount 
gives the same law in wonderful language. The  New Testament  gave me 
comfort and boundless joy, as it came after the rep ulsion that parts of the  Old  
had given me. Today supposing I was deprived of the  Gita and forgot all its 
contents but had a copy of the Sermon, I should der ive the same joy from it as I 
do from the Gila.  
Young India,  22-12-1927 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  Christ, a Supreme Artist  
Truth is the first thing to be sought for, and Beau ty and Goodness will then be 
added unto you. Jesus was, to my mind, a supreme ar tist because he saw and 
expressed Truth; and so was Mahomed, the  Koran  being the most perfect 
composition in all Arabic literature — at any rate,  that is what scholars say. It is 
because both of them strove first for Truth that th e grace of expression 
naturally came in and yet neither Jesus nor Mahomed  wrote on art. That is the 
Truth and Beauty I crave for, live for and would di e for. 
Young India,  20-1 1-1924 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5   
CHAPTER 3 
WHY I AM NOT A CONVERT TO CHRISTIANITY 
Though I admire much in Christianity, I am unable t o identify myself with 
orthodox Christianity…Hinduism as I know it entirel y satisfies my soul, fills my 
whole being, and I find a solace in the  Bhagavadgita and  Upanishads  that I miss 
even in the Sermon on the Mount. Not that I do not prize the ideal presented 
therein; not that some of the precious teachings in  the Sermon on the Mount 
have not left a deep impression upon me, but I must  confess... that when doubt 
haunts me, when disappointments stare me in the fac e, and when I see not one 
ray of light on the horizon, I turn to the Bhagavadgita , and find a verse to 
comfort me; and I immediately begin to smile in the  midst of overwhelming 
sorrow. My life has been full of external tragedies , and if they have not left any 
visible and indelible effect on me, I owe it to the  teachings of the  
Bhagavadgita.  
Young India,  6-8-1925 
 
There is nothing in the world that would keep me fr om professing Christianity 
or any other faith, the moment I felt the truth of and the need for it. Where 
there is fear there is no religion.... If I could c all myself, say, a Christian, or a 
Mussalman, with my own interpretation of the  Bible  or the  Koran , I should not 
hesitate to call myself either. For then Hindu, Chr istian and Mussalman would 
be synonymous terms. 
Young India,  2-9-1926 
 
Though I cannot claim to be a Christian in the sect arian sense, the example of 
Jesus' suffering is a factor in the composition of my undying faith in non-
violence which rules all my actions, worldly and te mporal. 
Harijan,  7-1-1939 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6   
CHAPTER 4 
ONLY BEGOTTEN SON OF GOD? 
I regard Jesus as a great teacher of humanity, but I do not regard him as the 
only begotten son of God. That epithet in its mater ial interpretation is quite 
unacceptable. Metaphorically we are all begotten so ns of God, but for each of 
us there may be different begotten sons of God in a  special sense. Thus for me 
Chaitanya may be the only begotten son of God. 
Q.  : But don't you believe in the  perfection  of human nature, and don't you 
believe that Jesus had attained perfection ? 
A. :  I believe in the  perfectibility  of human nature. Jesus came as near to 
perfection as possible. To say that he was perfect is to deny God's superiority to 
man. And then in this matter I have a theory of my own. Being necessarily 
limited by the bonds of flesh, we can attain perfec tion only after dissolution of 
the body. Therefore God alone is absolutely perfect . When He descends to 
earth, He of His own accord limits Himself. Jesus d ied on the Cross because he 
was limited by the flesh. I do not need either the prophesies or the miracles to 
establish Jesus' greatness as a teacher. Nothing ca n be more miraculous than 
the three years of his ministry. There is no miracl e in the story of the multitude 
being fed on a handful of loaves. A magician can cr eate that illusion. But woe 
worth the day on which a magician would be hailed a s the saviour of humanity. 
As for Jesus raising the dead to life, well I doubt  if the men he raised were 
really dead. I raised a relative's child from suppo sed death to life, but that was 
because the child was not dead, and but for my pres ence there she might have 
been cremated. But I saw that life was not extinct.  I gave her an enema and 
she was restored to life. There was no miracle abou t it. I do not deny that 
Jesus had certain psychic powers and he was undoubt edly filled with the love 
of humanity. But he brought to life not people who were dead but who were 
believed to be dead. The laws of Nature are changel ess, unchangeable, and 
there are no miracles in the sense of infringement or interruption of Nature's 
laws. But we limited beings fancy all kinds of thin gs and impute our limitations What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  to God. We may copy God, but not He us. We may not divide Time for Him, 
Time for Him is eternity. For us there is past, pre sent and future. And what is 
human life of a hundred years but less than a mere speck in the eternity of 
Time? 
Harijan,  17-4-1937 
 
Q. : Then you will recognize degrees of divinity. W ould you not say that Jesus 
was the most divine? 
A. :  No, for the simple reason that we have no data. Hi storically we have more 
data about Mahomed than anyone else because he was more recent in time. For 
Jesus there is less data and still less for Buddha,  Rama and Krishna; and when 
we know so little about them, is it not preposterou s to say that one of them 
was more divine than another? In fact even if there  were a great deal of data 
available, no j'udge should shoulder the burden of sifting all the evidence, if 
only for this reason that it requires a highly spir itual person to gauge the 
degree of divinity of the subjects he examines. To say that Jesus was 99 per 
cent divine, and Mahomed 50 per cent, and Krishna 1 0 per cent, is to arrogate 
to oneself a function which really does not belong to man. 
Harijan, 6-3-1937 
 
I therefore do not take as literally true the text that Jesus is the only begotten 
son of God. God cannot be the exclusive Father and I cannot ascribe exclusive 
divinity to Jesus. He is as divine as Krishna or Ra ma or Mahomed or Zoroaster. 
Similarly I do not regard every word of the  Bible  as the inspired word of God 
even as I do not regard every word of the  Vedas  or the  Koran as inspired. The  
sum-total  of these books is certainly inspired, but I miss t hat inspiration in 
many of the things taken individually. The  Bible  is as much a book of religion 
with me as the  Gita  and the  Koran.  
Harijan , 6-3-1937 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8   
CHAPTER 5 
WHAT JESUS MEANS TO ME 
Although I have devoted a large part of my life to the study of religion and to 
discussion with religious leaders of all faiths, I know very well that I cannot but 
seem presumptuous in writing about Jesus Christ and  trying to explain what He 
means to me. I do so only because my Christian frie nds have told me on more 
than a few occasions that for the very reason that I am not a Christian and that 
(I shall quote their words exactly) "I do not accep t Christ in the bottom of my 
heart as the only Son of God," it is impossible for  me to understand the 
profound significance of His teachings, or to know and interpret the greatest 
source of spiritual strength that man has ever know n. 
Although this may or may not be true in my case, I have reasons to believe that 
it is an erroneous point of view. I believe that su ch an estimate is incompatible 
with the message that Jesus Christ gave to the worl d. For He was, certainly, 
the highest example of One who wished to give every thing, asking nothing in 
return, and not caring what creed might happen to b e professed by the 
recipient. I am sure that if He were living here no w among men, He would bless 
the lives of many who perhaps have never even heard  His name, if only their 
lives embodied the virtues of which He was a living  example on earth; the 
virtues of loving one's neighbour as oneself and of  doing good and charitable 
works among one's fellow men. 
What, then, does Jesus mean to me? To me, He was on e of the greatest 
teachers humanity has ever had.  
To His believers, He was God's only begotten son. C ould the fact that I do or do 
not accept this belief make Jesus have any more or less influence in my life? Is 
all the grandeur of His teaching and of His doctrin e to be forbidden to me? I 
cannot believe so. To me it implies a spiritual bir th. My interpretation, in other 
words, is that in Jesus' own life is the key of His  nearness to God; that He 
expressed, as no other could, the spirit and will o f God. It is in this sense that I 
see Him and recognize Him as the son of God. But I do believe that something 
of this spirit that Jesus exemplified in the highes t measure, in its most What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  profound human sense, does exist. I must believe th is; if I did not believe it I 
should be a sceptic; and to be a sceptic is to live  a life that is empty and lacks 
moral content. Or, what is the same thing, to conde mn the entire human race 
to a negative end. 
It is true that there certainly is reason for scept icism when one observes the 
bloody butchery that European aggressors have unloo sed, and when one thinks 
about the misery and suffering prevalent in every c orner of the world, as well 
as the pestilence and famine that always follow, te rribly and inevitably, upon 
war. In the face of this, how can one speak serious ly of the divine spirit 
incarnate in man? Because these acts of terror and murder offend the 
conscience of man; because man knows that they repr esent evil; because in the 
inner depths of his heart and of his mind, he deplo res them. And because, 
moreover, when he does not go astray, misled by fal se teachings or corrupted 
by false leaders, man has within his breast an impu lse for good and a 
compassion that is the spark of divinity, and which  some day, I believe, will 
burst forth into the full flower that is the hope o f all mankind. An example of 
this flowering may be found in the figure and in th e life of Jesus. I refuse to 
believe that there now exists or has ever existed a  person that has not made 
use of His example to lessen his sins, even though he may have done so without 
realizing it. The lives of all have, in some greate r or lesser degree, been 
changed by His presence, His actions, and the words  spoken by His divine voice. 
I believe that it is impossible to estimate the mer its of the various religions of 
the world, and moreover I believe that it is unnece ssary and harmful even to 
attempt it. But each one of them, in my judgment, e mbodies a common 
motivating force: the desire to uplift man's life a nd give it purpose. And 
because the life of Jesus has the significance and the transcendency to which I 
have alluded I believe that He belongs not solely t o Christianity, but to the 
entire world; to all races and people, it matters l ittle under what flag, name or 
doctrine they may work, profess a faith, or worship  a God inherited from their 
ancestors. 
The Modern Review , Oct. 1941, p. 406 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10   
CHAPTER 6 
THE MESSAGE OF JESUS 
The message of Jesus, as I understand it, is contai ned in his Sermon on the 
Mount unadulterated and taken as a whole and even i n connection with the Ser-
mon on the Mount, my own humble interpretation of t he message is in many 
respects different from the orthodox. The message, to my mind, has suffered 
distortion in the West. It may be presumptuous for me to say so but as a 
devotee of truth, I should not hesitate to say what  I feel. 
Young India , 8-12-1927 
 
I consider him as a historical person — one of the greatest amongst the teachers 
of mankind. I have studied His teachings as prayerf ully as I could, with the 
reverence of a Christian, in order to discover the truth that is buried in them. I 
have done so, just as I have done about the teachin gs of other teachers. 
Harijan,  14-9-1934 
 
Even the blind who do not see the rose perceive its  fragrance. That is the 
secret of the gospel of the rose. But the gospel th at Jesus preached is more 
subtle and fragrant than the gospel of the rose. If  the rose needs no agent 
much less does the gospel of Christ need any agent.  
Harijan,  17-4-1937 
 
Jesus preached not a new religion but a new life. H e called men to repentance. 
It was he who said, ''Not everyone that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter 
into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the w ill of my Father which is in 
heaven". 
Harijan,  12-6-1937 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11  Jesus lived and died in vain if he did not teach us  to regulate the whole of life 
by the eternal Law of Love. 
Harijan,  7-1-1939 
 
The love that Jesus taught and practised was not a mere personal virtue, but it 
was essentially a social and collective virtue. Bud dhism 'taught and practised 
the same thing six hundred years before Jesus. 
Harijan,  4-3-1939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12   
CHAPTER 7 
THE JESUS I LOVE 
[In December, 1931, when Gandhiji was voyaging back  to India, after attending the Second 
Round Table Conference in London, he gave the follo wing talk on Christmas Day at the 
request of Christian fellow-passengers who used to attend the daily morning prayers 
conducted by him.] 
I shall tell you how, to an outsider like me, the s tory of Christ, as told in the  
New Testament , has struck. My acquaintance with the  Bible  began nearly forty-
five years ago, and that was through the  New Testament.  I could not then take 
much interest in the  Old Testament, which I had certainly read, if only to fulfill 
a promise I had made to a friend whom I happened to  meet in a hotel. But 
when I came to the  New Testament  and the Sermon on the Mount, I began to 
understand the Christian teaching, and the teaching  of the Sermon on the 
Mount echoed something I had learnt in childhood an d something which seemed 
to be part of my being and which I felt was being a cted up to in the daily life 
around me. 
I say it seemed to be acted up to, meaning thereby that it was not necessary 
for my purpose that they were actually living the l ife. This teaching was non-
retaliation, or non-resistance to evil. Of all the things I read, what remained 
with me forever was that Jesus came almost to give a new law — though he of 
course had said he had not come to give a new law, but tack something on to 
the old Mosaic law. Well, he changed it so that it became a new law — not an 
eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, but to be ready to receive two blows 
when only one was given, and to go two miles when y ou were asked to go one. 
I said to myself, this is what one learns in one's childhood. Surely this is not 
Christianity. For all I had then been given to unde rstand was that to be a Chris-
tian was to have a brandy bottle in one hand and be ef in the other. The Sermon 
on the Mount, however, falsified the impression. As  my contact with real Chris-
tians i.e., men living in fear of God, increased, I  saw that the Sermon on the What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13  Mount was the whole of Christianity for him who wan ted to live a Christian life. 
It is that Sermon which has endeared Jesus to me. 
I may say that I have never been interested in a hi storical Jesus. I should not 
care if it was proved by someone that the man calle d Jesus never lived, and 
that what was narrated in the Gospels was a figment  of the writer's 
imagination. For the Sermon on the Mount would stil l be true for me. 
Reading, therefore, the whole story in that light, it seems to me that 
Christianity has yet to be lived, unless one says t hat where there is boundless 
love and no idea of retaliation whatsoever, it is C hristianity that lives. But then 
it surmounts all boundaries and book teaching. Then  it is something 
indefinable, not capable of being preached to men, not capable of being 
transmitted from mouth to mouth, but from heart to heart. But Christianity is 
not commonly understood in that way. 
Somehow, in God's providence, the  Bible  has been preserved from destruction 
by the Christians, so-called. The British and Forei gn Bible Society has had it 
translated into many languages. All that may serve a real purpose in the time 
to come. Two thousand years in the life of a living  faith may be nothing. For 
though we sang, "All glory to God on High and on th e earth be peace," there 
seems to be today neither glory to God nor peace on  earth. 
As long as it remains a hunger still unsatisfied, a s long as Christ is not yet born, 
we have to look forward to Him. When real peace is established, we will not 
need demonstrations, but it will be echoed in our l ife, not only in individual 
life, but in corporate life. Then we shall say Chri st is born. That to me is the 
real meaning of the verse we have sung. Then we wil l not think of a particular 
day in the year as that of the birth of the Christ,  but as an ever-recurring event 
which can be enacted in every life. 
And the more I think of fundamental religion, and t he more I think of 
miraculous conceptions of so many teachers who have  come down from age to 
age and clime to clime, the more I see that there i s behind them the eternal 
truth that I have narrated. That needs no label or declaration. It consists in the 
living of life, never ceasing, ever progressing tow ards peace. What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14  When, therefore, one wishes "A Happy Christmas" wit hout the meaning behind 
it, it becomes nothing more than an empty formula. And unless one wishes for 
peace for all life, one cannot wish for peace for o neself. It is a self-evident 
axiom, like the axioms of Euclid, that one cannot h ave peace unless there is in 
one an intense longing for peace all around. You ma y certainly experience 
peace in the midst of strife, but that happens only  when to remove strife you 
destroy your whole life, you crucify yourself. 
And so, as the miraculous birth is an eternal event , so is the Cross an eternal 
event in this stormy life. Therefore, we dare not t hink of birth without death 
on the cross. Living Christ means a living Cross, w ithout it life is a living death. 
Harijan,  31-12-1931 
 
[At the pressing request of Mr. Mills of the Associ ated Press of America Gandhiji dictated 
the following message of Christmas Greetings the sa me day.] 
I have never been able to reconcile myself to the g aieties of the Christmas 
season. They have appeared to me to be so inconsist ent with the life and 
teaching of Jesus. 
How I wish America could lead the way by devoting t he season to a real moral 
stocktaking and emphasizing consecration to the ser vice of mankind for which 
Jesus lived and died on the Cross. 
Young India,  31-12-1931 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15   
CHAPTER 8  
CHRIST—A PRINCE AMONGST SATYAGRAHIS 
Buddha fearlessly carried the war into the enemy's camp and brought down on 
its knees an arrogant priesthood. Christ drove out the money-changers from the 
temple of Jerusalem and drew down curses from Heave n upon the hypocrites 
and the pharisees. Both were for intensely direct a ction. But even as Buddha 
and Christ chastized they showed unmistakable gentl eness and love behind 
every act of theirs. They would not raise a finger against their enemies, but 
would gladly surrender themselves rather than the t ruth for which they lived. 
Buddha would have died resisting the priesthood, if  the majesty of his love had 
not proved to be equal to the task of bending the p riesthood. Christ died on the 
Cross with a crown of thorns on his head defying th e might of a whole empire. 
And if I raise resistance of a non-violent characte r, I simply and humbly follow 
in the footsteps of the great teachers. 
Young India , 12-5-1920 
 
My reading of it  {Bible)  has clearly confirmed the opinion derived from a 
reading of the Hindu scriptures. Jesus mixed with t he publicans and the sinners 
neither as dependent or as a patron. He mixed with them to serve and to 
convert them to a life of truthfulness and purity. But he wiped the dust off his 
feet of those places which did not listen to his wo rd. I hold it to be my duty not 
to countenance a son who disgraces himself by a lif e of shame and vice. 
Enlightened non-co-operation is the expression of a nguished love.... Would 
Jesus have accepted gifts from money-changers, take n from them scholarships 
for his friends, and advanced loans to them to ply their nefarious traffic? Was 
his denunciation of hypocrites, pharisees, and sadd ucees merely in word? Or did 
he not actually invite the people to beware of them  and shun them? 
Young India , 19-1-1921 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16  The virtues of mercy, non-violence, love and truth in any man can be truly 
tested only when they are pitted against ruthlessne ss, violence, hate and 
untruth. 
If this is true, then it is incorrect to say that A himsa is of no avail before a 
murderer. It can certainly be said that to experime nt with Ahimsa in face of a 
murderer is to seek self-destruction. But this is t he real test of Ahimsa. He who 
gets himself killed out of sheer helplessness, howe ver, can in nowise be said to 
have passed the test. He who when being kicked bear s no anger against his 
murderer and even asks God to forgive him is truly non-violent. History relates 
this of Jesus Christ. 
With His dying breath on his Cross he is reported t o have said: "Father, forgive 
them, for they know not what they do." 
Harijan,  28-4-1946 
 
The theory is that an adequate appeal to the heart never fails. Seeming failure 
is not of the law of Satya- graha but of incompeten ce of the  satyagrahi  by 
whatever cause induced. It may not be possible to g ive a complete historical 
instance. The name of Jesus at once comes to the li ps. It is an instance of 
brilliant failure. And he has been acclaimed in the  West as the prince of passive 
resisters. I showed years ago in South Africa that the adjective 'passive' was a 
misnomer, at least as applied to Jesus. He was the most active resister known 
perhaps to history. His was non-violence  par excellence.  
Harijan,  30-6-1946 
 
Europe mistook the bold and brave resistance, full of wisdom, by Jesus of 
Nazareth for passive resistance, as if it was of th e weak. As I read the  New 
Testament for the first time, I detected no passivity, no wea kness about Jesus 
as depicted in the four Gospels, and the meaning be came clearer to me when I 
read Tolstoy's Harmony of the Gospels  and his other kindred writings. _Has not 
the West paid heavily in regarding Jesus as a passi ve resister? Christendom has What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17  been responsible for the wars which put to shame ev en those described in the  
Old Testament  and other records, historical or semi- historical.  
Harijan, 7-12-1947 
 
Jesus as a Politician  
Jesus, in my humble opinion, was a prince among pol iticians. He did render 
unto Caesar that which was Caesar's. He gave the de vil his due. He never 
shunned him and is reported never once to have yiel ded to his incantations. 
The politics of his time consisted in securing the welfare of the people by 
teaching them not to be seduced by the trinkets of the priests and the 
pharisees. The latter then controlled and moulded t he life of the people. 
Freedom's Battle,  p. 195, Ganesh & Co., Madras, 1921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18   
CHAPTER 9 
THE GREATEST ECONOMIST OF HIS TIME 
[From a lecture delivered by Gandhiji at a meeting of the Muir Central College Economic 
Society, held at Allahabad, on Friday 22nd December  1916.] 
"Take no thought for the morrow" is an injunction w hich finds an echo in almost 
all the religious scriptures of the world. In a wel l-ordered society the securing 
of one's livelihood should be and is found to be th e easiest thing in the world. 
Indeed, the test of orderliness in a country is not  the number of millionaires it 
owns, but the absence of starvation among its masse s. The only statement that 
has to be examined is, whether it can be laid down as a law of universal 
application that material advancement means moral p rogress. 
Now let us take a few illustrations. Rome suffered a moral fall when it attained 
high material affluence. So did Egypt and perhaps m ost countries of which we 
have any historical record. The descendants and kin smen of the royal and 
divine Krishna too fell when they were rolling in r iches. We do not deny to the 
Rockefellers and Carnegies possession of an ordinar y measure of morality but 
we gladly judge them indulgently. I mean that we do  not even expect them to 
satisfy the highest standard of morality. With them  material gain has not 
necessarily meant moral gain. In South Africa, wher e I had the privilege of 
associating with thousands of our countrymen on mos t intimate terms, I 
observed almost invariably that the greater the pos session of riches, the 
greater was their moral turpitude. Our rich men, to  say the least, did not 
advance the moral struggle of passive resistance as  did the poor. The rich men's 
sense of self-respect was not so much injured as th at of the poorest. If I were 
not afraid of treading on dangerous ground, I would  even come nearer home 
and show how that possession of riches has been a h indrance to real growth. I 
venture to think that the scriptures of the world a re far safer and sounder 
treatises on the laws of economics than many of the  modern text-books. The 
question we are asking ourselves... is not a new on e. It was addressed of Jesus 
two thousand years ago. St. Mark has vividly descri bed the scene. Jesus is in his What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19  solemn mood. He is earnest. He talks of eternity. H e knows the world about 
him. He is himself the greatest economist of his ti me. He succeeded in 
economizing time and space — he transcends them. It  is to him at his best that 
one comes running, kneels down, and asks: "Good Mas ter, what shall I do that I 
may inherit eternal life ?" And Jesus said unto him : "Why callest thou me good? 
There is none good but one, that is God. Thou knowe st the Commandments. Do 
not commit adultery. Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness. 
Defraud not, Honour thy Father and Mother." And he answered and said unto 
him: "Master, all these have I observed from my you th." The Jesus beholding 
him loved him and said unto him: "One thing thou la ckest. Go thy way, sell 
whatever thou hast and give to the poor, and thou s halt have treasure in 
heaven—come, take up the cross and follow me." And he was sad at that saying 
and went away grieved — for he had great possession . And Jesus looked 
roundabout and said unto the disciples: "How hardly  shall they that have riches 
enter into the kingdom of God." And the disciples w ere astonished at his words. 
But Jesus answereth again and said unto them: "Chil dren, how hard is it for 
them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom  of God. It is easier for a 
camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the 
kingdom of God!" Here you have an eternal rule of l ife stated in the noblest 
words the English language is capable of producing.  But the disciples nodded 
unbelief as we do to this day. To him they said as we say today: "But look how 
the law fails in practice. If we sell and have noth ing, we shall have nothing to 
eat. We must have money or we cannot even be reason ably moral." So they 
state their case thus. And they were astonished out  of measure, saying among 
themselves: 'Who then can be saved'. And Jesus look ing upon them said: "With 
men it is impossible, but not with God, for with Go d, all things are possible." 
Then Peter began to say unto him: "Lo, we have left  all, and have followed 
thee." And Jesus answered and said: "Verily I say u nto you, there is no man that 
has left house or brethren or sisters, or father or  mother, or wife or children or 
lands for my sake and Gospels but he shall receive one hundredfold, now in this 
time houses and brethren and sisters and mothers an d children and land, and in 
the world to come, eternal life. But many that are first shall be last and the What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20  last, first." You have here the result or reward, i f you prefer the term, of 
following the law. I have not taken the trouble of copying similar passages from 
the other non- Hindu scriptures and I will not insu lt you by quoting, in support 
of the law stated by Jesus, passages from the writi ngs and sayings of our own 
sages, passages even stronger, if possible, than th e Biblical extracts I have 
drawn your attention to. Perhaps the strongest of a ll the testimonies in favour 
of the affirmative answer to the question before us  are the lives of the greatest 
teachers of the world. Jesus, Mahomed, Buddha, Nana k, Kabir, Chaitanya, 
Shankara, Dayanand, Ramakrishna were men who exerci sed an immense 
influence over, and moulded the character of thousa nds of men. The world is 
the richer for their having lived in it. And they w ere all men who deliberately 
embraced poverty as their lot. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi,  pp. 350-53,  
Natesan & Co., Madras, 1933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21   
CHAPTER 10 
PROSELYTIZATION 
I hold that proselytizing under the cloak of humani tarian work is, to say the 
least, unhealthy. It is most certainly resented by the people here. Religion 
after all is a deeply personal matter, it touches t he heart. Why should I change 
my religion because a doctor who professes Christia nity as his religion has cured 
me of some disease or why should the doctor expect or suggest such a change 
whilst I am under his influence? Is not medical rel ief its own reward and 
satisfaction? Or why should I whilst I am in a miss ionary educational institution 
have Christian teaching thrust upon me? In my opini on these practices are not 
uplifting and give rise to suspicion if not even se cret hostility. The methods of 
conversion must be like Caesar's wife above suspici on. Faith is not imparted like 
secular subjects. It is given through the language of the heart. If a man has a 
living faith in him, it spreads its aroma like the rose its scent. Because of its 
invisibility, the extent of its influence is far wi der than that of the visible 
beauty of the colour of the petals. 
I am, then, not against conversion. But I am agains t the modern methods of it. 
Conversion nowadays has become a matter of business , like any other. I 
remember having read a missionary report saying how  much it cost per head to 
convert and then presenting a budget for 'the next harvest'. 
Yes, I do maintain that India's great faiths are al l- sufficing for her. Apart from 
Christianity and Judaism, Hinduism and its offshoot s, Islam and Zoroastrianism 
are living faiths. No one faith is perfect. All fai ths are equally dear to their 
respective votaries. What is wanted, therefore, is a living friendly contact 
among the followers of the great religions of the w orld and not a clash among 
them in the fruitless attempt on the part of each c ommunity to show the 
superiority of its faith over the rest. Through suc h friendly contact it will be 
possible for us all to rid our respective faiths of  shortcomings and excrescences. What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22  It follows from what I have said above that India i s in no need of conversion of 
the kind I have in mind. Conversion in the sense of  self-purification, self-
realization is the crying need of the times. That, however, is not what is ever 
meant by proselytizing. To those who would convert India, might it not be said, 
"Physician, heal thyself"? 
Young India , 23-4-1931 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23   
CHAPTER 11 
FOR MISSIONARIES IN INDIA 
You are here to find out the distress of the people  of India and remove it. But I 
hope you are here also in a receptive mood, and if there is anything that India 
has to give, you will not stop your ears, you will not close your eyes, and steal 
your hearts, but open up your ears, eyes and most o f all your hearts to receive 
all that may be good in this land. I give you my as surance that there is a great 
deal of good in India. Do not flatter yourselves wi th the belief that a mere 
recital of that celebrated verse in St. John makes a man a Christian. If I have 
read the  Bible  correctly, I know many men who have never heard th e name of 
Jesus Christ or have even rejected the official int erpretation of Christianity 
will, probably, if Jesus came in our midst today in  the flesh, be owned by him 
more than many of us. I therefore ask you to approa ch the problem before you 
with open-heartedness and humility. 
Young India , 6-8-1925 
 
Confuse not Jesus' teaching with what passes as mod ern civilization, and pray 
do not do unconscious violence to the people among whom you cast your lot. It 
is no part of that call, I assure you, to tear up t he lives of the people of the 
East by its roots. Tolerate whatever is good in the m and do not hastily, with 
your preconceived notions, judge them. Do not judge  lest you be judged 
yourselves. 
In spite of your belief in the greatness of Western  Civilization and in spite of 
your pride in all your achievements, I plead with y ou for humility, and ask you 
to leave some little room for doubt in which, as Te nnyson sang, there was more 
truth though by ' doubt' he certainly meant a diffe rent thing. Let us each one 
live our life, and if ours is the right life, where  is the cause for hurry? It will 
react of itself. What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  Young India,  8-12-1927 
 
It is a conviction daily growing upon me that the g reat and rich Christian 
missions will render true service to India, if they  can persuade themselves to 
confine their activities to humanitarian service wi thout the ulterior motive of 
converting India or at least her unsophisticated vi llagers to Christianity, and 
destroying their social superstructure, which, notw ithstanding its many defects, 
has stood now from time immemorial the onslaughts u pon it from within and 
from without. Whether they—the missionaries—and we wish it or not, what is 
true in the Hindu faith will abide, what is untrue will fall to pieces. Every living 
faith must have within itself the power of rejuvena tion if it is to live. 
Harijan,  28-9-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25   
CHAPTER 12 
FOR CHRISTIAN INDIANS 
If Indian Christians will simply cling to the Sermo n on the Mount, which was 
delivered not merely to the peaceful disciples but a groaning world, they would 
not go wrong, and they would find that no religion is false, and that if all live 
according to their lights and in the fear of God, t hey would not need to worry 
about organizations, forms of worship and ministry.  
Young India,  22-9-1921 
 
As I wander about throughout the length and breadth  of India I see many 
Christian Indians almost ashamed of their birth, ce rtainly of their ancestral reli-
gion, and of their ancestral dress. The aping of Eu ropeans on the part of Anglo-
Indians is bad enough, but the aping of them by Ind ian converts is a violence 
done to their country and, shall I say, even to the ir new religion. There is a 
verse in the  New Testament  to bid Christians avoid meat if it would offend 
their neighbours. Meat here, I presume, includes dr ink and dress. I can 
appreciate uncompromising avoidance of all that is evil in the old, but where 
there is not only no question of anything evil, but  where an ancient practice 
may be even desirable, it would be a crime to part with it when one knows for 
certain that the giving up would deeply hurt relati ves and friends. Conversion 
must not mean denationalization. Conversion should mean a definite giving up 
of the evil of the old, adoption of all the good of  the new and a scrupulous 
avoidance of everything evil in the new. Conversion , therefore, should mean a 
life of greater dedication to one's own country, gr eater surrender to God, 
greater self-purification. 
I know that there is a marvellous change coming ove r Christian Indians. There is 
on the part of a large number of them a longing to revert to original simplicity, 
a longing to belong to the nation and to serve it, but the process is too slow. 
There need be no waiting. It requires not much effo rt.. . .Is it not truly What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26  deplorable that many Christian Indians discard thei r own mother-tongue and 
bring up their children only to speak in English? D o they not thereby completely 
cut themselves adrift from the nation in whose mids t they have to live? 
Young India,  20-8-1925 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27   
CHAPTER 13 
FOR CHRISTIAN FRIENDS 
“Dear Brother Gandhi, 
Under a double prompting when praying for you, I si t down to write. You have 
had your name blazoned abroad all over the (so-call ed) civilized world, as one 
of the greatest philosophers and sacrificial worker s on earth. In India you have 
been proclaimed  the  Mahatma and actually worshipped as one of  the  
incarnations of India's many deities, and much as y ou have declared that you do 
not encourage these ascriptions of sanctity, you wo uld indeed be more than 
human if you did not occasionally feel a sweet comp lacency in them. Your 
practice also of fastings when sin has been committ ed, or quarrels have taken 
place in your Ashram or schools, has had a tendency  to make Indians believe 
that you can merit blessing which can be communicat ed to others,— but has 
anybody been loving and courageous enough to write and challenge you as to 
how personally you are going to obtain atonement fo r your own sin? All your 
self-denials and fastings and prayers and good deed s cannot blot out one sin of 
your earlier days. For thirty or more years of your  life you lived the carnal self 
life, seeking and forming your own plans and ambiti ons without seeking to know 
God's purpose for your life or to honour His holy n ame. You were a trustee of 
talents intended to be used for the glory of God an d the good of your 
fellowmen. Nothing that you do can obliterate the r ecord of those years of 
indifference and disobedience. Every hour of every day of that period at least 
lifts up its voice in condemnation. Law must be vin dicated. Some punishment 
must be inflicted. But even on earth it is a recogn ized principle that the 
prerogative of an earthly king is to have mercy — a nd yet righteousness must be 
the very foundation from which mercy may flow. The Laws of the Universe 
proclaim the impartial justice of the Creator and c onfirm the Bible declaration: 
'The soul that sinneth, it shall die,' and yet the doctrine of vicarious suffering is 
written in the very nature of human existence. God is Love. Every pulse of love 
in every creature has its origin and activity from Him. Parental, mother love, What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  all love is a manifestation of our emanation from t he fountain of the Divine 
Love. Milton sings: 
‘Of ere the kindred source be down 
The kindred blood will claim his own 
And throbbing pulses silently 
Move heart to heart in sympathy. ' 
‘If all sin is sin against God' (Psalm 51) the prer ogative of forgiveness is His. If 
His righteous judgment is appeased by (for God was in Christ, reconciling the 
world unto Himself, not imputing their trespasses u nto them) Himself suffering 
the death penalty on behalf of the race; and if, as  in Philippines (II. 6-11) He 
commands everyone in heaven and on earth to accept Christ as Saviour and 
Lord to the  glory of God the Father,  how shall we (how will you) escape if you 
neglect so great a salvation ? 
Even if, as you profess to believe, Christ was only  one of many incarnations of 
God, and the latest of them, you must either accept  His tremendous claims as 
of Divine origin, or reject them as only human and fallible. And when He decla-
res as He did to the Jews of His day — 'If ye belie ve not that I am He, you shall 
die in your sins,' or ' I am  the  way,  the truth and  the  life, no man cometh unto 
the Father but by me,' you must either believe Him to have been self-deceived, 
or deliberately false. I see no other solution. I p ray daily that Christ may grant 
you revelation of Himself, as He did to Saul of Tar sus, that before you pass off 
this earthly scene, you may be used to proclaim to India's millions the sacrificial 
efficacy of His precious blood. 
Yours lovingly in His glad service." 
This is a typical letter from an old English friend  who regularly writes such 
letters almost every six months. This friend is ver y earnest and well known to 
me. But there are numerous other correspondents unk nown to me who write in 
the same strain without arguing. Since now I cannot , for reasons of health, 
write to individuals, I use this letter as a text f or a general reply. Incidentally, What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29  this effort will enable the readers of  Harijan, who accept my guidance, to 
understand the nature of my religious belief. 
My correspondent is a literalist. He gives its lite ral meaning to every text of the  
Bible  in spite of its clear statement that "the letter k illeth, the spirit giveth 
life/' My very first reading of the  Bible  showed me that I would be repelled by 
many things in it if I gave their literal meaning t o many texts or even took 
every passage in it as the word of God. I found, as  I proceeded with my study of 
the scriptures of the various religions, that every  scripture had to be treated 
likewise, not excepting the  Vedas  or the  Upanishads.  Therefore the story of the 
immaculate conception when I interpret mystically d oes not repel me. I should 
find it hard to believe in the literal meaning of t he verses relating to the imma-
culate conception of Jesus. Nor would it deepen my regard for Jesus if I gave 
those verses their literal meaning. This does not m ean that the writers of the 
Gospels were untruthful persons. They wrote in a mo od of exaltation. From my 
youth upward I learnt the art of estimating the val ue of scriptures on the basis 
of their ethical teaching. Miracles, therefore, had  no interest for me. The 
miracles said to have been performed by Jesus, even  if I had believed them 
literally, would not have reconciled me to any teac hing that did not satisfy 
universal ethics. Somehow or other, words of religi ous teachers have for me, as 
I presume for millions, a living force which the sa me words uttered by ordinary 
mortals do not possess. 
Jesus then, to me, is a great world teacher among o thers. He was, to the 
devotees of His generation, no doubt "the only bego tten son of God". Their 
belief need not be mine. He affects my life no less  because I regard Him as one 
among the many begotten sons of God. The adjective ' begotten' has, for me, a 
deeper and possibly a grander meaning than its lite ral meaning. For me it 
implies spiritual birth. In His own time He was the  nearest to God. 
Jesus atoned for the sins of those who accepted His  teachings by being an 
infallible example to them. But the example was wor th nothing to those who 
never troubled to change their lives. A regenerate outgrows the original taint 
even as purified gold outgrows the original alloy. What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  I have made the frankest admission of my sins. But I do not carry their burdens 
on my shoulders. If I am journeying Godward, as I f eel I am, it is safe with me. 
For I feel the warmth of the sunshine of His presen ce. My austerities, fastings 
and prayers are, I know, of no value if I rely upon  them for reforming me. But 
they have an inestimable value if they represent, a s I hope they do, the 
yearnings of a soul striving to lay his weary head in the lap of his Maker. 
The  Gita  has become for me the key to the scriptures of the  world. It unravels 
for me the deepest mysteries to be found in them. I  regard them with the same 
reverence that I pay to the Hindu scriptures. Hindu s, Mussalmans, Christians, 
Parsis, Jews are convenient labels. But when I tear  them down, I do not know 
which is which. We are all children of the same God . " Verily verily I say unto 
you, not everyone that sayeth unto me Lord, Lord, s hall enter the Kingdom of 
heaven, but he that doeth the will of my Father whi ch is in heaven shall enter 
the Kingdom," was said, though in different words, by all the great teachers of 
the world. 
Harijan,  18-4-1936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31   
CHAPTER 14 
VALUE OF SCRIPTURAL TEXTS 
I believe that all great religions of the world are  true more or less. I say "more 
or less" because I believe that everything that the  human hand touches, by 
reason of the very fact that human beings are imper fect, becomes imperfect. 
Perfection is the exclusive attribute of God and it  is undescribable, 
untranslatable. I do believe that it is possible fo r every human being to become 
perfect even as God is perfect. It is necessary for  us all to aspire after 
perfection, but when that blessed state is attained  it becomes indescribable, 
indefinable. And, I, therefore, admit, in all humil ity, that even the  Vedas, the  
Koran  and the  Bible  are imperfect word of God and, imperfect beings th at we 
are, swayed to and fro by a multitude of passions, it is impossible for us even to 
understand this word of God in its fullness. 
Young India , 22-9-1927 
 
I exercise my judgment about every scripture, inclu ding the  Gita.  I cannot let a 
scriptural text supersede my reason. Whilst I belie ve that the principle books 
are inspired, they suffer from a process of double distillation. Firstly they come 
through a human prophet, and then through the comme ntaries of interpreters. 
Nothing in them comes from God directly. Mathew may  give one version of one 
text and John may give another. I cannot surrender my reason whilst I subscribe 
to divine revelation. And above all, 'the letter ki lleth, the spirit giveth life*. But 
you must not misunderstand my position. I believe i n faith also, in things where 
reason has no place, e.g. the existence of God. No argument can move me from 
that faith, and like that little girl who repeated against all reason, "yet we are 
seven", I would like to repeat, on being baffled in  argument by a very superior 
intellect, "Yet there is God". 
Harijan,  5-12-1936 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32   
CHAPTER 15 
WESTERN CHRISTIANITY TODAY 
It is my firm opinion that Europe today represents not the spirit of God or 
Christianity but the spirit of Satan. And Satan's s uccesses are the greatest when 
he appears with the name of God on his lips. Europe  is today only nominally 
Christian. It is really worshipping Mammon. 'It is easier for a camel to pass 
through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom.' Thus 
really spoke Jesus Christ. His so-called followers measure their moral progress 
by their material possessions. 
The very national anthem of England is anti- Christ ian. Jesus, who asked his 
followers to love their enemies even as themselves,  could not have sung of his 
enemies, "Confound his enemies, frustrate their kna vish tricks." 
The last (Great) War, however, has shown as nothing  else has, the Satanic 
nature of the civilization that dominates Europe to day. Every canon of public 
morality has been broken by the victors in the name  of virtue. No lie has been 
considered too foul to be uttered. The motive behin d every crime is not 
religious or spiritual, but grossly material. ... I t is certainly necessary to purge 
religion of its excrescences, but it is equally nec essary to expose the 
hollowness of moral pretensions on the part of thos e who prefer material 
wealth to moral gain. It is easier to wean an ignor ant fanatic from his error 
than a confirmed scoundrel from his scoundrelism. T his, however, is no 
indictment against individuals or even nations. Tho usands of individual 
Europeans are rising above their environment. I wri te of the tendency in 
Europe, as reflected in her present leaders... It i s combination of evil forces 
that India is really fighting through non-violent n on-co-operation. 
Young India , 8-9-1920 
 
I consider Western Christianity in its practical wo rking a negation of Christ's 
Christianity. I cannot conceive Jesus, if he was li ving in the flesh in our midst, What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  approving of modern Christian organizations, public  worship or modern 
ministry. 
Young India,  22-9-1921 
 
Today I rebel against orthodox Christianity, as I a m convinced that it has 
distorted the message of Jesus. He was an Asiatic w hose message was delivered 
through many media, and when it had the backing of a Roman Emperor it 
became an imperialist faith as it remains to this d ay. 
Harijan,  30-5-1936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34   
CHAPTER 16 
TO THE CEYLONESE YOUTH 
[During his tour of Ceylon Gandhiji gave the follow ing message to the Christian and 
Buddhist youth that had gathered to hear him at the  Colombo Y. M. C. A.] 
To you, young Ceylonese friends, I say: Do not be d azzled by the splendour that 
comes to you from the West. Do not be thrown off yo ur feet by this passing 
show. The Enlightened One has told you in never-to- be-for- gotten words that 
this little span of life is but a passing shadow, a  fleeting thing, and if you 
realize the nothingness of all that appears before your eyes, the nothingness of 
this material case that we see before us ever chang ing, then indeed there are 
treasures for you up above, and there is peace for you down here, peace which 
passeth all understanding, and happiness to which w e are utter strangers. It 
requires an amazing faith, a divine faith and surre nder of all that we see before 
us. What did Buddha do, and Christ do, and also Mah omed ? Theirs were lives of 
self-sacrifice and renunciation. Buddha renounced e very worldly happiness, 
because he wanted to share with the whole world his  happiness which was to 
be had by men who sacrificed and suffered in search  for truth. If it was a good 
thing to scale the heights of Mt. Everest, sacrific ing precious lives in order to be 
able to go there and make some slight observations,  if it was a glorious thing to 
give up life after life in planting a flag in the u ttermost extremities of the 
earth, how much more glorious would it be to give n ot one life, surrender not a 
million lives but a billion lives in search of the potent and imperishable truth! 
So be not lifted off your feet, do not be drawn awa y from the simplicity of your 
ancestors. A time is coming when those, who are in the mad rush today of 
multiplying their wants, vainly thinking that they add to the real substance, 
real knowledge of the world, will retrace their ste ps and say, “What have we 
done?" Civilizations have come and gone, and in spi te of all our vaunted 
progress I am tempted to ask again and again, “To w hat purpose?” Wallace, a 
contemporary of Darwin, has said the same thing. Fi fty years of brilliant 
inventions and discoveries, he has said, has not ad ded one inch to the moral What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35  height of mankind. So said a dreamer and visionary if you will—Tolstoy. So said 
Jesus, and Buddha, and Mahomed, whose religion is b eing denied and falsified 
in my own country today. 
By all means drink deep of the fountains that are g iven to you in the Sermon on 
the Mount, but then you will have to take sackcloth  and ashes. The teaching of 
the Sermon was meant for each and every one of us. You cannot serve both God 
and Mammon. God the Compassionate and the Merciful,  Tolerance incarnate, 
allows Mammon to have his nine days' wonder. But I say to you, youths of 
Ceylon, fly from that self-destroying but destructi ve show of Mammon. 
Young India;  8-12-1927 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36   
CHAPTER 17 
SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
[The following were some of the questions put to Ga ndhiji and answered by him when 
Christian missionaries and other followers of the f aith visited him.] 
Q.: Do you definitely feel the presence of the livi ng Christ within you? 
A.:  If it is the historical Jesus surnamed Christ that  you refer to, I must say I do 
not. If it is an adjective signifying one of the na mes of God, then I must say I do 
feel, the presence of God—call Him Christ, call Him  Krishna, call Him Rama. We 
have one thousand names to denote God, and if I did  not feel the presence of 
God within me, I see so much of misery and disappoi ntment every day that I 
would be a raving maniac and my destination would b e the Hooghli. 
Young India , 6-8-1925 
 
Q.: Why do you refuse to enter God's house if Jesus  invites you? Why does not 
India take up the Cross ? 
A.:  If Jesus has reference to God, I have never refuse d to enter the house of 
God, indeed every moment I am trying to enter it. I f Jesus represents not a 
person, but the principle of non-violence, India ha s accepted its protecting 
power. 
Young India , 31-12-1931 
 
Q.: Did not Jesus himself teach and preach? 
A.:  We are on dangerous ground here. You ask me to giv e my interpretation of 
the life of Christ. Well, I may say that I do not a ccept everything in the Gospels 
as historical truth. And it must be remembered that  he was working amongst 
his own people, and he said he had not come to dest roy but to fulfil. I draw a 
great distinction between the Sermon on the Mount a nd the Letters of Paul. What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37  They are a graft on Christ's teaching, his own glos s apart from Christ's own 
experience. 
Young India,  19-1-1928 
 
Q.: But, Mr Gandhi, why do you object to proselytiz ation as such? Is not there 
enough in the  Bible  to authorize us to invite people to a better way o f life? 
A.:  Oh yes, but it does not mean that they should be m ade members of the 
Church. If you interpret your texts in the way you seem to do, you straightaway 
condemn a large part of humanity unless it believes  as you do. If Jesus came to 
earth again, he would disown many things that are b eing done in the name of 
Christianity. It is not he who says “Lord, Lord” th at is a Christian, but “He that 
doeth the will of the Lord " that is a true Christi an. And cannot he who has not 
heard the name of Christ Jesus do the will of the L ord? 
Harijan,  11-5-1935 
 
Q.: Why may not I share with others my experience o f Jesus Christ which has 
given me such an ineffable peace? 
A.:  Because you cannot possibly say that what is best for you is best for all. 
Quinine may be the only means of saving life in you r case, but a dangerous 
poison in the case of another. And again, is it not  superannuation to assume 
that you alone possess the key to spiritual joy and  peace, and that an adherent 
of a different faith cannot get the same in equal m easure from a study of his 
scriptures? I enjoy a peace and equanimity of spiri t which has excited the envy 
of many Christian friends. I have got it principall y through the  Gita. 
Your difficulty lies in your considering the other faiths as false or so 
adulterated as to amount to falsity. And you shut y our eyes to the truth that 
shines in the other faiths and which gives equal jo y and peace to their votaries. 
I have not hesitated, therefore, to recommend to my  Christian friends a 
prayerful and sympathetic study of the other script ures of the world. I can give 
my own humble testimony that, whilst such study has  enabled me to give the What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  same respect to them that I give to my own, it has enriched my own faith and 
broadened my vision. 
Q,.: What would be your message to a Christian like  me and my fellows? 
A.:  Become worthy of the message that is imbedded in t he Sermon on the 
Mount, and join the spinning brigade. 
Harijan,  13-1-1940 
 
Q.: Could you tell me the things one should avoid i n order to present the gospel 
of Christ? 
A.:  Cease to think that you want to convert the whole world to your 
interpretation of Christianity. At the end of readi ng the  Bible,  let me tell you, 
it did not leave on my mind the impression that Jes us ever meant Christians to 
do what the bulk of those who take his name do. The  moment you adopt the 
attitude I suggest, the field of service becomes li mitless. You limit your own 
capacity by thinking and saying that you must prose lytize. 
Harijan,  23-3-1940 
 
Q.: You often refer to the Sermon on the Mount. Do you believe in the verse, "If 
any man will take away thy coat, let him have thy c loak also?" Does it not 
follow from the principle of non-violence? 
A.:  In the verse quoted by you Jesus put in a pictures que and telling manner 
the great doctrine of nonviolent non-co-operation. Your non-co-operation with 
your opponent is violent when you give a blow for a  blow, and is ineffective in 
the long run. Your non- co-operation is non-violent  when you give your 
opponent all in the place of just what he needs. Yo u have disarmed him once 
for all by your apparent co-operation, which in eff ect is complete non-co-
operation. 
Harijan,  13-7-1940 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39   
APPENDIX I 
SERMON ON THE MOUNT 
And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mounta in: and when he was 
set, his disciples came unto him: 
And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying, 
Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the k ingdom of heaven. 
Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comf orted. 
Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the ea rth. 
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after r ighteousness: for they shall 
be filled. 
Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mer cy. 
Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see G od. 
Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be call ed the children of God. 
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteous ness' sake: for theirs is the 
kingdom of heaven. 
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and pers ecute you, and shall say all 
manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. 
Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad: for great is your  reward in heaven: for so 
persecuted they the prophets which were before you.  
Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost its savour, wherewith shall 
it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, b ut to be cast out, and to be 
trodden under foot of men. 
Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set o n an hill cannot be hid. 
Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a b ushel, but on the 
candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40  Let your light so shine before men, that they may s ee your good works, and 
glorify your Father which is in heaven. 
Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the  prophets: I am not come to 
destroy, but to fulfill. 
For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pa ss, one jot or one tittle shall 
in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled . 
Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall 
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the k ingdom of heaven: but 
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall b e called great in the 
kingdom of heaven. 
For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed the 
righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shal l in no case enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. 
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time,  Thou shalt not kill; and 
whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judg ment: 
But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with hi s brother without a cause 
shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever s hall say to his brother, 
Raca, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoe ver shall say, Thou fool, 
shall be in danger of hell fire. 
Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there remem- berest that thy 
brother hath aught against thee, 
Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy w ay; first be reconciled to thy 
brother, and then come and offer thy gift. 
Agree with thine adversary quickly, whilst thou art  in the way with him; lest at 
any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, a nd the judge deliver thee to 
the officer, and thou be cast into prison. 
Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come  out thence, till thou hast 
paid the uttermost farthing. What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41  Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time,  Thou shalt not commit 
adultery: 
But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a wom an to lust after her hath 
committed adultery with her already in his heart. 
And if thy right eye offends thee, pluck it out, an d cast it from thee: for it is 
profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy 
whole body should be cast into hell. 
And if thy right hand offends thee, cut it off, and  cast it from thee: for it is 
profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not your whole 
body should be cast into hell. 
It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wif e, let him give her a letter 
of divorcement: 
But I say unto you, that Whosoever shall put away h is wife, saving for the cause 
of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and  whosoever shall marry her 
that is divorced committeth adultery. 
Again, ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shalt not 
forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord t hine oaths: 
But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by he aven; for it is God's throne: 
Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city 
of the great King. 
Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one hair 
white or black. 
But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more 
than these cometh of evil. 
Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an  eye, and a tooth for a 
tooth: 
But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but wh osoever shall smite thee on 
thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42  And if any man shall sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have 
thy cloak also. 
And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go wi th him twain. 
Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that wou ld borrow of thee turn not 
thou away. 
Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt lo ve thy neighbour, and hate 
thine enemy. 
But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them t hat curse you, do good to 
them that hate you, and pray for them which despite fully use you, and 
persecute you;  
That ye may be the children of your Father which is  in heaven: for he maketh 
his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and se ndeth rain on the just and on 
the unjust. 
For if ye love them which love you, what reward hav e ye? do not even the 
publicans the same? 
And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye mor e than others? do not even 
the publicans so? 
Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. 
Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to b e seen of them: otherwise 
ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven . 
Therefore when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as 
the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the stre ets, that they may have 
glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They have thei r reward. 
But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand kno w what thy right hand 
doeth: 
That thine alms may be secret: and thy Father which  seeth in secret himself 
shall reward thee openly. What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43  And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hyp ocrites are: for they love to 
pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may 
be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have th eir reward. 
But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet,  and when thou hast shut 
thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; an d thy Father which seeth in 
secret shall reward thee openly. 
But when ye pray, use not ,vain repetitions, as the  heathen do: for they think 
that they shall be heard for their much speaking. 
Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father  knoweth what things ye 
have need of, before yc ask him. 
After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father whi ch art in heaven, Hallowed 
be thy name. 
Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth as it i s in heaven. 
Give us this day our daily bread. 
And forgive us for debts, as we forgive our debtors . 
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us fro m evil: For thine is the 
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever. Ame n. 
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heaven ly Father will also forgive 
you. 
But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither  will your Father forgive your 
trespasses. 
Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, o f a sad countenance: for 
they disfigure their faces, that they may appear un to men to fast. Verily I say 
unto you, They have their reward. 
But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head and wash thy face; 
That you appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret: 
and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward  thee openly. What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44  Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, whe re moth and rust doth 
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal:  
But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, wher e neither moth nor rust doth 
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor  steal: 
For where your treasure is, there will your heart b e also. 
The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thin e eye be single, thy whole 
body shall be full of light. 
But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be f ull of darkness. If therefore 
the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is  that darkness! 
No man can serve two masters: for either he will ha te the one, and love the 
other: or else he will hold to the one, and despise  the other. Ye cannot serve 
God and mammon. 
Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or 
what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye  shall put on. Is not the life 
more than meat, and the body more than raiment? 
Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neit her do they reap, nor gather 
into barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Ar c ye not much better than 
they? 
Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit un to his stature ? 
And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the l ilies of the field, how they 
grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: 
And yet 1 say unto you, That even Solomon in all hi s glory was not arrayed like 
one of these. 
Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field,  which today is, and 
tomorrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much m ore clothe you, O ye of 
little faith? 
Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we ea t? or, What shall we drink? 
or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45  (For after all these things do the Gentiles seek:) for your heavenly Father 
knoweth that ye have need of all these things. 
But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his right eousness; and all these things 
shall be added unto you. 
Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the m orrow shall take thought 
for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day i s the evil thereof. 
Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what jud gment ye judge, ye shall be 
judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. 
And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brot her's eye, but considerest 
not the beam that is in thine own eye? 
Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull ou t the mote out of thine eye: 
and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye? 
Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thin e own eye; and then shalt 
thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy br other's eye. 
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before 
swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and  turn again and rend you. 
Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be 
opened unto you: 
For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that se eketh findeth; and to him 
that knocketh it shall be opened. 
Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask br ead, will he give him a 
stone? 
Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? 
If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts  unto your children, how 
much more shall your Father which is in heaven give  good things to them that 
ask him? 
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men s hould do to you, do ye 
even so to them: for this is the law and the prophe ts. What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46  Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gat e, and broad is the way, that 
leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in threat: 
Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and 
few there be that find it. 
Beware of false prophets, which come to you in shee p's clothing, but inwardly 
they are ravening wolves. 
Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather g rapes of thorns, or figs of 
thistles? 
Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree brihgeth 
forth evil fruit. 
A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth 
good fruit. 
Every tree that bringeth not good fruit is hewn dow n, and cast into the fire. 
Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. 
Not everyone that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of 
heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father whi ch is in heaven. 
Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have w e not prophesied in thy 
name? and in thy name cast out devils? and in thy n ame done many wonderful 
works? 
And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you : depart from me, ye that 
work iniquity. 
Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will 
liken him unto a wise man, which built his house up on a rock: 
And the rain descended, and the floods came, and th e winds blew, and beat 
upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founde d upon a rock. 
And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, a nd doeth them not, shall be 
likened unto a foolish man, which built his house u pon the sand: What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47  And the rain descended, and the floods came, and th e winds blew, and beat 
upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fal l of it. 
And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these say ings, the people were 
astonished at his doctrine: 
For he taught them as one having authority, and not  as the scribes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48   
APPENDIX II 
TWO FAVOURITE CHRISTIAN HYMNS OF GANDHIJI  
The Wondrous Cross 
When I survey the wondrous Cross 
On which the Prince of Glory died, 
My richest gain I count but loss, 
And pour contempt on all my pride. 
Forbid it, Lord, that I should boast 
Save in the Cross of Christ, my God; 
All the vain things that charm me most,  
I sacrifice them to His Blood. 
See from His Head, His Hands, His Feet, 
Sorrow and love flow mingling down; 
Did e'er such love and sorrow meet, 
Or thorns compose so rich a crown? 
Were the whole realm of nature mine, 
That were an offering far too small; 
Love so amazing, so divine, 
Demands my soul, my life, my all. 
To Christ, Who won for sinners grace 
By bitter grief and anguish sore, 
Be praise from all the ransom'd race, Forever and e vermore. 
 
- I.  Walts  What Jesus Means To Me 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49   
ROCK OF AGES  
Rock of ages, cleft for me, 
Let me hide myself in Thee; 
Let the Water and the Blood, 
From Thy riven Side which flow'd 
Be of sin the double cure, 
Cleanse me from its guilt and power. 
 
Not the labours of my hands  
Can fulfill Thy law's demands;  
Could my zeal no respite know,  
Could my tears for ever flow,  
All for sin could not atone;  
Thou must save, and Thou alone. 
 
Nothing in my hand I bring,  
Simply to Thy Cross I cling;  
Naked, come to Thee for dress;  
Helpless, look to Thee for grace;  
Foul, I to the Fountain fly;  
Wash me, Saviour, or I die. 
 
While I draw this fleeting breath,  
When my eyelids close in death,  
When I soar through tracts unknown,  
See Thee on Thy judgment Throne;  
Rock of ages, cleft for me.  
Let me hide myself in Thee. 
- A. M. Toplady  
 