The Lost Oaks of California Ave  --

17 September 2009A week ago, California Avenue in Palo Alto was one of the nicest
places in Silicon Valley.  Palo Alto is unusual in having two
downtowns, because it's a merger of two towns, Palo Alto, whose
downtown is University Ave, and the older town of Mayfield, whose
downtown is California Ave.What made California Ave unique were the beautiful old oaks
that lined the streets.  Until the city 
cut every one of them down
earlier this week.  I was there this afternoon, and everyone is
talking about it.  People are in shock.I'm still trying to figure out what happened.  From what I can tell
so far, the city cut down the trees as part of a plan sponsored by an
organization called CAADA (the California Avenue Area Development
Association) for "improving" California Ave.
Apparently some planner decided that maple trees would be nicer
than oaks.If they were going to replace the trees, why didn't
they do it gradually?  This is hard to believe, but according to
this 
news article, they thought the street would look more "tidy"
if all the trees were the same height:
 Officials considered doing the replacement project in
phases, but eventually decided to "bite the bullet and do it all
at once," said Ronna Devincenzi, president of the California Avenue
Area Development Association. She said that will allow the new trees
to grow in at uniform height, giving the street a more tidy appearance.

Tidy.  They cut down mature oaks 
in order to replace them with a bunch of maple
saplings because that would look tidier?CAADA says that the trees were cut down because 80% of them were
diseased.  I have trouble believing that.  They didn't look diseased.
When a bunch of trees
in the way of a development project are suddenly found to be diseased,
I look for alternative explanations.We can't bring the trees back.  The oaks of California Ave are
gone, and it would take more than our lifetimes to grow them back.
But we can find out how this disaster happened and try to prevent
something similar from happening again.If you'd like to know what happened to the oaks of California Ave,
you can reach Ronna Devincenzi, the president of CAADA, at
rdevincenzi@akrealty.com, and Palo Alto mayor Peter Drekmeier at
pdrekmeier@earthlink.net.
Update: 18 SeptemberThe mayor, city council, and city manager 
do 
not seem to have been 
consulted about the decision to cut down all the trees on California
Avenue.  Apparently that decision was made by someone else.  It's still
unclear who.I'm now trying to piece together the chain of events that led
to this terrible mistake.  If anyone has any leads, please let me
know at pg@ycombinator.com.
Update: 27 SeptemberWe're getting closer to being able to figure out how this happened, though everyone involved is stonewalling.  It now looks as if the plan to cut down all the trees was initiated either by the city project engineer, who was, according to this news story Woojae Kim, or by the CAADA board of directors.The web page listing the CAADA board of directors was recently removed, but was still in the Google cache:President: Ronna Devincenzi, Realtor Alhouse-King Realty
Vice President: Jim Stevens, Country Sun Natural Foods
Secretary: Terry Shuchat, Keeble and Shuchat
Treasurer: George Langford, Hewlett-Packard
Mark Luchesi, Mollie Stone's Market
Elizabeth Bishop, Bishop Corporation
Karl Broussard, Kinko's
Lynn Davidson, California Paint & Wallpaper
Gerald Brett, Language Pacifica
Warren Wong, Hotel CaliforniaI don't know for sure if these are the exact people who voted to cut down the trees; this list could be old; but I suspect these people would be good ones to start asking what happened.California Avenue Trees Get the AxeToppled trees on Palo Alto's California Avenue kindle debate'Clearcutting' Surprises City Manager, Council Canopy 'shocked' at Cal Ave tree removal Canopy: "gaping hole left in the heart of this part of town"Trees: City Acknowledges Communication ErrorPalo Alto city staff take fall for tree-chopping fiascoTrees chainsawed before city's approval was final Keene: Outreach failure on trees a 'mistake' Palo Alto announces meetings to discuss California Avenue tree removal




    









