Filters vs. Blacklists --

September 2002The real test of any technique for eliminating spam is not how much spam
you can stop, but how much spam you can stop without stopping a significant
amount of  legitimate email.   
That is, how do you design a defense against spam so
that the error in the system is nearly all in the direction of false negatives
rather than false positives?One great advantage of 
Bayesian filtering is that it generates few false
positives.  This
is the main reason I prefer it to other antispam techniques, particularly
blacklisting.Simply blocking mail from any server listed on a
blacklist, as some ISPs do now, is in effect a clumsy form of filtering--
one that generates a large number of false positives, and yet only
catches a 
small percentage 
of spam.  Spammers seem to have
little trouble staying a step ahead of blacklists.Blacklists have been around for years.  If they worked, we'd know by now.
But according to a recent study, 
the MAPS RBL, probably the best known
blacklist, catches only 24% of spam, with 34% false
positives.  It would take a conscious effort to write a content-based filter
with performance that bad.Another advantage of filtering over blacklisting is that there is less
potential for abuse.  Like other kinds of vigilantes, antispam vigilantes often 
do more
damage 
than the problem they're fighting.  The ACLU, the Electronic Frontier
Foundation, and Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility
(among others) have all condemned 
the practices of groups like MAPS.The problem is not just that these groups' methods are unethical.
Their unethical methods are why their numbers are bad.  The worst
of them will blacklist anyone who makes them mad
enough, whether their server is a source of spam or not.  
Obviously, this is not
going to generate very good filtering performance.In effect, MAPS wastes most of its bullets on civilians.Bayesian filters, because they're just programs, don't take spam personally. 
As a result, they make fewer mistakes.So if you want to fight spam, work on filters.  (Think globally, act locally.)
This approach is not only more 
effective, it's also less likely to turn you into a nut.I'm not saying it's a waste of time to keep track of spam sources.  But I do think
that whether an email comes from a server on a list of (supposed) spam
sources is just one piece of evidence among many, and probably fairly
unimportant evidence compared to the content of the email.Ultimately, I think filters will put a stop to groups like MAPS.   They only
have the power that they do because ISPs are desperate and feel
they have no alternative.  If ISPs start to do content-based filtering, 
or know that their users are, they won't have to rely on such crude
methods much longer.More Info:Internet News: When Spam Policing Gets Out of ControlEFF: Statement Regarding Anti-Spam MeasuresNetwork World: The Spam PoliceZDNet: Spam: The Last CrusadeWhen Everything Was Spam to ISPCoalition Statement Against "Stealth Blocking"Slashdot: MAPS RBL is now CensorwareCNET: Canning Spam Without Eating Up Real Mail




    









