Gateway High School, 1981 --

Popular GirlsSusie, second from right, was 
she's just standing strangely.)Lisa, far left, went to Gateway for a 
year between prep schools.  She seemed out of
place, in a good way.  She didn't
believe in big hair, and was known to have
read books.Tough GuysThe tough guys in my high school were pretty scary.  Fortunately,
by this time I hardly ever ran into them.A friend of mine who went to a good east coast high school looked
at this picture and said "this looks like a picture from prison."    And yet I 
believe my school was above average, statistically.Mr. GatewayIf kids in my school had spent as much time studying math
as they did lifting weights, we could have run our own
Manhattan Project in house.I lifted weights too.  I started at about fifteen, mostly to protect myself.
By the time I graduated I could bench press around 200.
It was kind of fun, actually.Valedictorian (Almost)Here's my friend Rich in gym class.  He would have been
valedictorian, but came second on a technicality.  
Rich wrote large parts of Mach and is now a fairly big
cheese at Microsoft.  Believe it or not, he later took up
rowing, and is now an avid mountain climber.Pep RallyFootball is taken
very seriously in Western Pennsylvania.  When I entered high school, the quarterback
of our rival Central Catholic was Dan Marino.Looking at this picture now, what I notice is the uniformity.
The same clothes, the same hair, the same facial expressions,
the same gestures.Chess ClubThat's me, top left.  How unhappy we all look.  Well, we probably
were unhappy.  The kind of things we were interested in didn't count
for much in our high school.Jonathan Yedidia, lower 
left, later became a
professional chess player.  It was not so
much a question of whether he would win as how many
pieces he would spot you.A Great TeacherDoc Schultz was a great teacher.  His class felt like a college 
class.  What was he doing in our school?(I was alarmed to hear from several friends that they 
thought I'd made this page as a joke.  So let me state explicitly, all these pictures
are scanned from my junior-year high school yearbook.  Yes, my high school 
had bodybuilding contests; yes, that muscular guy was a high
school student, and not the only one who looked like that; yes, Dan Marino
was the quarterback of our high school rival; and yes, 
that is me in the upper left in the chess club.)Thanks to new media expert Maria Daniels for scanning these images.





    









