Hijacking is Buffer Overflow --

September 2001If you want to defend against hijackings, the problem you're trying to 
solve is one that programmers know well: the buffer overflow
attack.In a buffer overflow attack, someone gives a program much
more data than it was expecting.  The data is too long
for the memory allocated for it and overflows
into the memory occupied by the program itself.  
Suddenly the computer is running the attacker's code.In a hijacking, the same thing happens to a plane.  A plane
has two separate spaces, one for the people carried on it,
and one for the people who control it.  A hijacking happens
when passengers overflow into the cockpit from the cabin.
What was cargo is now in control.  By promoting themselves
from data to code, hijackers on September 11th promoted
box-cutters into 400,000 lb. incendiary bombs.How do programmers solve the problem?  There are two defenses,
one that works and one that doesn't.The defense that doesn't work is to check the data on the way in, 
to make sure it isn't longer than the memory set aside for it.
The problem here is that you might forget to check, or do
it incorrectly.  And in fact this happens all the time.
Everyone has known about buffer overflow
for at least 15 years, and still software gets written that is
vulnerable to it.The defense that does work is to keep code and data in 
separate places.  Then there is no way to compromise code by
playing tricks with data.  Garbage-collected languages like
Perl and Lisp do this, and as a result are immune
from buffer overflow attacks.To programmers, at least, this would suggest that the most
reliable way to prevent hijackings is to separate the   
cockpit from the cabin.  You still need to watch who gets
on the plane, to prevent people from simply blowing it
up.  But as long as you keep passengers out of the cockpit
you can prevent anyone taking control of the plane.It might be enough
just to keep the cockpit door locked, and make it strong
enough that to get through it you'd need something harder
to smuggle onboard a plane than a box-cutter.I'm sure the government is working on the problem.  I just
hope they understand as well as we do that it is never
enough just to check what comes in.




    









