On Lisp --

On Lisp is a comprehensive study of advanced Lisp
techniques, with bottom-up programming as the unifying theme.
It gives the first complete description of macros and
macro applications.  The book also covers important
subjects related to bottom-up programming, including
and embedded languages.
The final chapter takes a deeper look at object-oriented
programming than previous Lisp books, showing the step-by-step
construction of a working model of the Common Lisp Object System
(CLOS).As well as an indispensable reference, On Lisp is a
source of software.  Its examples form a library of functions
and macros that readers will be able to use in their own
Lisp programs.Prentice Hall, 1993, 432 pages, paperback.  ISBN 0130305529.New: Download it for free."The first book that really explains what Lisp is all about."- John Foderaro, Franz Inc."On Lisp draws the reader in from the very first sentence.
The author's writing style is clear and articulate,
but comfortably informal.  The subject matter is important,
and has not been adequately treated
in previous books.  The chapters on macros present important
material that is virtually unique to this book.The chapter on object-oriented programming is excellent.
The author builds a nice mini-CLOS to teach basic object-oriented
techniques, but then wisely switches to real CLOS to cover the
more advanced topics."- David Touretzky, Carnegie-Mellon University"An excellent description of the real essence of Lisp."- Thomas Cheatham, Harvard University"As with his other book, ANSI Common Lisp, Graham writes 
in a fluid style that is a pleasure to read."- Amazon.Com"The topics On Lisp covers are extremely useful for any seriously
aspiring Lisp programmer.  I think it's a great idea to collect in one
place programming techniques normally attainable only the hard
way. The examples, which are plentiful and excellent, are one of
the significant strengths of the book."- Skona Brittain, Developer of NanoLispDownloadAmazonCodeErrataCall for Bugs




    









