Dan Weinreb on NIL --

(Here Dan Weinreb replies to 
Olin Shivers with a 
description of some of the extenuating factors in the history of NIL.)You have to take into account who their user community was.  The
                    Macsyma people were a very large constituency.  It was clear that
                    high-speed bignums were way up there on the priority list -- NIL with
                    slow bignums would be deemed a failure.It would have helped them a lot if a lot of the people knowledgable
                    about Lisp implementation had not been off working on Lisp machines
                    instead of being part of the NIL team.  They had very extensive
                    requirements, including "do everything that Maclisp does at least as
                    well as Maclisp does it", which was a tall order.  The "quick and
                    dirty prototype" path that Jonathan took with T was not considered
                    suitable.  (At least that's how I remember it, not that I was really
                    involved directly with NIL...)By the way, while we're talking history, let me mention that it took
                    an *amazingly* long time for SETF to be invented.  In retrospect, it's
                    seems so simple and obvious.  But the MIT Lisp community went through
                    many generations of structure-macro-packages before SETF came along,
                    at which point it was instantly obvious to everybody that SETF was the
                    answer.  (I'm not sure who invented it, but I'm pretty sure it was
                    either Dave Moon or Alan Bawden.)And nested backquotes flummoxed all of us for quite some time.  Moon
                    and I and Bawden had noticed that nesting backquotes just didn't work,
                    but we didn't understand why.  Finally Bawden groked it in all its
                    fullness and discovered that actually it *did* work; our problem was
                    that we had not yet discovered the ",'," construct.So I hope this is encouraging for newcomers: although other (very
                    smart) people have tramped all over the garden, it there may yet be
                    still-undiscovered gems hiding under that next stone.




    









