ATTALLAH SH ABAZZ: FORE WORD
M. S. HANDLER: IN TRODUCT ION
CHAPT ER ONE : NIGH TMARE
CHAPT ER TWO: MASCOT
CHAPT ER THREE: "HOMEB OY"
CHAPT ER FOUR: L AURA
CHAPT ER FI VE: H ARLEMI TE
CHAPT ER S IX: DETRO IT RED
CHAPT ER S EVEN: HUST LER
CHAPT ER E IGHT : TRAPPED
CHAPT ER NINE: CAUGHT
CHAPT ER TEN: S ATAN
CHAPT ER E LEVEN: S AVED
CHAPT ER TWELVE: SAVIOR
CHAPT ER THIRTEEN: MINI STER MALCO LM X
CHAPT ER FOUR TEEN: B LACK MUSLIMS
CHAPT ER FIF TEEN: ICARUS
CHAPT ER S IXTEEN: OUT
CHAPT ER S EVEN TEEN: MECCA
CHAPT ER E IGHT EEN: EL-HAJJ MA LIK EL-SHA BAZZ
CHAPT ER NINE TEEN: 1 965
ALEX HALEY: EPILOGUE
OSSIE D AVIS: ON MALCOM [sic]
 
ATTALLAH SH ABAZZ
FORE WORD
 
Behold, Americ a. Just when o ur country's cultural evol ution appears to have t he m an who was 
the author o f the interna tionally acclaim ed _Roots_ p assed away  suddenly  in the middle of the 
night. Alex Haley  and I had discussed the possibilit y of my writing his a utobiograp hy to 
acknowledge our liter ary circle, our family of writers-my  father to him an d him to me.
 
Six years have pass ed si nce I  received t his initial requ est to pre pare a new foreword  for my 
father's li fe story . My god father's wish was  that I commemorate my father's li fe by writing about 
some o f the significant eve nts that have s erved as a postscript f or his extra ordinary  life story , but 
to do this it is esse ntial t o begin w ith the legac y that my father himsel f was heir to from the 
begin ning.
 
In 1919, my paternal grandparents, Earl and Louisa Little , married a nd bega n their large family of 
eight c hildren. At the same tim e they both worked s teadfastly as crus aders for Marcus Garve y's 
Universal Negro I mprove ment Associa tion, acting a s chapter presid ent and writer/tra nslat or for 
more than a d ecade. Their c hildren were d eeply involved a nd inspire d by their parents' missi on to 
encourage self-reliance and uphold a  sense o f empowerme nt for people of the African Diaspora .
 
Given the turbul ence , fear, and despair of the depressio n era , with its economic dro ughts a nd 
racial an d social in equities, my grand parents c ould n ever have i magined that one of their own 
childre n would have his liken ess on  a Unite d States po stal s tamp b efore the century's en d.
 
Eight y years lat er, on January 20,1999, pri de filled Harlem's historic Apollo Theatre a s six of Earl 
and Louisa Little's g randdaugh ters sa t encircled by a body of fifteen hundred, as family, friends, 
esteemed guests , and well -wishers gat hered to cele brate a momentous o ccasio n-the unveiling  of 
the Unit ed States P ostal Service's n ewest rele ase i n its Bl ack Heritage S tamp S eries.
 
The issua nce o f the stamp with the image o f El-Hajj Malik  El-Shabazz-known to the world as 
Malcolm X and fondly loved by mysel f and my five sist ers as Daddy- will provide a source of 
eternal pri de to his children . While this was  indeed a glorious m oment, it does not cancel the pain of the loss o f both our par ents, or eve n kiss awa y the ache of their absence . What it certainly 
does is a dd to the blessings  of our dowry.
 
The stamp also s erves a s a remin der o f the stock f rom which we we re born and confirms 
significantly that how one lives  his or h er life today stands as a testament to one's forever a fter.
 
In his gen uine humility and pure d edication to serv ice, my father had no idea of the potency  of his 
deeds, of the impact his li fe would have o n others, or o f the legac y that was to unfold. As he and 
my godfather, Alex Haley , worked diligently  to complete this classic work- in person, from airport 
telephones, via  ship t o shore, or over f oreign wire services-he could never h ave imagine d by 
America's t one in his final d ays that his words, p hilosophy , and wisdom would b e so appreci ated 
and honored around the wo rld, or that it would still  offer inspirati on and guida nce t o so ma ny.
 
In my father's a bsence, my mother n urtured a nd protected the significance and value o f her 
husband's e ndless d evotion t o human rights. She was thrilled by the opening disc ussions a bout 
her h usband's im age ap pearing  on a U.S. postal stamp. From her p erspective, it was  not as 
inconceivable a s others h ave f ound it. To my mo ther, it was  his du e.
 
As the house lights d immed in t he Apollo Theatre, the flickering images o f black-and-white 
photographs a nd film clips o n the scree n chr onicled my father's lif e. Bittersweet , his yout hful face 
and broad smile caresse d my he art. As the documentary  film move d forward, t he voice-over o f 
our d ear family friend and loving  "uncle" actor Ossie Davis  delivered t he eulogy  from my f ather's 
funeral in 1965. This b ecame the backdro p for the montage o f nostalgicchildho od memories that 
played i n my  mind. Life with bo th parents and my little sist ers. Li fe joyous a nd uninterru pted.
 
When people ask how my mother m anaged to keep my f ather's memory  alive, a ll I can say is-for 
my mother, he never left. He n ever left her. He n ever left us. My  father's spiritu al prese nce is what 
sustained my mo ther. And we, their c hildren, were t he beneficiaries o f their ti meless l ove for one 
another.
 
Born and rais ed in a family that was  culturally  varied, I  innately gravitated to the rhythms of the 
world. Mo mmie was  our c onstant, as many mothers ar e. Daddy  was the jubilan t energy in our 
world. H e was  not at all like th e descriptio ns I grew up hearing. I n addition to being de termine d, 
focused, honest, he was als o greatly  humorous, d elightful, and boy- like, while at the same time a 
strong, f irm ma le presence in a house filled with littl e wome n. His wome n. My  sisters, me, and our 
mother. A colla boration o f qualities  that enchants me  even now.
 
". . . If you knew  him you would know wh y we mu st honor him," Uncle O ssie's voice co ntinued. 
"Malcol m was  our m anhood, our living, black m anhood. . . . and, in h onoring  him, we honor the 
best in o urselves. . . ."
 
A spotlight on the Apollo po dium brought m e back to the presen t as the announcer introduce d 
Ruby  Dee a nd Ossie Davis, the first of an intim ate selecti on of my f ather's esteemed comrad es 
and appreciators f rom the "front line" to speak and share their remembrances .
 
Aunt Ruby opened, "What a privi lege t o witness t he radical gon e res pectable in our times. . . ." 
Uncle O ssie co ntinued, "We in this community  look u pon this co mmemorative  stamp finally as 
America's st amp of approval. . .  ."
 
When I had mentioned the issua nce o f the stamp to others, th e news simply  stopped folks in their 
tracks. Touched. Teary-eyed. They could har dly believe it. They had to catch their br eath, or a sk 
me to repeat myself . "How can this be ?" they wond ered. "A stamp with Brot her Malcol m's f ace on 
it?" "What does it m ean?" "Is America re ally ready for a Malcolm X stamp, eve n if it is t hirty-four 
years  after his a ssassin ation ?"
 
I reflected on the m essage o f Congress man Chak a Fat tah, the ra nking  Dem ocrat o n the Postal subcom mittee, who commented, "There is n o more appropria te honor than this st amp because 
Malcolm X sent all of us a message t hrough his lif e and his li fe's work.
 
"Stamps a re affixed to envelo pes t hat contain me ssages, and when we rec eive an envelop e with 
this p articular s tamp o n it hopefully it is a message t hat will speak again t o the consci ence of this 
nation. Hop efully not just t o those of African d escent in America bu t to those who want t o speak 
and be heard on the question of human rights thr ougho ut the world. To this d ay Malc olm X  stands 
as a leader. His th oughts , his i deas , his c onviction, and his c ourage pr ovide an inspirati on eve n 
now to new genera tions t hat come."
 
I've aske d mysel f, What change in o ur societ y today per mits t he reevaluati on of my f ather's 
convictions o r his st ance on the human injustic es th at plague d the internation al lan dsca pe? For 
years,  he's been the subject o f a patchwork o f commentaries, n umerous judgm ents, and endless 
character a ssess ments from a spectrum  of self-appointed experts . But, in spite of the 
psychoa nalysis, Malcol m will always be exac tly who he is, wheth er or no t we as a society  ever 
succeed in figuring  him out. Truth d oes not change, only  our aware ness o f it.
 
Not everyone agre ed with my f ather's p hilosophy  or methodology ; he was  considere d 
complicat ed, intricat e, and complex. Nevertheless , he was always  a focused man with a 
commit ment and a program. His pl an of action, regardless of the stages of his life, his age nda, 
and his perspective  were always poignan tly clear .
 
Malcolm X never a dvocat ed violenc e. He was an advocat e of cultural and social reco nstructio n-
until a balance o f equality was  shared, "by any means necessary ." Generally, this p hrase of his 
was misuse d, eve n by those who were his s upporters. But the statement was int ended to 
encourage a paraly zed co nstitu ent of America n cult ure to consid er the range o f options t o which 
they were  entitled-t he "means." "By any me ans necessary" meant exa mine the obstacles, 
determi ne the vision, find the resolve, a nd explore t he altern atives  toward diss olving the 
obstacles . Anyone truly familiar w ith my f ather's ide ology, autobiograp hy, and speec hes si ncerely 
underst ands th e signific ance of the now-famous phr ase.
 
My father a ffected America ns-black a nd white-in untold measure and not always  in wa ys as 
definitive as census charts and polls have dic tated. We've m isrepres ented the silent majority on 
both sides. There were bl ack f olks who carried a s mu ch disdain for my father as some white f olks 
did, and then there were s ome wh ite folks f or whom his life's lessons were a s valuabl e a blueprint 
for personal a nd spiritual d evelop ment as they have been for many black folks. Nevertheless, 
within t he range o f the boist erous and the sile nt there are s till folks brown, re d, and yellow on this 
contine nt and elsewhere who h onor and respec t the true m essage o f Malcolm X Shabazz.
 
Fortu nately, as a child, my surrou ndings we re filled with my father's p artners for social change. 
This warm, d evote d circ le of people was alwa ys on  the front lines o f the struggle, workin g to 
ensure t he rightful equilibrium o f human rights-no t just domestically , but globally -"by any me ans 
necessary ." Whether they were pers ons of note or simply  hardwork ing citizens, t hese individuals 
in my early  life were mission aries o f justice , each committed to doing his or her p art. As the 
dedicati on cerem ony continued at the Apollo, t he master o f cerem onies , activist-entertainer H arry 
Belafonte-yet an other c hildho od "uncle"-f ramed the importanc e of this historic m oment for the 
audience a ssemble d.
 
"Each year the Postal Service rec eives m ore than forty thousand reques ts reco mmending 
subjects f or U.S. stamps. Only  thirty or s o are chosen . Short of a national mo nument in 
Washingto n-and that's n ot a bad idea-a stamp is a mong the highes t honors t hat our country  can 
pay to any o f its citi zens."
 
The El-Hajj Malik El-Sh abazz/Malcol m X stamp is t he twenty-second in the Bl ack Heritage S eries, 
which was in augurat ed in 1978. It joins s uch lu minaries  as Harriet Tubman, Fred erick  Douglass, 
A. Philip Ra ndolph, Mary McLe od Bethune, M artin Lu ther King, Jr ., and others. I am hopeful that the initial pri nting  of 100 millio n sta mps will be some inspira tion t o those who collec t them or pass 
them on as gi fts to represe nt or e ncourage o ne's personal e nlighte nment and triu mph.
 
What my father a spired to be and what Allah had destin ed for him was  nurtured chiefly by the 
fertile t utelage o f his p arents while  his family was still together an d thriving as a unit. This was 
before his father's murder by  the Kla n, his mo ther's emotional br eakdown, an d the subseque nt 
scattering  of his siblings  and himsel f into an inadequa te and inattentive foster care syste m.
 
My grandmother ha d a direc t hand in the cultural, social, and intellectu al ed ucation of her 
childre n. The attitude of people o f color during t he '20s a nd '30s festered with racial te nsion that 
produce d var ying degrees o f misguid ed social a nd perso nal p araly sis. K nowin g this an d being 
globally educated me mbers o f the G arvey move ment cognizant o f the true origins o f the African in 
the Western He misph ere, b oth my g randmother a nd her h usband were int ent on equip ping their 
childre n with a clear aware ness o f the seed of their orig ins and it's a nces tral power . They knew 
that this would pr ovide a base of strength for their childre n. My  gran dmother knew  that in spite of 
America's soci al climat e, her childre n would b e able to discern f or themselves  when an act was 
genera ted by pure racism, or sim ply by ignora nce.
 
For exam ple, there ar e ma ny who k now the story  about when my f ather, while  on the honor roll 
and the eighth-g rade cl ass presi dent, was  told by his wh ite teacher that his dream to be a lawyer 
was unrealistic  for a "colored b oy." Maybe he should consi der carp entry. . . . He sh ared this s tory 
with us directly . The teacher act ually admire d my f ather grea tly and didn't want to encourage him 
to enter a field of study that he believed would n't allow  my father to excel. Misguide d, yet wel l 
intended. A teacher crippl ed by a country that offered littl e pro mise or future for its in digenous an d 
colore d inhabit ants.
 
Without the strong su pport of life with his p arents an d siblings under one roof and chafing under 
foster par ents an d teachers im posing limit ed state policies , Malcolm simply  dropped out.
 
This is us ually where t he recou nting o f my father's li fe begins. In the street. Hus tling,  numbers 
running,  stealing  . . . Indeed these accou nts were f actual an d he was alwa ys the first to tell them. 
But if his first fourteen years h adn't been rooted in a  healthy die t of education and the rich ness o f 
his h eritage, Malc olm would n't have found hims elf gravitating to the prison libraries a fter he was 
incarcera ted. The movie _M alcolm X_, wh ich was originall y contract ed as _X: The Mov ie_, shows 
him learni ng how to read the dictio nary as if he didn't a lready  know how. The truth is, it h ad been 
a while since he'd read anything. Bu t after being re acquainted with bo oks, he proceeded to out-
read the library  stock. I've s een letters that my f ather wrote from priso n in his early  twenti es, 
eagerly  looking  for the third volum e of a text, or wanting help to track d own out-of-print b ooks, or 
even s uggesting b ooks to his friends and family on the outside. The honor roll st udent 
reappeared as the layers o f street life faded. He read so m uch that he had to begin to wear 
glasses.
 
With the encourage ment of his br others, he  began s tudying  the tenets of the Natio n of Islam. 
While the little brothers di dn't adhere to all of the teachings personally, they did believe it was th e 
only current America n-based id eology  that had the potential to  unify black people and teach sel f-
pride the wa y their childho od affiliatio n with the Garve y movem ent h ad done. Also, the bro thers 
believed that through t he Natio n of Islam they could finally become par t of a larger family that 
could reu nite them o nce again .
 
It was as a res ult of the documentary he was producing  on the Natio n of Islam that Mike W allace, 
an uncompro mising,  truth-seeking pio neer of broadcas t journ alism a nd now the senior 
corresp ondent of _60 Min utes_, first m et my father o n an assignme nt. He rec alled t hose early 
meetings in his re marks a t the stamp's u nveiling:
 
"It was  forty years ago , back in 1 959, that I first heard a bout a man who calle d himsel f Malc olm X. 
We at Cha nnel 13 had set out to produce a  documentary  that we had intended to call 'T he Hate That Hat e Pro duced.' It was a report about a grou p and a man just beginni ng to get s ome 
attention in the white world. The group was th e Black Muslims a nd their leader was  Elijah 
Muhammad. [When] we finally bro adcast the documentary, America a t large f inally learn ed about 
the Nati on and their desire t o separate from the white m an. Their h atred of the white m an for that 
effectivel y was th eir credo back th en: The white ma n hates us, so we  should h ate the white m an 
back. Not long a fter the broadcas t, which ca used a consid erable stir, Louis Lomax inv ited m e to 
sit down f or breakfast for my first meeting with  Malcolm , and strangel y and rather swiftly after that 
morning a curious f riendship beg an to develop, and slow ly a trust . And on my par t a grow ing 
underst anding and event ually an admira tion f or a man with a daring mi nd and heart. And 
gradually  it became apparent to me that here was a genui ne, compassi onate, and far-se eing 
leader in t he making. A man utterly  devote d to his p eople, b ut at the same time he was bent on 
reconciliation b etwee n the rac es in America.
 
"And that, of course , that was her esy to the N ation of Islam  at the time.
 
"Malcol m was  still evolv ing, still fi nding his wa y, still finding his constit uency  back th en when he 
was struck down-to him not unexpect edly-struck d own by forces who f eared that his way , his 
leadership , might be a serious t hreat to their powe r. I have tr easured t he memory  of the Malcolm 
that I knew. I know he trus ted me  as a reporter, but in the few years th at I had the chance to know 
him, he sent me on my own voyage of report orial discover y and understan ding.
 
"[The] stamp that honors him  today is the kind of recognitio n he deserves  as a courageous 
American hero."
 
In time my  father's gro wth and independence would b e his un doing. The Natio n reprim anded him, 
stripp ed hi m of all p owers  of attorney , silenc ed him, and then exiled hi m. At first his exp ulsion l eft 
him feeling like a man without a home, much the way it had been in his childh ood. Ultim ately, 
howe ver, it gave hi m the freedom he needed.
 
He finally bega n acc epting long-standing invitatio ns he'd received to  travel  abroad. There we re 
many foreign he ads of state and prim e ministers who h ad long tak en note of this ch arismatic 
champion o f the people.
 
With my mo ther's blessi ngs for his jo urney , my f ather set out to visit Kwam e Nkrum ah of Ghana, 
Nasser o f Egypt, Princ e Faisal o f Saudi Arabia, and more. The warm welcomes a nd instant 
paternal relatio nships became an essen tial co mponent o f his clea nsing  and rebirth as he traveled 
througho ut Europe, Africa, and the Mid dle E ast, culmi nating in h is great pilgrimage t o Mecc a.
 
As my f ather's philos ophy expa nded, he bega n to empower , enlight en, a nd embrace an untold 
populace exte nding f ar beyon d the limits of governmental control. Howeve r, as long a s Dr. Martin 
Luther King, Jr ., rem ained in the South, and my father in the Nort h, neither was too difficult t o 
monitor. But whe n my  father a nd Dr. King became colle agues a nd decided to bridge t heir t wo 
philos ophies a nd unite the America n commonwealth toward a greater goal, they both became 
tremendous thr eats to the status qu o. Sadly, this fear was shared by some of their own 
constitu ents and supporters who be lieved that the union of both would weake n or d etract from the 
strengt h of each m ovem ent.
 
One man whose br ethre nship never wa vered was t he H onora ble P ercy Sutton, my father's 
attorney and a perpetual dr um for our family, who approac hed the podium at the Apollo . He 
paused reflectively and warmly  paid trib ute to my father, while placing my  father's li fe in its pr oper 
perspective:
 
"It is a miracle, really , if you thi nk about it!" The audience b urst i nto applaus e. ". . . The journey  of 
Malcolm X was long an d hard. . . . I can rem ember a  Minister Malcol m that nobody wante d to be 
near; law yers, acc ountants, p ersons of conseque nce t o the black c ommunity . . . were a fraid t o 
be identified with him, afraid to be seen with hi m 
"We would invite t hem to come because we ne eded lawyers, we ne eded doctors, we ne eded 
persons o f ability, but they were frigh tened, they were  fright ened by o ther people's a ttitudes 
toward Minister Malcol m. . . .
 
"Let me for a moment tell you who M alcolm X was.  Malcolm was n ot a spiteful man. Malcolm X 
was a revolutio nary. But he was not a mean-spirite d revolution ary, he was a gentle man. A kind 
man, a concerned man. "It was so bad, ladies a nd gentl eman, that even at Malcolm's d eath there 
were people who were a fraid to come to the funeral. . .  . There was no t a major bl ack ch urch in 
the entire city  of New York that was  willing to let us bury him from their edifices. It was a small 
church up  on Amsterdam Avenu e [the Faith Temple C hurch o f God] that permit ted us t o come."
 
Looking int o Mr. Sutton's f ace and seeing hi m diplom atically  balance all t hat he knew of my 
parents' c halle nges  brought ba ck an old sadness, o ne that had not healed sinc e the loss of his 
"little sister ," my m other, Betty. Feeling  Mr. Sutton's st eadfast devotio n, I found myself  massaging 
the ache from my own heart as I reflected on America's tre atment of my parents d uring  my 
childh ood. Des pite my yout hful joys an d sense of safety, the trials my p arents faced we re 
unrelenti ng. As well, th e way  my father was regarde d during  his lifetime ro bbed hi m of any peace 
in knowing that his life and contributio ns m attered , and that his f amily would live without jeopardy 
or repercussio n.
 
Now, perhaps sa nction ed by a karmic wave of "in due time," Americ a is ack nowledging Malcolm 
yet again.
 
The Honorable S. David Fin eman, member of the Board of Governors o f the U. S. Postal Service, 
commented on the appropriate ness o f this ack nowledgment duri ng his introductio n to the stamp's 
official u nveiling, " Today we ho nor n ot only  a great African American but a great American. 
Malcolm X was one of the m ost charismatic a nd pivotal f igures o f our time. He was  a passio nate 
and persuasive voice f or change, a nd his co ntroversial  ideas hel ped bring race relatio ns to  a 
national stage .
 
"[Malcolm] X poured his e nergy  and anger in to speaki ng the truth about the plight of African 
Americans . He s poke with a rare p assio n and eloque nce. He b ecame a world wide h ero. A symb ol 
of strength and defiance. He wasn't s hy about telling us where soci ety was  going 
wrong. ["Although] it has been thirty -four years  since we lost M alcolm X, his words, h is voice, his 
vision, his st ory of trans formation lives on . They h ave become part of us in a  journey to 
wholeness .
 
"We must never f orget the challenge Malc olm X  issue d to us. 'Let us learn to live toge ther in 
justice and love.'"
 
*     *     *
 
 
I had long kn own o f the individual a nd cultural valu es th at others plac ed on my father's lif e. But I 
would lear n of another me asurem ent and dis play of that value in the ma rketplace.
 
On October 2 , 1992, I was on locati on in southern Africa pr oduci ng a segm ent for a documentary 
film. Durin g a break in t he day, I returned to my hotel ro om for my a fternoon siest a.
 
This p articular a fternoon, I turned on my televis ion and search ed until I found a CNN broadc ast. 
Global news co mmentaries n ow became the backdro p in my ro om. I then pulled d own th e top 
sheet a nd blanke t on my be d so I could rest. No so oner had my he ad touched the pillow, I began 
to fade, exchanging  conscious s ounds o f the televis ion for those o f my in ner thoughts. But in a 
matter of moments I was interrup ted by the broadcaster st ating, " Earlier to day the Alex Haley 
estate auction ed off his items. .  . ." I instantly  sat up and listen ed in dis belie f. The newscast continu ed, "Among the items s old was  the orig inal ma nuscript o f _The Autobiography of Malc olm 
X_, w ith actual ha ndwr itten notes by Malcol m X himsel f."
 
I cannot possibly  recapture in words h ow I felt at that ins tant. It seemed inconceivable that such a 
personal a nd historic document could be bartered awa y so carelessly .
 
It was yet an other loss to contend with. I was still brok enheart ed about my godfather b eing gon e, 
and greatly  disappointed by the decision t o diminish t he value of his li fe's contributio ns by wa y of 
the auctio n block, a symbol that he fought so har d to dis mantle in the telling o f _Ro ots_. Do ubly 
painful was th e fact that this bidding war inclu ded a part of me and my f amily with neither our 
permission n or participati on. Had a nyone thought to offer my father's w ife and childre n first right 
of refusal?
 
I jotted down a s much data as possible during th e news coverage a nd then called the legal fi rm 
handling my god father's estate auction in Tenness ee. Although I d id reach a  represe ntative, little 
Information was  given  over the telephone so I scheduled a subsequen t call f ollowing my ret urn to 
the States.
 
During  my lo ng hours of travel a cross t he Atlantic, I wor ried about how this gross dis play may 
have b een tugging at my m other. How  was sh e feeling  about it all? As it was, sh e'd b ecome 
increasi ngly busy due to the explosio n of interest a bout her husband, and the pre parations f or the 
releas e of X: The Movie.
 
Malcolm X had been reborn during t his perio d. It was  approximately six weeks  prior to  the wor ld 
premiere a nd my mother and I were a bout to embark o n a press junket that was to exce ed a 
hundred interviews-print, e lectro nic, video-to promote the film and discuss t he resurgenc e of 
Malcolm .
 
The vibran t, pop-culture m arketing of the film gave pe ople per mission to claim a nd learn about 
Malcolm in a forum that was  not threatening. For p eople who d idn't know anything a bout his life, 
America n ow provided a healthier , safer atmosphere t o do so. It also gave the public th e freedom 
and opportunity to talk a bout Malcolm o ut loud, as opposed to in the m urmure d huddles th at 
reflected the clima te of the previous gen eratio n.
 
So much of the public and the m edia were un der the impression that the m aking of _X: The 
Movie_ was a new vent ure. That its d irector h ad to battle a lone, tooth and nail, on behalf of 35 
million b lack Americans . Things are n't alwa ys as they seem. The components in the ma king o f 
this f ilm we re very signific ant and intertw ined like t he main branch es on a family tree. They we re 
not to be forgot ten.
 
Shortly after my f ather's a ssassin ation in 1 965 and the publica tion o f _The Autobiograp hy of 
Malcolm X_, Marvin W orth, a friend of my f ather's fr om their te enage years, ap proache d Alex and 
my mother about making a film about my f ather's li fe. Once b oth agree d, Marv in brought James 
Baldwin on  board to write th e script a nd Arnold Perl t o modify the scre enplay. During what was to 
take twenty -five years  to realizatio n, Marv in Worth produced the Warner Bros , documentary _El-
Hajj Malik  El-Shabazz_. This was th e first d efinitive film stock collectio n of the life of Malcolm X 
and it tr aveled exte nsively througho ut the nation's universit y circuit as well  as to civil rights a nd 
Afro-A merica n nationalist even ts. In the meantime, this f raternity  of men worked diligently  against 
all se tbacks and odds to creat e a film res pectfully repres entative  of their brother, now gone-th e 
man who, in their eyes, America h ad betrayed.
 
But old attitudes a nd distorted stubborn impressions o f my f ather ou tlived Arnold P erl an d James 
Baldwin. Marv in Worth was the lon e torchb earer , a thorn in H ollywood's si de, h olding true to the 
initial dr eam for almost twenty -five years,  despite the taboo image o f my father. Single-ha ndedly, 
while keeping my m other a breas t of all u pdates, he continued to commissio n writers  again a nd 
again. 
Marvin's te nacity  was astonishing, to  the dis may of many. His dedicatio n and faithfulness were 
due to his own perso nal loyalt y to my par ents and his passi on for displ aying onscre en the 
integrity and power  of my f ather's me ssage.
 
In the late '70s, Marv in bega n to inclu de m e informally in the process of the film develop ment. 
This b ecame very cathartic f or me. I accompanied h im to meetings w ith prospective  directors a nd 
writers. Sh ortly thereafter, I bega n rea ding through di fferent drafts submi tted, and I recall him 
telling  me, "Some of them are overw riting.  They are trying to  'creat e' Malcol m as the her o. I just 
told them to start f rom scratch ; if you wr ite honestly, the hero will emerge. "
 
Those who k new Malcol m X Shabazz personally  want ed to be sure that the neg ative myt h aro und 
his m emory would b e erased by portrayin g the truths of his missi on, and the depth of his he art.
 
Finally , it was  the right time. In 1991, withou t any f urther d elays,  the deal to make the film of my 
father's li fe came through. A long-awaite d dre am was to be realized. But before it ma de it to the 
scree n, we  lost Alex.
 
My father, James Baldwin, Arnold Perl, and my god father, Alex Haley , were all with  us in spirit as 
my mother, her daught ers, an d Marvin Worth journeyed f orth toward th e final realization of this 
history-making film, which n ot only made it come to life, it ignite d a cultur al phenomenon.
 
During  this p eriod, total sal es of _The Autobiography of Malcol m X_ reac hed record numbers. 
Nearly  3 million c opies have b een sol d wo rldwide. At least twen ty new literary  works  that used my 
father's li fe as a subject appeared o n bookshelves. Young males, n ewly born, were be ing named 
Malcolm , Malik, an d Omowale a fter my father. His philos ophy, speeches, a nd life transitions were 
now being adopted by a whole new gen eration of youngsters, in terna tionally.
 Adult appreci ators were co ming  out of the clos et, waving th eir Malcolm b anners b oldly. Both 
American and foreign students u tilized hi m as their prototype for human development, spiritual 
dedicati on, a nd equality.
 
Parents o f the '90s were not as apprehensive as the parents o f the '60s, '70s, a nd '80s. Instead, 
as their m any lett ers an d comments in formed m e, they were relie ved that at a stage when t heir 
childre n's discipline and social mores were  being challe nged, their so n or d aughter h ad claim ed 
characteristics an d habits ass ociat ed with Malcolm's .
 
Psychologists, pro fessors, journ alists, a nd critics re disco vered Malcol m X for review and gen eral 
analysis. New  documentaries  unfolded, revealing  film footage long existing  yet pr eviously  edited 
from cultural co nsumptio n.
 
The sensatio ns, p assio ns, a nd sincerities o f this bl ack America n crus ader, plus his n ew cross over 
and internation al mark etability, now challe nged all t he prece ding assessm ents o f twen tieth-
century  historians, social exp erts, t he m edia, and most pointedly our governm ent.
 
The resurrectio n of Malcol m X also precipitat ed a new wave  of unauthorized expl oitatio n of his 
image . In the early days- the '60s, '70s, and '80s, before my f ather's liken ess ha d become a 
license d commodity-my m other di dn't m ind the bootlegged T-shirts, c asset te tapes, a nd framed 
photos bei ng sold a t various eve nts ar ound the country duri ng his birthday, Black Histor y Mont h, 
and the like. In  those years  she felt it was one of the pulses t hat kept Malcol m alive  on campuses, 
in community centers, a nd on cultural occ asions . As a mother and educator, she was co mforted 
by the thought that such re membra nces would enable young  people to have a n opportunity to be 
expos ed to her hu sband, ask questio ns, le arn, a nd achieve. Pass it o n!
 
When people commented on the exploit ation, sh e'd ge nerously reply , "It's love th at's m aking them 
do this f or my hu sband." 
On the other h and, if the intentions o f the merc hant were no t honorable , you'd b etter believe that 
she'd b e heading in their directi on to inform t hem of their m alfeasance a nd impropriety . It was 
imperative  to my mother that the m emory of her hu sband be resp ected with the honor she knew 
he deserved. I t was  not okay to mistre at her husband. _N ot okay_. In  his a bsence , for more than 
thirty  years, s he tirel essly guarde d his l egac y and fought to ensure that his id eology  was clear . 
For her , it was essential th at if she was  going t o los e her lifemate to the strugg le, then those f or 
whom h e had strugg led mu st be educated. They must be made aware o f the conviction, 
dedicati on, a nd sacri fices h e made on behalf of his faith in humanity and his missi on to unite us 
as one community, certain o f our inherent right to our own d estiny. My mother took no te of anyon e 
who maligne d any charact eristic  of her husband or a nything  associ ated with him.
 
To my m other, Malcol m X Shabazz was res erved f or herself , her children, and the m any p ersons , 
young  and mature, who h ave be en fortified, caresse d, and inspire d to employ aspects o f my 
father's li fe lesso ns an d personal disc overies a s a bridge t o their own inner strength and as a 
foundation for their "personhood."
 
"Person hood" is a word I first heard a s I listen ed to the eloque nce o f Brother Ran dall Ro binso n, 
presid ent of the TransA frica Forum, during  his rem arks at  the Apollo co mmemoratio n. W hile he is 
a generati on younger t han my f ather, both he and his el der bro ther Max alwa ys symbolized a 
genui ne and authentic c ontinuity through out the strugg le. They are m en of their word, like Haki 
Madhubuti, Kweisi Mf ume, and Da nny Glover-th e few in t heir gen eratio n who say  it, mean it, and 
live it. Thank God for them as they continue to make certain that my f ather's beat go es on .
 "I grew up in the Old South in Rich mond, Virginia, " said Brot her Ra ndall Robins on.
 
"I am one of the unfortunate millions who never k new or met Malcol m X.
 
"So perhaps I can pres ume to speak f or those millions like me, then and now, when I  say that 
Malcolm X was a shining  model for a new, whole, and proud black pers onhood.
 
"_Before_ we  in the South could s ee through th e mean veil  of Southern segregatio n-there was 
Malcolm X.
 
"_Before_ we  could function beyon d the humiliation of Southern bigotry -there was  Malcolm X.
 
"_Before_ we  could come to know Africa's glorious p ast-there was Malcol m X.
 
"_Before_ we  could find our s elf-esteem an d self-respec t-there was Malc olm X.
 
"And we owe hi m so dearly in way s our young must never b e allowed to forget.
 
"Where we  have n ow the very possibilit y of courage-we  _owe_ M alcolm X.
 
"Where we  have t he wisdom to search f or our his tory before the Atlantic slave tra de-we  _owe_ 
Malcolm X.
 
"Where we  have t he political in tegrity to simply  stand for something because it is ri ght-we  _owe_ 
Malcolm X.
 
"It is no t often that an Americ an governm ent institu tion honors t hose who em body a whole a nd 
uncompromised tr uth. But today is on e such rare occ asion . And I will keep it i n my  heart for the 
rest o f my li fe."
 
*     *     *
  
At that moment, Brother Robins on spok e for all of us, and I will forever c arry in my heart the 
sincerities o f that cere mony. In partic ular, I will remember that as my five younger sisters an d I 
gathered o nstage f or Harry Belafonte's closing re marks, I  remained full. As I list ened to the final 
notes s ung by  the Boys Ch oir of Harle m their song's m essage still lingere d in my h eart: "All b lack 
boys are born of heroes."
 
I thought o f my f ather a nd his p arents, my m other a nd her parents, each family's res pective 
lineage and hist ory of particip ation in s ocial move ments-Garve y on one side and Booker T. 
Washingto n on the other. I though t of my sisters an d I standing there, parentless, yet in c onstant 
celebratio n of our parents' lives. W e are bless ed every  day by th e union and the victorio us 
sojourns t hat Malcolm X Sh abazz and his b eloved B etty Saunders S habazz shared on this earth.
 
When I first realiz ed that my m other wouldn' t be here to witness her husband's like ness b eing 
unveiled on a United States postal st amp, after particip ating  in the initial discussio ns, a  lonely tear 
bega n to slip d own my cheek. B ut then it d awned on me that she wasn't missing th e occasio n. In 
fact, she had the best s eat in the house. She is n ow where s he lo nged t o be. Besid e her 
husband. And toget her they are toasting our healthy continuance a nd productive li ves.
 
As their el dest, I have ple dged ti me and agai n to care f or their da ughters, my younger sisters, in 
their memory , in their h onor, and with their celestial guid ance.
 When the curtain d escends on this c urrent wave of attention a nd the thematic celebrations cool 
down, my sist ers and I will remain p roud. Pr oud of a man and his w ife, proud of a cause a nd a 
heartbeat that was a m etronome for us long before the crossover  audience considere d them 
worthy of praise. We, the Shabazz daughters a nd our children , will forever  be nurtured by our 
legacy .
 
My inherent idealism yearns f or the issu ance of the commemorative sta mp and the living 
document of _The Autobiography of Malcol m X_ to  continue to bridge ignor ance with insight, and 
despondency  with ho pe. It is ess ential f or people to trus t-even through lo ng periods when dr eams 
may ap pear to have b een deferred, delayed, and oversh adowed-t hat there co mes a time when 
an unwaver ing w ill, a strong  belie f, and endless pr ayers bring great visions t o realization .
 
_The Autobiography of Malcol m X_ is evidenc e of one man's will and belief in prayer  and 
purpose . As you re ad my f ather's autobiography, wheth er for the first time or a fter a long absence, 
it is my ho pe that you wi ll come to know him foremost as a man. A man who lived to serve -initially 
a specific people, then a nation, and event ually all pe ople of the world. So me have said t hat my 
father was ah ead of his time, but the truth is h e was  on time and perhaps we were lat e. I trust t hat 
through his words we  may co me to honor and respec t all m embers o f the human family as he did. 
In closing, I o ffer you my father's own wo rds: "One day, may we all m eet together in t he light o f 
underst anding."
 
 
 
M. S. HANDLER
INTR ODU CTION
 
The Sunday before he was to officially  announce his ru pture w ith ElijahMuh ammad, Malc olm X 
came to my h ome to disc uss his p lans and give m e some necessary documentation.
 
Mrs. Handler had never met Malcolm before this f ateful vis it. She served u s coffee and cakes 
while Malcol m sp oke in the courte ous, gentle manner that was his i n private. It was  obvious t o me 
that Mrs. Ha ndler was im pressed by Malc olm. His p ersonality filled our liv ing room.
 
Malcolm's a ttitude was  that of a man who h ad reac hed a cr ossroads in his life and was m aking a choice un der an inner compulsio n. A wistful smile illumi nated his countenance from time to time-a 
smile t hat said ma ny things. I  felt uneasy  because Malcol m was  evide ntly trying to  say something 
which h is prid e and dignity  prevent ed hi m from expr essing.  I sense d that Malcolm was n ot 
confident he would succe ed in esc aping fr om the shadowy world  which h ad held him in thrall.
 
Mrs. Handler was quiet and thoughtful after Malcolm's d eparture. Looking u p suddenly, she sai d:
 
"You know, it was like h aving tea with a black panther."
 
The description s tartle d me . The black p anther is a n arist ocrat i n the animal kingdo m. He is 
beautiful. He is dangerous . As a man, Malcolm X ha d the physical  bearing  and the inner s elf-
confidence o f a born arist ocrat. And he was potentially  dangero us. No man in our time aro used 
fear and hatred in t he white ma n as did Malcol m, because i n him  the white m an sensed an 
implacabl e foe who c ould n ot be had for any price-a man unreservedly  committe d to the cause of 
liberati ng the black m an in America n socie ty rather th an integrating t he black m an into that 
socie ty.
 
My first meeting with Malcolm X took place in March 1963 in the Muslim resta urant of Temple 
Num ber S even o n Lenox Avenu e. I had been assigned by _ The New  York Times_ to investigate 
the gro wing pressures within t he Negro community. Thirty years  of experienc e as a reporter in 
Western and Eastern Eur ope had taught me that the forces in a  develo ping social s truggle are 
freque ntly buri ed beneath the visible sur face and make themselves f elt in many way s long b efore 
they burst o ut into the open. These gen erative  forces make themselves f elt through t he power  of 
an idea long before their organization al forms can openly challe nge th e establishm ent. It is t he 
merit of Euro pean political scie ntists a nd sociologists t o give a high priorit y to the power o f ideas 
in a social s truggle. I n the U nited States, it is o ur weakness to confuse the numerical stre ngth of 
an organization a nd the publicity  attache d to leaders with th e germin ating f orces th at sow the 
seeds o f social upheaval in our c ommunity.
 
In studying the growin g pressures within t he N egro community, I had not only to seek th e 
opinions of the establish ed le aders of the civil rights orga nizatio ns bu t the opinions o f those 
working  in the penumbra o f the move ment-"undergrou nd," so to speak. This is why  I sought out 
Malcolm X, whose ideas ha d reach ed m e through th e medium of Negro integratio nists. Their 
thinking  was alre ady reflecting a high degre e of nascen t Negro na tionalism.
 
I did not know what to expect a s I waited for Malcolm. I was th e only white pers on in the 
resta urant, an immaculat e establishme nt tended by somber , handsome, uncommunicative 
Negroes. Signs r eading "Smoking Forbid den" were p asted on the highl y polish ed mirrors. I was 
served co ffee but became uneasy  in this aseptic, sile nt atmosphere a s time p assed. Malcolm 
finally arrived. He was ver y tall, h andsome, of impressi ve bearing. His skin h ad a bronze h ue.
 
I rose to greet him and exten ded my ha nd. Malcol m's hand came u p slowly. I had the impressio n 
it was  difficult f or him to take my h and, but, _noblesse o blige_, h e did. Malcolm t hen did a curious 
thing which he  alwa ys rep eated whe never  we m et in pu blic in a  restaurant in New York or 
Washingto n. He aske d wheth er I would m ind if he took a seat facing t he door. I had had similar 
requests put to me in Eastern E uropean capitals. M alcolm was on  the alert; h e wished to see 
every perso n who e ntered t he resta urant. I quick ly realized t hat Malcolm constantly walked in 
danger.
 
We spoke f or more than three h ours at this f irst e ncounter. His views about the white m an were 
devast ating, b ut at no time did h e transgress agains t my own pers onality and make me feel that I, 
as an individual, shared in the guilt. He at tribut ed the degra datio n of the Negro p eople to the 
white man. He d enounced integratio n as a fraud. He c ontended that if the leaders o f the 
establish ed civ il rights organi zatio ns persisted , the social strugg le would end in bloodsh ed 
becaus e he was  certai n the white m an would n ever c oncede full int egration. He argue d the 
Muslim c ase f or separati on as the only solution in which th e Negro c ould a chieve his own identity, develo p his own c ulture, and lay  the foundations f or a self-resp ecting  productive co mmunity. He 
was vague a bout where the Negro sta te could be establish ed.
 
Malcolm refused to see the impossibilit y of the white m an concedi ng secessio n from the U nited 
States; at this s tage in his * c areer h e contended it was  the only  solution. He d efended Islam as a 
religion that did not recognize col or bars. He de nounced Christianit y as a religion d esigne d for 
slaves and the N egro clergy as the curse of the black man, exploiting  him for their own pur poses 
instead of seeki ng to liber ate h im, and acting  as handmaidens o f the white community in its 
determi natio n to keep the Negroes in a subservient p ositio n.
 
During  this first e ncounter Malcolm also sought to enlighte n me about the Negro me ntality. He 
repeatedly cautio ned me  to beware of Negro affirmations of good wi ll toward t he white man. He 
said that the N egro had been train ed to diss emble a nd conceal h is real t houghts, a s a matter of 
survival. He argue d that the Negro only tells th e white m an what h e believes  the white m an 
wishes t o hear, and that the art of dissembling  reached a point where even Negroes cannot 
truthfully say they understa nd what t heir f ellow Negroes b elieve. The art o f deceptio n practiced by 
the Negro was  based on a thorough un derst anding of the white ma n's m ores, he said; at the 
same ti me the Negro ha s remain ed a closed book to the white ma n, who ha s never dis played any 
interest in underst anding the Negro.
 
Malcolm's exp osition of his soci al ideas was  clear an d thoughtful, if somewhat shocking  to the 
white initiat e, but most disc oncerti ng in our talk was  Malcolm's b elief in Elijah Muhammad's 
history of the origins o f man, and in a gene tic theory devised to prove t he superiority of black over 
white-a theory stunning to me in its s heer absurdity .
 
After this first encounter, I realized  that there were two Malcol ms-the private and the public 
person. His public p erformances o n television and at meeting halls pr oduced an almost terrifying 
effect. His implac able mars haling  of facts and his logic had something of a new dialectic, d iabolic 
in its f orce. He frighte ned white television a udiences , demolished his Negro o pponents, but 
elicited a remark able res ponse f rom Negro audiences. Ma ny Negro op ponents in the end refused 
to make any public a ppearances on the same platform with hi m. The troubled white a udiences 
were confused, dis turbed, felt themselves thr eatened. Some bega n to consider Malcol m evi l 
incarn ate.
 
Malcolm appealed t o the two most desparate elements in the Negro co mmunity -the depressed 
mass, a nd the galax y of o Negro w riters an d artists who have burst on the Americ an sc ene in t he 
past decade. The Negro middle class-th e Negro " establish ment"-ab horre d and feared Malcol m as 
much as he despis ed it.
 
The impoverish ed Negroes respected Malcolm in the way  that wayward children respect the 
grandfather image . It was alwa ys a strange a nd moving experienc e to walk  with Malcol m in 
Harlem . He was kn own to all. People glanced at him shyly. Sometimes Negro youngsters would 
ask f or his a utograph. It always seemed to me that their a ffection f or Malcol m was  inspired by the 
fact that although h e had become a  national figure, h e was still a man of the people who, they 
felt, would n ever b etray  them. The Negroes have suffered too long f rom betrayals an d in Malcolm 
they sensed a man of mission. They knew his orig ins, with which t hey could identify. They knew 
his crimin al and priso n rec ord, which he  had never co nceal ed. They looke d upon Malcol m with a 
certai n wonder ment. Her e was  a man who had come from the lower de pths which  they still 
inhabited, who h ad triumphed over his own criminality  and his own ignora nce t o become a 
forceful leader and spokes man, an uncompromising  champion o f his people.
 
Although m any co uld n ot share his Muslim religious b eliefs, they found in Malcolm's puritanism a 
standing re proach to their own lives. Malcolm had purged hi msel f of all the ills that afflict th e 
depresse d Negro m ass: drugs, alc ohol, tobacc o, not to speak of criminal p ursuits. His personal 
life was  impecca ble-o f a puritanis m unattainable for the mass. Hu man red emption-Malc olm h ad 
achieved it in his own lif etime, and this was  known to the Negro co mmunity. 
In his television appearanc es an d at public m eetings  Malcolm articulat ed the woes an d the 
aspirations o f the depresse d Negro m ass in a way  it was un able to do for its elf. When he attacke d 
the white m an, Malcol m did for the Negroes what t hey couldn't do for themselves -he attack ed 
with a violence a nd anger that spoke for the ages o f misery. It was  not an academic exercise o f 
just giv ing hell to "Mr . Charlie. "
 
Many  of the Negro writers  and artists who are n ational f igures today revered Malcolm for what 
they consider ed his ruthless ho nesty in s tating t he N egro case, his re fusal to compromise , and 
his search f or a group identity  that had been destroyed by the wh ite ma n when he brought t he 
Negroes in c hains from Africa. The Negro wr iters an d artists regarde d Malcol m as the great 
catalyst, t he man who ins pired s elf-respec t and devotio n in t he downtrod den millions .
 
A group of these artists gathered o ne Sunday in my h ome, and we  talked about Malc olm. Their 
devotio n to him as a man was moving. On e said: "M alcolm will never b etray  us. We have s uffered 
too much from betrayals  in the past."
 
Malcolm's a ttitude toward t he white man underwent a m arked change in 19 64-a change t hat 
contribut ed to his break with Elijah Mu hammad and his racist doctrines. Malc olm's m eteoric 
eruption on the national sc ene brought hi m int o wider  contact with white m en who were not the 
"devils" h e had though t they were. He was m uch in demand as a speaker at  student forums in 
Eastern u nivers ities and had appeared a t many by  the end of his short care er as a national figure. 
He alwa ys sp oke res pectfully and with a certai n surprise o f the positive res pons e of white 
students to his l ectures .
 
A second factor th at contribut ed to his conversion t o wider  horizons was  a gro wing doubt about 
the authenticity of Elijah Mu hammad's version o f the Muslim relig ion-a doubt that grew into a 
certai nty with  more knowledge a nd more exp erience . Certai n sec ular practic es at  the Chicago 
headqu arters o f Elijah M uhammad had come to Malcolm's n otice and he was pr ofoundly 
shocked .
 
Finally , he embarked on a number o f prolonged trips t o Mecca and the newly independent African 
states through the goo d offices of the represe ntatives o f the Arab League in the U nited States. It 
was on his firs t trip t o Mecc a that he came to the concl usion t hat he had yet to discover  Islam .
 
Assassi ns' bull ets e nded Malc olm's c areer be fore he was able to develo p this n ew approach, 
which in ess ence recognized th e Negroes as an integral  part of the Americ an community-a far cry 
from Elijah Muha mmad's doctrine o f separa tion. Malcolm had reache d the m idpoint in redefining 
his a ttitude to this country and the white-black relatio nship . He n o longer inveighe d agains t the 
Unite d States bu t agai nst a  segm ent of the Unite d States repr esen ted by overt white 
suprem acists in t he South and covert white s upremacists i n the Nort h.
 
It was Malcol m's int entio n to raise Negro militancy  to a new high p oint with the ma in thrust aimed 
at both the Southern a nd North ern white su prem acists. The Negro pr oblem, which h e had always 
said should b e renamed "the white man's pr oblem," was  beginni ng to assum e new dimensions for 
him in the last m onths o f his life.
 
To the very end, Malcolm sought to refashion the broken stran ds between the Americ an Negroes 
and African cult ure. He saw in this t he road to a new sense of group identity, a self-conscio us role 
in his tory, and above all a  sense o f man's own wo rth wh ich he claim ed the white man had 
destroyed in t he Negro.
 
American autobiographical litera ture is f illed with numero us accou nts o f remarka ble m en who 
pulle d themselves  to the summit by their b ootstraps . Few  are as poign ant as Malc olm's m emoirs. 
As testimony  to the power o f redemption and the force of human person ality, the autobiography  of 
Malcolm X is a revelation. 
New York, Ju ne 1965
 
 
 
 
CHAPT ER ONE
NIGHTM ARE
 
When my mother was pregnan t with me, she told m e later, a party  of hooded Ku Klux Klan rid ers 
gallope d up to our home in O maha, Nebrask a, one night. Surro unding the house, brandishing 
their shotguns and rifles, they shouted for my f ather to come o ut. My mother went t o the front 
door an d opened it. Standing where t hey could se e her pregn ant c ondition , she told them that she 
was alone with her three small children , and that my father was away , preaching, in Milw aukee. 
The Klansmen shouted threats and warnings  at her that we had better get out of town b ecause 
"the good C hristian white p eople" were not going  to stand for my father's " sprea ding trouble" 
among t he "good" Negroes of Omaha with the "back to Africa" preachi ngs of Marcus Garve y.
 
My father, the R everend Earl Little , was  a Baptist mi nister , a dedicated organizer  for Marcus 
Aurelius Garve y's U.N.I. A. (Uni versal Negro I mprove ment Associa tion). W ith the help of such 
disciples a s my f ather, Garvey, from his headqu arters in New  York City 's Harle m, was raising  the 
banner of black-race purity  and exhorting t he N egro m asses to  return to  their ancestral African 
homeland-a cause which h ad made Garve y the most controversial bl ack ma n on earth.
 
Still sh outing t hreats, the Kl ansmen finally spurre d their horses and gallop ed around the house, 
shattering ever y window pa ne with their gun butts. Then they rode off into the night, t heir t orches 
flaring, as suddenly as they had come.
 
My father was enr aged when he returned . He d ecided to wait un til I was bor n-which would b e 
soon-an d then the family would m ove. I  am not sure why  he made this decisio n, for he was not a 
fright ened N egro, as m ost then were, a nd many still are today. My father was  a big, six -foot-four, 
very black ma n. He h ad only  one eye. H ow he  had lost the other on e I have n ever known. He was 
from Reynolds, Georgia, where h e had left school a fter the third or mayb e fourth grade. H e 
believed , as did Marc us Garvey , that freedom, independence and self-respec t could n ever be 
achieved by the Negro in America, a nd that therefore the Negro sh ould leave Americ a to the 
white man and return to  his African lan d of origin. Among th e reasons my  father h ad decided to 
risk and dedicate his life to help diss eminate this philos ophy am ong his people was  that he had 
seen four of his six brothers di e by violence, t hree of them killed by white men, includi ng one by 
lynching. W hat my f ather co uld n ot know then was th at of the remaining  three, including hi msel f, 
only one, my Uncle Jim, would die in be d, of natural c auses . North ern white p olice were lat er to 
shoot my Uncl e Osc ar. And my f ather was finally him self to die by the white ma n's hands.
 
It has always  been my b elief that I, too, will die by violence . I have do ne all that I can to be 
prepared.
 
I was my  father's s eventh c hild. He had three children by a previous m arriage- Ella, E arl, an d 
Mary, who lived in B oston. He h ad met and marrie d my  mother in Philad elphia , where th eir first 
child, my oldest full br other; W ilfred, was b orn. They moved f rom Phila delphia to Omaha, where 
Hilda and then Philbert were b orn.
 
I was next in line. My mother was twenty -eight whe n I was bor n on May  19, 1925, in a n Omaha 
hospital. Then we moved to Milwaukee , where Reginald was b orn. Fro m infancy, he had some 
kind of hernia conditio n wh ich was to handicap him physicall y for the res t of his li fe.
 
Louise L ittle, my mother, who was bor n in Gr enada, in the British W est Indies, lo oked like a  white 
woman . Her f ather was white. She had straight black hair, and her accen t did not sound like a Negro's. Of this white f ather of hers , I know nothing except her s hame a bout it. I remember 
hearing  her say she was  glad that she had never s een him. It was, of course , because o f him that 
I got my reddish-br own "mariny" color o f skin, a nd my hair o f the same color. I was the lightest 
child in our family. (Ou t in the world la ter on , in Boston and New  York, I  was among th e millions of 
Negroes who were  insane enough t o feel that it was  some kin d of status symbol to  be light 
complexione d-that one was actually fortunate to be born thus. But, still later, I learned to hate 
every drop of that white ra pist's blo od that is in me.)
 
Our f amily stayed only brie fly in Milwauke e, for my father want ed to find a plac e where h e could 
raise o ur own f ood and perhaps b uild a  business . The teaching o f Marcus G arvey stresse d 
becomi ng independent of the white man. We went next, for some reas on, to Lansing, Michigan. 
My father b ough t a house a nd soon, as had been his p attern, he was doing fr ee-la nce Christian 
preaching in loc al Negro Ba ptist c hurch es, a nd during t he week h e was ro aming a bout spreading 
word of Marcus Garve y.
 
He h ad begu n to lay away  savings  for the store he had alwa ys wante d to own when, as alwa ys, 
some s tupid local U ncle Tom Negroes b egan to funnel stories a bout his revolutio nary beli efs to 
the loc al white people. This time, the get-ou t-of-town t hreats came from a loc al ha te society  called 
The Black L egion . They wore bl ack ro bes ins tead of white. S oon, nearly  every where my f ather 
went, Bl ack Legio nnaires  were reveiling  him as an "uppity nigger" f or wanti ng to own a  store, f or 
living outsid e the Lansing Negro district, f or sprea ding unrest a nd disse ntion among " the goo d 
niggers. "
 
As in Omaha, my m other was  pregna nt ag ain, t his tim e with my  youngest sist er. Shortly  after 
Yvonne was b orn c ame the night mare night in 1929, my earliest vivid me mory. I remember being 
suddenly snatched awak e into a fright ening co nfusion of pistol sh ots a nd shouting and smoke 
and flames. My  father had shouted and shot at the two  white men who h ad set the fire and were 
running away . Our home was burning d own around us. W e were lu nging and bumping and 
tumbling all over ea ch other trying to esca pe. My mother, with th e baby in h er arms, jus t made it 
into the yard be fore the house crash ed in, shower ing sp arks. I re member we  were o utsid e in t he 
night in our u nderwear , crying and yell ing our heads off. The white police and firemen came and 
stood around watchi ng as the house burned down to the ground.
 
My father pr evailed on some friends to clothe and house us temporarily ; then he move d us into 
another ho use on the outskirts o f East L ansing. In those d ays Negroes we ren't allowed a fter dark 
in East L ansing proper. There's where Michigan S tate Universit y is located; I rel ated all o f this to 
an audience o f students when I spok e there i n January, 1963 (and had the first re union in a  long 
while with my  younger  brother, Rob ert, who was th ere d oing po stgradu ate studies in psycholog y). 
I told them how East L ansing harass ed us so mu ch that we  had to move again , this ti me two 
miles o ut of town, in to the country. This was  where my father built for us with  his own h ands a 
four-ro om h ouse. This is where I re ally begin t o remember things-this h ome where I  started to 
grow up.
 
After the fire, I remember that my f ather was  called i n and question ed about a permit for the pistol 
with which h e had shot at the white m en who se t the fire. I remember that the police were alwa ys 
dropping by  our h ouse, s hovin g things  around, "just c hecking" or "looking  for a gun. " The pistol 
they were  looking f or-which th ey never found, and for which  they wouldn' t issue a permit-was 
sewed u p insi de a pillow. My father's . 22 rifle and his shotgun, though, were ri ght out in the open; 
everyone had them for hunting birds and rabbits a nd other ga me.
 
*     *     *
 
 
After that, my memories are o f the friction b etwee n my  father a nd mother. They seemed to be 
nearly always  at odds. Sometimes my f ather would beat her. It might h ave ha d something to do 
with the fact that my m other h ad a pretty good educati on. Where she go t it I don't know. But an educated woman , I suppose, ca n't resist the temptation t o correct an  uneducated ma n. Ever y now 
and then, when she put those sm ooth words on  him, he would grab her.
 My father was also belligerent toward all o f the children, except me. The older on es he would 
beat almost s avagel y if they broke any of his rules-an d he had so many rules it was  hard to know 
them all. Ne arly all my whippings ca me from my mother. I've thought a  lot about why. I actually 
believe t hat as a nti-white as my father was, he  was subc onscio usly so afflicted with  the white 
man's br ainwashing of Negroes th at he inclined to favor the light ones, and I was his lightest 
child. Most Negro p arents in t hose days would al most insti nctively treat any lighter c hildren b etter 
than they did the dark er on es. It came directly  from the slaver y traditio n that the "mulatto," 
becaus e he was  visibly nearer to  white, was  therefore "better."
 
My two o ther im ages  of my father are both outside the home. One was his role as a Baptist 
preacher . He never pa store d in a ny regular  church of his own; h e was alwa ys a "visiting 
preacher ." I remember especiall y his favorite serm on: "That littl e _bl ack_ tr ain is a-c omin' . . . an' 
you be tter get all your  business right! " I gu ess this a lso fit his a ssociati on with th e back-to-A frica 
move ment, with Marcus G arvey's  "Black Train Hom eward. " My brother Philb ert, the one just older 
than m e, loved c hurch, but it confused and amaze d me . I would sit gogg le-eyed a t my f ather 
jumping and shouting as he preached, with the congregatio n jumping a nd shouting be hind him, 
their souls a nd bodies d evote d to singing  and praying.  Even at that young age, I just c ouldn't 
believe in the Christian conc ept of Jesus as s omeone divine. And no religious perso n, until I was 
a man in my twen ties-and then in priso n-could tell m e anything. I h ad very little respect for most 
people who repres ented religion.
 
It was in h is role a s a preacher t hat my f ather h ad most contact with t he N egroes of Lansing. 
Believe m e whe n I tell you th at those Negroes were in bad shape then. They are still in bad 
shape-t hough in a different way. By that I mean that I don't know a town with a higher perc entage 
of complac ent and misguid ed so-called "middle-class " Negroes-th e typical st atus-s ymbol-
orien ted, integration-se eking  type of Negroes. J ust rec ently, I was st anding in a lobby at 
theUnite d Nati ons t alking  with an African am bassad or an d his wife, when a Negro came up to me 
and said, "Y ou know me?" I was a little embarrass ed because I thought he  was someone I should 
remember. It turned out that he was o ne of those br agging,  self-satis fied, "middle-class " Lansing 
Negroes. I wasn't ingratiat ed. He was  the type who would n ever have b een associat ed with 
Africa, until the fad of having African f riends became a status-s ymbol for "middle-class " Negroes.
 
Back when I was gro wing up, the "success ful" Lansing  Negroes were  such as waiters a nd 
bootblacks. To be a janitor at some downtown store was t o be highly  respected. The real "elite," 
the "big shots," the "voices o f the race," were the waiters  at the Lansing Co untry  Club and the 
shoeshi ne boys at the state capitol. The only Negroes who really  had any money were the ones 
in the numbers racket , or who ra n the gambling  houses , or who in some o ther way lived 
parasiticall y off the poorest ones, who were t he m asses. N o Negroes were hired then by 
Lansing's  big Oldsm obile plant, or the Re o pla nt. (Do you remember the R eo? It was 
manufactured in Lansing, a nd R. E . Olds , the man after whom it was  named, als o lived in 
Lansing. W hen the war ca me a long, t hey hired some Negro ja nitors.) The bulk of the Negroes 
were either on Welfare, or W .P.A., or they starved.
 
The day was  to come when o ur family was so poor that we  would ea t the hole out of a doughn ut; 
but at that time we  were m uch better o ff than most town Negroes. The reason was  that we raised 
much of our own f ood out there in the country where we  were. W e were m uch better off than the 
town Negroes who would s hout, as my f ather preache d, for the pie-in-the-sky  and their heaven in 
the hereafter while  the white m an had his here on earth.
 
I knew that the collections my father got f or his pr eaching were m ainly what fed and clothed us, 
and he als o did other o dd jobs , but still the image o f him that made me proudest was his 
crusa ding and milita nt campaigning  with thewords o f Marcus G arvey. As young as I was th en, I 
knew from what I overhear d that my f ather was  saying something that made him a "tough " man. I 
remember a n old lady, grinning a nd saying to my father, "You're scaring th ese white folks t o death!"
 
One of the reasons I've al ways  felt that my f ather favored m e was that to the best o f my 
remembranc e, it was o nly me  that he sometimes t ook with him to the Garve y U.N.I. A. meetings 
which h e held quietly  in different people's h omes. There were n ever more than a few p eople a t 
any on e time-twenty  at most. But that was  a lot, packe d into someone's living room. I noticed how 
differently  they all ac ted, although sometimes t hey were the same p eople who j umped and 
shouted in church. B ut in these meetings b oth they and my father were mor e intense, more 
intelligent and down to earth. It made me feel the same way .
 
I can re member hearing  of "Adam driven out of the gard en into the caves o f Europe," "Africa for 
the Africans ," "Ethiopi ans, Awake! " And my father would t alk a bout how it would not be much 
longer b efore Africa would b e completely run by Negroes-"by black men," was  the phrase he 
always  used.
 
"No one knows when the hour of Africa's re demption cometh. It is in the wind. I t is co ming. On e 
day, like a storm, it will be here."
 
I remember seeing the big, shiny  photograp hs of Marcus G arvey that were  passed from hand to 
hand. My father h ad a big envelop e of them that he always  took to these m eetings. The pictures 
showed what seemed to me millions o f Negroes t hronged in p arade behind Garve y riding  in a fine 
car, a big black m an dress ed in a d azzling uni form with gold b raid o n it, and he was wearing  a 
thrillin g hat with t all plumes. I remember hearing that he had black f ollowers n ot only hi the Unit ed 
States but all ar ound the world, a nd I remember how the me etings always clos ed with my f ather 
saying, s everal ti mes, and the people chanting a fter him, "Up, you mighty  race, you c an 
accomplish what you wi ll!" 
I have never u nderstoo d wh y, after hearing  as much as I did of these ki nds o f things, I s omehow 
never th ough t, then, of the black p eople in Africa. My  image o f Africa, at that time, was  of naked 
savages, ca nnibals, m onkeys and tigers  and steami ng jungles.
 
My father would d rive in h is old black touring car, sometimes ta king me, to meeting places all 
around the Lansing ar ea. I remember one daytim e meeting (most were at nigh t) in the town o f 
Owoss o, forty miles from Lansing, which t he N egroes called "White City ." (Owosso's great est 
claim t o fame is t hat it is t he home town o f Thomas E. Dewey.) As in Ea st Lansing, no Negroes 
were allowed on the stre ets there after dark-hence the daytime meeting. I n point of fact, in t hose 
days lots o f Michigan t owns  were like that. Every  town h ad a few "home" Negroes who li ved 
there. S ometimes it would be just one family, as in the nearby  county seat, Mas on, which h ad a 
single  Negro family named Lyons. Mr. Lyons h ad been a famous football star a t Mas on High 
School, was highly  thought o f in Mas on, and consequ ently  he now worked around that town in 
menial jo bs.
 
My mother at this t une seemed to be always work ing-cooking, washing, ironi ng, cleaning,  and 
fussing over us eight c hildren. And she was usually  either arguing wi th or no t speaking  to my 
father. One cause of friction was that she had strong ide as about what s he wouldn't eat-and didn't 
want _u s_ to eat-inclu ding pork a nd rabbit, b oth of which my  father loved dearly.
 
He was  a real Ge orgia Negro, and he believed in eating plenty of what we  in Harle m today call 
"soul food."
 
I've said t hat my mo ther was  the one who whipp ed m e-at leas t she did whenever sh e wasn't 
ashamed to let the neighb ors think sh e was  killing  me. For i f she even a cted as though s he was 
about to raise h er hand to me, I would o penmy mouth and let the world kn ow ab out it. If anybody 
was passing by  out on the ro ad, she would eit her c hange her m ind or just give me a few licks.
 
Thinking a bout it n ow, I feel definitely  that just as my f ather favore d me  for being lighter t han the 
other c hildren, my m other gave me  more h ell for the same reason. S he was very  light herself but she favored the ones who were d arker . Wilfred, I know, was p articularly  her angel. I  remember 
that she would tell me  to get o ut of the house and "Let the sun shine on you s o you ca n get s ome 
color ." She went o ut of her wa y never to  let me become a fflicted with a sense of color- superiority. 
I am sure that she treated me  this wa y partly because of how she came to be light h erself .
 
I learned early  that crying out in pr otest could a ccomplish t hings. M y old er bro thers a nd sister h ad 
started to school when, sometimes, they would come in and ask for a buttered biscuit o r 
something and my mo ther, impatiently, would tell t hem no. But I would cry  out and make a fuss 
until I got what I want ed. I remember well  how my m other a sked me  why I couldn't be  a nice boy 
like W ilfred; but I would t hink t o mysel f that W ilfred, for being so n ice a nd quiet, often stayed 
hungry. So early  in life, I had learn ed that if you want s omething,  you had better ma ke some 
noise.
 
Not o nly did we  have o ur big garde n, but we raise d chicke ns. My  father would b uy some baby 
chicks a nd my mother would raise t hem. W e all loved chick en. That was one dish t here was  no 
argum ent with my f ather about. One thing in p articular t hat I remember ma de me feel grate ful 
toward my mo ther was  that one day I went a nd asked her for my own garden , and she did let me 
have my own little plot. I loved it and took care of it well. I loved especially  to gro w peas. I was 
proud when we had them on our table. I  would pu ll out the grass in my gard en by ha nd when t he 
first little bl ades ca me up. I would patrol th e rows  on my h ands and knees f or any wo rms and 
bugs, a nd I would kill and bury them. And sometimes when I had everything  straight a nd clean for 
mythings to grow, I would lie down o n my b ack b etwee n two  rows, a nd I would gaze up  in the 
blue sky at the cl ouds moving  and think all ki nds o f things.
 
At five, I, too, beg an to go t o school, leavin g home in the mo rning alo ng with W ilfred, Hilda, and 
Philb ert. It was  the Ple asant Grove S chool that went from kind ergarten through the eight h grade. 
It was two miles outside the city limits, and I guess t here was no problem about our attending 
becaus e we  were the only Negroes in t he area. In those days  white people in t he North u sually 
would "a dopt" just a few Negroes ; they didn't see them as any threat. The white kids d idn't make 
any g reat thing about us, either. They called us "nigger" and "darkie " and "Rastus" so m uch that 
we thought t hose we re our n atural na mes. But they did n't think o f it as an ins ult; it was jus t the 
way they thought a bout us.
 
*     *     *
 
 
One afternoon in 1 931 when Wilfred, Hilda, Philb ert, a nd I came home, my m other a nd father 
were having one of their argu ments. There h ad lately been a lot of tension around the house 
becaus e of Black Legio n threats. Anyway, my f ather had taken one of the rabbits wh ich we were 
raising,  and ordered my  mother to cook it. We raised ra bbits, but sold them to whites . My father 
had taken a rabbit from the rabbit p en. He had pulled off the rab bit's he ad. He was so stro ng, he 
needed no knife to behead chickens or rab bits. W ith one twist  of his big  black hands h e simply 
twiste d off the head and threw  the bleeding-neck ed thing b ack a t my mo ther's f eet.
 
My mother was cry ing. Sh e started to skin t he rabbit, pr eparatory  to cooking  it. But my f ather was 
so angry he slam med on out of the front door and started walkin g up the road toward t own.
 It was t hen that my m other h ad this vis ion. She had alwa ys be en a strange wom an in this s ense, 
and had always  had a strong int uition of things a bout to happen. And most of her c hildren ar e the 
same way , I think. W hen something is about to happen, I can feel something, sense something. I 
never have known so mething to  happen that has caught m e complet ely off guard-excep t once. 
And that was when , years  later, I discovered facts I couldn't believe about a man who, u p until 
that disc overy, I would gladly have gi ven my life for.
 
My father was we ll up the ro ad when my mo ther ran screa ming  out onto the porc h. _"Early! 
Early!"_ S he screa med his n ame. She clutc hed up her apron in one hand, and ran down acr oss 
the yard an d into the road. My  father turned around. He s aw her . For some reason, co nsidering how angry  he had been whe n he left, he wa ved at her. But he kept on going.
 
She told m e later, my mo ther did , that she had a vision o f my f ather's end. All the res t of the 
afternoon, she was  not hers elf, crying an d nervous an d upset. She finished cooki ng the rabbit 
and put the whole t hing in the warmer p art of the black s tove. W hen my f ather was not back 
home by our bedtime, my mo ther hugged and clutc hed us, and we f elt stra nge, no t knowing what 
to do, because s he had never a cted like t hat.
 
I remember waking up  to the sound of my mo ther's screa ming  again. When I scra mble d out, I 
saw the police in the Irvin g room; they were tr ying to calm h er down. She had snatched on her 
clothes t o go with th em. And all o f us children who were staring  knew  without anyone having  to 
say it that something t errible had happened to our father.
 
My mother was taken by the police to  the hospit al, and to a room where a sheet was  over my 
father in a b ed, and she wouldn't look, she was afraid t o look. Pr obably it was w ise that she didn't. 
My father's sk ull, on one sid e, was crush ed in, I was told la ter. Negroes in Lansing  have alwa ys 
whispered t hat he wasatt acke d, and then lai d across some tr acks f or a streetcar to run over hi m. 
His body was  cut a lmost in half.
 
He lived t wo and a half hours in t hat conditio n. Negroes then were stro nger than they are n ow, 
especially  Georgia Negroes. Negroes b orn in Ge orgia had to be strong simply  to survive.
 
It was m orning when we childre n at home got t he word that he was dead. I was si x. I can 
remember a  vague commotion, the house filled up with people crying, saying bitterly that the 
white Black L egion had finally gotte n him. My  mother was hysterical. In  the bedroom, wome n 
were holding smelling  salts u nder her nose. She was still hysterical at  the funeral.
 
I don't have a  very clear m emory of the funeral, eit her. Oddly, the main thing I r emember is th at it 
wasn't in a  church, a nd that surprised m e, since my  father was a preac her, and I had been where 
he preached people's f unerals in c hurch es. B ut his was in a funeral ho me.
 
And I remember that during th e service a big black f ly came down and landed on my f ather's face, 
and Wilfred sprang up  from his chair a nd he shooed the fly away, and he came groping back t o 
his chair-there were f olding ch airs for us to sit on-and the tears were  strea ming down his face. 
When we went by the casket, I remember that I thought t hat it looked as if my father's stro ng 
black face had been dusted with f lour, and I wished they hadn't put on such a lot of it.
 
Back in the big four-roo m house, there were m any v isitors f or another week or s o. They were 
good friends of the family, such as t he Lyons from Mas on, twelve  miles away , and the Walkers, 
McGuires, L iscoes , the Greens , Ran dolphs, a nd the Turners, an d others from Lansing, a nd a lot 
of people from other towns, whom I  had seen at the Garvey meetings.
 We childre n adjusted m ore easily  than our mother did. We couldn' t see, as clearly  as she did , the 
trials th at lay ahead. As the visitors ta pered off, she became ver y concerned about collec ting the 
two insura nce p olicies t hat my father had always  been proud he carried . He h ad always  said that 
families sh ould be protected in case of death. One policy apparently  paid off without any problem-
the smaller on e. I don't know the amount of it. I would im agine it was no t more than a thousand 
dollars, and maybe h alf of that.
 
But after that money ca me, and my m other h ad paid out a lot of it for the funeral a nd expe nses, 
she bega n going int o town a nd returni ng very upset. The company that had issu ed the bigger 
policy  was balki ng at paying o ff. They we re claiming th at my father had committed suicide. 
Visitors ca me again, and there was bit ter talk about white people: how could my f ather ba sh 
hims elf in the head, then get d own across t he stree tcar tracks to be run over?
 
So there we  were. My mother was thirty-four years old now, with n o husband, no provider or 
protector to take care o f her eight children . But some kind of a family routine got going again . And for as long as the first insuranc e money lasted, we did a ll right.
 
Wilfred, who was  a pretty stable fellow, bega n to act older than his age. I think h e had the sense 
to see, when t he rest o f us did n't, what was  in the wind f or us. He quietly  quit sc hool a nd went t o 
town in s earch of work. He t ook any kind of job h e could find and he would come home, dog-tired, 
in the eve nings, an d give  what ever h e had made to my mother.
 
Hilda, who alwa ys had been quie t, too, attended to the babies. P hilbert a nd I didn't contribut e 
anything. W e just fought all the time-ea ch other at home, and then at sch ool we would t eam up 
and fight white kids. S ometimes t he fights would b e racial i n nature, but they might b e about 
anything.
 Reginald c ame under my wing. Since he had gro wn o ut of the toddling st age, he and I had 
become ver y close. I suppose I enjoyed t he fact that he was th e little one, under me , who l ooke d 
up to me.
 
My mother bega n to buy on  credit. My  father had alwa ys be en very strongly against cre dit. "Credit 
is the first st ep into debt and back int o slaver y," he had always said. And then she went t o work 
herself. She would go int o Lansing an d find different jobs-in h ousework, or sewing-for white 
people. They did n't re alize, u sually , that she was a Negro. A lot of white p eople ar ound there 
didn't want N egroes in their ho uses.
 
She would d o fine until in some way  or other it got t o people who s he was, whose widow she 
was. And then she would b e let go. I remember how she used to come home crying, but trying to 
hide it, b ecause she had lost a job that she needed so much.
 
Once when o ne of us-I c annot remember which- had to go for something to where s he was 
working, an d the people saw us, and realized sh e was  actually a Negro, she was fired on the 
spot, and she came home crying, this time n ot hiding it.
 
When the state Welfare p eople bega n coming  to our h ouse, we would c ome from school 
sometimes a nd find them talking with  our m other, asking  a thousan d ques tions. They acted and 
looked at her, and at us, and around in our ho use, in a  way that had about it the feeling-at l east 
for me-that we were no t people. I n their eyesight we  were jus t _things_, that was  all. 
 
 
My mother bega n to receive two  checks- a Welfare check and, I believe, widow's pension. The 
checks hel ped. But they weren't en ough , as many of us as there we re. When they came, about 
the first o f the m onth, one always  wasalrea dy owed i n full, if not more, to the ma n at the grocery 
store . And, after that, the other on e didn't last long.
 
We began to go sw iftly downhill.  The physical  downhill  wasn't as quick a s the psychological. My 
mother was, above everything  else, a proud woma n, and it took its toll on  her that she was 
accepting ch arity. And her feelings we re communicat ed to us.
 
She would s peak sh arply to the ma n at the grocery store for padding th e bill, t elling  him that she 
wasn't ignoran t, and he didn't like t hat. She would talk b ack s harply  to the state Welfare people, 
telling  them that she was a grown  woman, able to raise her c hildren, that it wasn't necessary  for 
them to keep coming aro und so much, m eddling in o ur lives.  And they did n't like t hat.
 
But the monthly Welfare check was  their pass. They acted as if they owned us, as if we we re their 
private pro perty . As m uch as my mother would have liked to, she couldn' t keep them out. She 
would get p articularly  incense d when t hey bega n insisting u pon drawing us older childre n asi de, 
one at a time, out on the porch or somewhere, a nd asking us questio ns, or telling  us things-
against our m other a nd agains t each other.
 
We couldn't underst and wh y, if the state was w illing to give us packages of meat, sacks o f potatoes and fruit, and cans o f all kinds o f things, o ur mo ther obviously  hated to accept. W e really 
couldn't underst and. What I later u ndersto od was th at my m other was ma king a desperat e effort 
to preserve her pride-a nd ours.
 
Pride was jus t about all we  had to preserve,  for by 19 34, we really  began to suffer. This was 
about the worst  depressio n yea r, and no one we kn ew had enough t o eat or live on. Some old 
family friends visited us n ow and then. At first they bro ught f ood. Though it was ch arity, my m other 
took it. 
Wilfred was  working  to help. My mother was work ing, when she could find any kind of job. In 
Lansing, t here was a bakery where, f or a nickel, a  couple of us children would b uy a tall flour s ack 
of day-old bre ad and cookies, and then wa lk the two m iles b ack o ut into the country  to our ho use. 
Our m other k new, I guess, d ozens o f ways to cook things with bre ad and out of bread. Stewed 
tomatoes with br ead, maybe t hat would be  a meal. Something like Frenc h toast, if we had any 
eggs. Br ead pudding, sometimes with raisins in it. If we got hold of some hamburger, it came to 
the table more bre ad than meat. The cookies t hat were  always  in the sack w ith the bread, we jus t 
gobbl ed down straight.
 
But there were ti mes when there wasn't eve n a nickel a nd we would b e so hungry we were diz zy. 
My mother would boil a  big po t of dandelio n greens, and we  would ea t that. I remember th at 
some s mall-min ded neigh bor pu t it out, and children would te ase us, that we  ate "fried grass. " 
Sometimes , if we we re lucky, we would h ave oa tmeal or cornmeal mush three times a day. Or 
mush in the morning a nd cornbr ead at night.
 
Philb ert an d I were grown  up enough to quit fighting long enough t o take the .22 caliber rifl e that 
had been our father's, and shoot rabbits t hat some white n eighb ors up or down t he road would 
buy. I know now th at they just did it to help us, becaus e they, like everyone, shot their own 
rabbits. S ometimes, I remember, Philbert a nd I would t ake little Reginal d alo ng with us . He wasn't 
very strong, bu t he was al ways  so pr oud to be along. We would tra p muskrats out in the little 
creek i n back of our house. And we would lie quiet u ntil un suspecting b ullfrogs appeared, and we 
would sp ear them, cut off their legs, an d sell them for a nickel a  pair to people who lived u p and 
down t he road. The whites seemed less restricted in their die tary tastes .
 
Then, about in lat e 1934, I would guess, something bega n to happen. Some kind of psychological 
deteriorati on hi t our family circle and began to eat awayour prid e. Perhaps it was th e constant 
tangible evidenc e that we were de stitute. W e had known other families who h ad gone on relief . 
We had known w ithout a nyon e in o ur ho me ever expressing it t hat we had felt prouder n ot to be 
at the depot where t he free food was pa ssed out. And, now, we we re among t hem. At scho ol, the 
"on relie f" finger suddenly was pointed at us, too, and sometimes it was said aloud.
 
It seemed that everything  to eat in o ur house was  stamped No t To Be Sold. All W elfare food bore 
this s tamp to keep the recipie nts from selling  it. It's a  wond er we didn't come to think o f Not To Be 
Sold as a brand name.
 
Sometimes , inst ead of going  home from school, I walked the two mil es up  the road into L ansing. I 
bega n drifting from store t o store, hanging ar ound outsid e where t hings  like apples were 
displayed in boxes and barrels  and baske ts, and I would watch my chance a nd steal me  a treat. 
You know what a  treat was to  me? Anything!
 
Or I b egan to drop in a bout dinnertime at the home of some family that we kn ew. I knew that they 
knew exactl y why I was  there, b ut they never e mbarrasse d me  by letti ng on. They would invite 
me to stay for supper, and I would st uff mysel f.
 
Especially , I liked to drop in and visit at the Go hannases' h ome. They were nic e, older p eople, 
and great churc hgoers. I h ad watche d them lead the jumping and shouting whe n my  father 
preache d. They had, living with th em-they were raising hi m-a nephew who m ever yone calle d "Big 
Boy," and he and I got along fine. Also living with t he G ohannases was  old Mrs. Adcock, who went w ith them to church . She was al ways  trying to help a nybo dy she could, vis iting a nyone she 
heard was sick, c arrying them something. Sh e was th e one who, years  later, would t ell me 
something that I remembered a long tim e: "Malcolm ,there's o ne thing I like about you. You're no 
good , but you d on't try to hide it. You ar e not a hypocrite. "
 
The more I bega n to stay  away from home and visit  people and steal from the stores , the more 
aggressive  I became in my inclina tions. I never want ed to wait f or anything.
 
I was g rowing u p fast, physicall y more so than mentally. As I began t o be recogni zed more 
around the town, I started to become aware o f the peculiar attitude of white people toward m e. I 
sensed that it h ad to do with my father. It was an adult version of what several wh ite childre n had 
said at sc hool, in h ints, or so metimes in the open, which re ally expresse d what t heir par ents had 
said-th at the Black Legion or the Kl an had killed my f ather, and the insura nce c ompany  had 
pulle d a fast one in refusing to pay my m other the policy  money.
 
When I began to get ca ught st ealing now an d then, the state Welfare people beg an to focus on 
me when t hey came to our house. I can't re member h ow I first became aware that they were 
talking o f taking me away. What I first remember a long t hat line was my  mother raising  a storm 
about being able to bring  up her own c hildren . She would whip m e for stealing, an d I would try  to 
alarm the neighborh ood with my yellin g. One thing I have alwa ys been pro ud of is that I never 
raised my hand against my m other.
 
In the summertim e, at night , in a ddition to all t he other things  we did, some of us boys  would slip 
out down the road, or across t he pastures, and go " cooning" water melo ns. W hite people alwa ys 
associate d waterm elons with Negroes, and they sometimes c alled Negroes "coons" among all 
the other names, and so stealing  watermelo ns became "cooning" them. If white boys  were doing 
it, it implie d that they were only acting  like Negroes. W hites have al ways  hidden or justi fied all o f 
the guilts th ey could by ridiculing  or blaming Negroes.
 One Halloween night, I  remember that a bunch of us were out tipping over those ol d country 
outhouses , and one old farmer-I guess h e had tipped over en ough in his d ay-had set a trap for 
us. Alwa ys, you s neak up from behind the outhouse, then you ga ng togeth er an d push it, t o tip it 
over. This farmer had taken his o uthouse o ff the hole, and set it just in _front_ of the hole. Well, 
we came sneaking u p in single file, in the dark ness , and the two white b oys in the lead fell down 
into the outhous e hole n eck d eep. They smelle d so bad it was all we co uld st and to get them ou t, 
and that finished us all f or that Halloween. I had jus t miss ed falling in myself . The whites were  so 
used to taking  the lead, this time it had really gotten them in the hole.
 
Thus, in various way s, I learn ed various t hings. I picke d strawberries, a nd though I can't recall 
what I go t per crate for picking, I  remember that after work ing har d all o ne day, I woun d up with 
about a dollar , which  was a whole lo t of money in t hose tim es. I was so hungry , I didn't k now what 
to do. I was walk ing awa y toward t own with visions of buying  something good to eat, and this 
older white boy I knew, Richard Dixon, came u p and asked m e if I want ed to match nick els. He 
had plenty of change f or my dollar. In about a half hour, he had all t he change ba ck, incl uding my 
dollar , and inste ad of going t o town to buy something, I went h ome with no thing, and I was bit ter. 
But that was nothing compared to what I felt when I found out later that he had cheated. There is 
a way  that you can catch and hold the nick el and make it c ome up the way  you want. This was 
my first lesso n about gambling: if  you s ee somebody winning  all the tim e, he isn't ga mbling, he 's 
cheating. L ater on in life, if I were c ontinuously losing in a ny gambling  situation , I would watch 
very closely. It's like t he Negro in Americ a seeing the white ma n win all th e time. He's a 
profession al gam bler; h e has all t he cards a nd the odds stack ed on his sid e, and he has always 
dealt to our pe ople from the bottom of the deck.
 
About this ti me, my mo ther bega n to be visited by some S event h Day  Adve ntists who h ad moved 
into a h ouse not too far down t he ro ad from us. Theywould t alk to her for hours a t a time, and 
leave b ookle ts an d leaflets an d magazines f or her to read. She read them, and Wilfred, who h ad 
started back t o school after we  had begun to get the relie f food supplies , also read a lot. His h ead was forever  in some book.
 
Before long, my mo ther sp ent much time with t he Adve ntists. I t's my beli ef that what mostly 
influenced her was  that they had even more die t restrictio ns th an she always  had taught a nd 
practic ed with us . Like us, they were against e ating rabbit and pork; t hey followed the Mos aic 
dietary law s. They ate nothing o f the flesh withou t a split h oof, or that didn't c hew a cud. We 
bega n to go wi th my mother to the Adventist m eetings th at were h eld further out in the country . 
For us children , I know that the m ajor attraction was the go od food they served. But we listen ed, 
too. There were a handful of Negroes, f rom small towns in the area, but I would say that it was 
ninety-nin e perc ent white people. The Adventists felt that we were liv ing at the end of time, that 
the wor ld soon was  comi ng to an end. But they were the friendliest white p eople I had ever se en. 
In some way s, though, we  children noticed , and, when we  were b ack a t home, discuss ed, that 
they were  different from us-suc h as the lack o f enough se asoning in their food, and the different 
way that white people sm elled .
 
*     *     *
 
 
Meanwhile, t he state Welfare people kept after my mother. By now , she didn't m ake it any secr et 
that she hated them, and didn't want them in her ho use. But they exerted their right t o come, and 
I have ma ny, many tim es re flected upon how, talking to us children, they began t o plant the seeds 
of division i n our minds. They would a sk suc h things  as who was sm arter t han the other. And they 
would ask me why I was "so different."
 I think t hey felt that getti ng children i nto foster homes was  a legitima te pan of their function , and 
the res ult would be  less tr oubleso me, howe ver they went about it.
 
And when my mother fought them, they went after her-fi rst, through me. I was the first target. I 
stole; that implie d that I wasn't b eing ta ken care o f by my mo ther.
 
All of us were misc hievous a t some time or a nother, I more so than any of the rest. Philb ert an d I 
kept a battle going. And this was  just o ne of a dozen t hings  that kept buildi ng up the press ure on 
my mother.
 
I'm not sure just h ow or when t he idea was  first dropped by the Welfare workers th at our m other 
was losing her mi nd.
 
But I can distinctly  remember he aring  "craz y" ap plied to her by t hem when t hey learn ed that the 
Negro fanner who was in t he next h ouse down the roa d from us had offered to give us some 
butchered p ork-a whole p ig, maybe even two o f them-a nd she had refused. We all heard them 
call my  mother "craz y" to her face for refusing goo d meat. It meant nothing to them even when 
she explain ed that we had never e aten pork, t hat it was  against her religion a s a Sevent h Day 
Adven tist.
 
They were as vicious as vultures . They had no feelings, u ndersta nding, c ompassio n, or res pect 
for my m other. They told us, "She's crazy for refusing f ood." Right then was  when o ur ho me, our 
unity, began to disint egrate. We were h aving a hard tim e, and I wasn't h elping. But we could have 
made it, we co uld h ave stayed t ogether. As bad as I was, a s mu ch trouble a nd worry as I caused 
my mother, I loved h er.
 
The state people, we found out, had interv iewed t he Gohannas family, andthe Go hannases h ad 
said that they would take me  into their h ome. My  mother threw  a fit, though, whe n she heard that-
and the home wreckers to ok cover for a while.
 
It was a bout this tim e that the large, d ark ma n from Lansing beg an vis iting. I don't re member how 
or where h e and my mother met. It may have be en through so me mutual friends. I don't 
remember what t he man's pr ofession was. I n 1935, in Lansing, Negroes di dn't have a nything  you could call a  professio n. But the man, big and black , looked something like my father. I can 
remember his name, but there's no need to mention it. H e was  a single m an, and my mother was 
a wido w only thirty -six years old . The man was in dependent; naturally she admired that. She was 
having  a hard ti me disciplining  us, and a big man's pr esenc e alone would he lp. And if she had a 
man to provide, it would s end the state people awa y forever.
 
We all u nderstoo d withou t ever  saying mu ch about it. Or a t least we ha d no objection . We took it 
in strid e, even with some am usement among u s, that when t he m an came, our mo ther would be 
all dress ed up in the best that she had-she still was  a good-looking woma n-and she would a ct 
differently, light- hearted and laughing,  as we ha dn't seen her act in years.
 
It went on for about a year , I guess . And then, about 1936, or 1937, the man from Lansing jilted 
my mother suddenly. He just s topped coming to see her . From what I  later underst ood, he finally 
backed away from taking on the responsibilit y of those eight m ouths to feed. He was  afraid of so 
many of us. To this d ay, I can see the trap that Moth er was  in, sa ddled with  all of us. And I can 
also underst and why he would s hun taking on such a tremendous respo nsibilit y.
 
But it was a t errible sh ock t o her. It was th e beginning o f the end of reality  for my mother. When 
she bega n to sit ar ound and walk around talking  to hersel f-almost as though sh e was  unaware 
that we we re there-it became incre asingl y terrifyin g.
 
The state people s aw her weakening. That was when t hey bega n the definite s teps to take me 
away from home. They b egan t o tell me how nic e it was  going  to be at the Gohannases' ho me, 
where th e Gohannases and Big Boy an d Mrs. Adcock h ad all said how much they liked m e, and 
would like t o have me live wi th them.
 
I liked all o f them, too. But I didn't want t o leave W ilfred. I looked up to and admired my big 
brother. I didn't want t o leave Hilda , who was  like my seco nd m other. Or P hilbert ; even i n our 
fighting, th ere was a feeling of brotherly union. Or R eginald, e speciall y, who was  weak  with his 
hernia co nditio n, and who look ed up to me as h is big  brother who lo oked out for him , as I looked 
up to Wilfred. And I had nothing,  either, against t he babies, Yvonne, Wesley, and Ro bert.
 
As my m other talked to hersel f more and more, she grad ually became less responsive to us. And 
less res ponsi ble. The house became less tidy . We began to be more unkempt. And usually, now, 
Hilda cooked.
 
We childre n watche d our an chor giv ing way. It was so mething terrible that you c ouldn't get your 
hands on, yet you co uldn' t get awa y from. It was a sensi ng that something bad was going  to 
happen. We younger on es leaned m ore and more heavily on the rela tive stre ngth o f Wilfred and 
Hilda, who were th e oldest.
 
When finally I was sent to the Gohannases' h ome, at least in a  surface way  I was glad. I 
remember that when I left home with the state man, my mo ther said one thing: "D on't l et them 
feed him any pig."
 
It was b etter, in a lot of ways, at  the Gohannases' . Big Boy and I share d his roomtoget her, and we 
hit it off nicely . He jus t wasn't t he same as my  blood br others. The Gohannases were ver y 
religious people. Big Boy and I attended church wi th them. They were s ancti fied Holy  Rollers 
now. The preachers an d congregations jumped even higher an d shouted even louder th an the 
Baptists I  had known. They sa ng at the top of their lungs, a nd swayed b ack a nd forth and crie d 
and moaned and beat on tambourines a nd chanted. It was spooky , with ghosts and spirituals an d 
"ha'nts" seeming  to be in the very  atmosphere when f inally we all ca me o ut of the church, going 
back ho me.
 
The Gohannas es and Mrs. Adcock l oved to go fishing, a nd some S aturdays  Big Boy and I would 
go alo ng. I had changed sc hools now, to Lansing's  West Junior High School. It was  right in the heart of the N egro c ommunity, and a few white kids were  there, b ut Big Boy didn't mix  much with 
any o f our sc hoolma tes, and I didn't eit her. And when we went f ishing,  neither h e nor I liked t he 
idea of just sitting  and waiting  for the fish to jerk th e cork under the water-or m ake the tight lin e 
quiver, whe n we  fished that way. I figure d there s hould be  some smarter wa y to ge t the fish-
though we never disc overed what it m ight b e.
 
Mr. Gohannas was  close cr onies with so me other m en who, so me Saturdays, would t ake me and 
Big Boy with t hem hu nting rabbits. I had my father's . 22 caliber ri fle; my m other h ad said it was  all 
right for me to take it with m e. The old men had a set rabbit-hu nting strategy  that they ha d alwa ys 
used. Us ually when a  dog j umps a r abbit , and the rabbit gets away , that rabbit will alwa ys 
somehow ins tinctively run in a  circle an d return s ooner or l ater p ast the very spot where he 
originally was ju mped. Well, the old m en would jus t sit a nd wait in hiding s omewhere for the rabbit 
to come b ack, then get their shots at him. I go t to thinking  about it, and finally I thought o f a plan. I 
would se parat e from them and Big Boy and I would go to a point where I f igure d that the rab bit, 
returning,  would have t o pass m e first.
 It worked like magic. I  began to get t hree and four rabbits before they got o ne. The astonishing 
thing was th at none of the old m en ever fig ured o ut why. They ou tdid themselves exclaimi ng what 
a sure s hot I was. I was ab out twel ve, then. All I h ad done was to improve on  their strat egy, and it 
was the beginni ng of a very import ant lesso n in li fe-that anytim e you fi nd someone mo re 
successful than you ar e, es pecially  when you're  both engaged in the same business-you k now 
they're d oing something that you ar en't.
 
I would re turn h ome to visit  fairly often. Sometimes Big  Boy and one or an other, or b oth, of the 
Gohannas es would go with me -sometimes n ot. I would be glad when s ome of them did go, 
becaus e it m ade the ordeal e asier .
 
Soon the state p eople were m aking pl ans t o take over all of my m other's c hildren. She talk ed to 
herself nearly all o f the time n ow, and there was  a crowd o f new white pe ople entering the picture-
always  asking  questio ns. They would eve n visit me  at the G ohannases'. They would ask me 
questio ns out on the porc h, or sitting  out in their c ars.
 
Event ually my mother suffered a complete breakdown, a nd the court or ders we re finally signe d. 
They took her to the State Men tal Hos pital a t Kalam azoo.
 
It was seven ty-some miles from Lansing, a bout an hour and a half on the bus. A Judge McClellan 
in Lansing had authority over me and all o f my br others and sisters. We were "state children ," 
court wards; he had the full say- so over us. A white m an in charge  of a black m an's childre n! 
Nothing but legal, mo dern slaver y-however  kindly  intention ed.
 
*     *     *
 
 
My mother remained in t he same h ospital a t Kalamazoo for about twenty-sixyears. Later, when I 
was still growing up in Michi gan, I would go to  visit her every so often. Nothing t hat I can imagine 
could have moved me as deeply as seeing her p itiful state. In 1963, we got my mo ther ou t of the 
hospital, and she now lives  there in L ansing with Phil bert a nd his family.
 
It was so much worse t han if it had been a physical sick ness, f or which a c ause might be known, 
medicine given, a  cure effected. Every  time I visited her , whe n finally they led her-a c ase, a 
number-back inside f rom where we had been sitting  toget her, I felt worse.
 
My last vis it, when I knew  I would n ever come to see her again-th ere-was  in 1952. I was twenty -
seven. My brother Phil bert h ad told me  that on his las t visit, s he had recognized hi m so mewhat . 
"In spots, " he said.
 
But she didn't r ecogni ze m e at all. 
She stared at me. She didn't know who I was.
 
Her mi nd, whe n I trie d to talk, to  reac h her, was somewhere else. I asked , "Mama, do you k now 
what day it is? "
 
She said, st aring,  "All the people have gon e."
 
I can't d escrib e how I f elt. The wom an who h ad brought m e into the world, a nd nurs ed m e, and 
advised m e, and chastised m e, and loved me, didn't know  me. It was  as if I was tryin g to walk  up 
the sid e of a hill of feathers. I looked at her. I listen ed to her "talk." But there was nothing I could 
do.
 
I truly believe t hat if ever  a state soci al agency  destroyed a family, it destroyed ours. We wante d 
and trie d to stay toge ther. Our home didn't have to be destroyed. But the Welfare, the courts, a nd 
their doctor, gave us theone-two- three punch. And ours was no t the only case of this kin d.
 
I knew I wouldn't b e back to see my mother ag ain b ecause it could ma ke me a very vicious and 
dangerous perso n-knowin g how they had looked at us as numbers a nd as a case in t heir b ook, 
not as human beings. And knowing that my m other in t here was  a statistic t hat didn't have to be, 
that existe d because o f a socie ty's failure, hypocrisy , greed, a nd lack o f mercy and compassion. 
Henc e I have n o mercy or c ompassio n in m e for a society that will crus h people, and then 
penalize  them for not being a ble to stand up under the wei ght.
 
I have rarel y talk ed to anyone about my mother, for I believe t hat I am capable o f killing  a person , 
without hesitation , who ha ppened to make the wrong  kind o f remark a bout my m other. So I 
purposely  don't make any op ening for some fool to step into.
 
Back then whe n our family was destroyed, in 1937, W ilfred and Hilda were ol d enough so that the 
state let them stay on their own in the big four-roo m ho use that my f ather ha d built. Philb ert was 
placed with an other family in Lansing, a Mrs. H acket t, whi le Reginald a nd Wesley went t o live 
with a family calle d Williams, who were fri ends of my mother's. And Yvonne and Rob ert went t o 
live with a West Indian family named McGuire.
 
Separated though we we re, all o f us maintained fairly close touch ar ound Lansing-in sc hool a nd 
out-whenever  we co uld get toget her. Despit e the artificially created separation and dis tance 
between us, we  still remained very close in o ur feelings toward e ach other.
 
 
 
CHAPT ER TWO
MASCO T 
On June twenty- seven th of that yea r, nineteen thirty-seven , Joe Louis knocke d out James J. 
Braddock to become the heavy weight c hampion of the wor ld. And all th e Negroes i n Lansing, like 
Negroes every where, went wi ldly happy with the greatest celebratio n of race pride our ge nerati on 
had ever kn own. Every Negro boy old enough t o walk  want ed to be the next Br own B omber. My 
brother P hilbert, who had alre ady become a pretty goo d boxer in scho ol, was  no excepti on. (I was 
trying to play baske tball. I was  gangl ing an d tall, b ut I wasn't ver y good at it-to o awkw ard.) I n the 
fall of that year, Philbert e ntered the am ateur b outs that were held in Lansing's Pru dden 
Auditoriu m.
 
He di d wel l, surviving the increasingl y tough elimi natio ns. I would go d own to the gym an d watch 
him train. It was ver y exciting. P erhaps wi thout realiz ing it I became secre tly envious; for one 
thing, I know I could not help s eeing so me of my younger brother Reginald's li felong ad miratio n 
for me getting  siphoned off to Philbert.
 People praise d Philbert a s a natural b oxer. I figured t hat sinc e we  belonged t o the same family, 
mayb e I would b ecome one, too. So I put mysel f in the ring. I t hink I  was thirte en whe n I signe d 
up for my f irst b out, but my height a nd rawbon ed frame let me get awa y with  claiming t hat I was 
sixteen, the minimu m ag e-and my weight o f about 128 pounds got m e classifi ed as a 
bantamwei ght.
 
They matched m e with a white boy , a novice  like myself , named Bill Peterso n. I'll n ever forget 
him. When our tur n in t he next a mateur bouts c ame up, all o f my br others and sist ers were 2 4 
there watching, al ong w ith just a bout everyone e lse I knew in town. They were t here not so much 
becaus e of me but because of Philb ert, who h ad begu n to build u p a pretty goo d following,  and 
they wante d to see how his brother would d o.
 I walked d own th e aisle between the people thronging the rows  of seats, and climb ed in the ring. 
Bill Peterson and I were introd uced, and then the referee called u s toge ther a nd mumbled all of 
that stuff about fighting  fair an d breaki ng cle an. Then the bell rang a nd we came out of our 
corners. I k new I was scared, but I didn't kn ow, as B ill Peterson t old me later on, that he was 
scare d of me, too. He was so scared I was going  to hurt him that he knocke d me  down fifty times 
if he did once.
 
He di d suc h a job on my reputation in the Negro neigh borhood that I practic ally went into hiding. A 
Negro just c an't be whipped by somebody white a nd return with his he ad up to the neighborh ood, 
especially  in those days, whe n sports an d, to a lesser exten t show bu siness, were the only fields 
open to Negroes, a nd when the ring was  the only  place a Negro could whip a white m an and not 
be lynch ed. When I did show my f ace ag ain, t he Negroes I k new rode me so badly I knew I had to 
do something.
 
But the worst o f my humiliations was my younger br other Reginald's a ttitude: he simply never 
mentioned the fight. It was the way he looked at me-and avoid ed lo oking  at me. So I went back to 
the gym, and I traine d-hard . I beat bags and skip ped rop e and grunted and sweat ed all over the 
place. And finally I signe d up to fight Bill P eters on agai n. This time, the bouts we re held in his 
hometown o f Alma, Michi gan.
 
The only thing b etter about the rematch was th at hardly  anyone I knew was  there to see it; I was 
partic ularly grateful for Reginald's a bsence . The moment the bell rang, I saw a fist, then the 
canvas c oming u p, and ten seconds la ter th e referee was  saying "Ten!" over  me. It was  probably 
the shortest "fight" in h istory . I lay there liste ning to the full count, but I couldn't move . To tell th e 
truth, I'm not sure I  wante d to move .
 
That white boy was  the begin ning and the end of my fight car eer. A lot oftunes in these l ater years 
since I became a Muslim , I've th ought back to that fight and reflected that it was Allah's work to 
stop me: I might have woun d up punchy.
 
Not long after this , I came into a classroo m with my  hat on. I did it deli berat ely. The teacher, who 
was white, order ed m e to keep the hat on, and to walk  around and around the room until he told 
me to stop. "That way ," he said, "everyone can see you. Me anwhi le, we'll go on  with class f or 
those who a re here to learn s omething. "
 
I was still  walking  around whe n he got u p from his de sk and turned to the black board to write 
something on it. Everyone in the classro om was lo oking  whe n, at this moment, I passed behind 
his d esk, s natched up a thumbtack an d deposite d it in his chair. When he turned to sit back down, 
I was f ar from the sce ne of the crime, circling  around the rear o f the room. Then he hit the tack, 
and I heard hi m holler an d caught a glimps e of him spra ddling  up as I disappeared through t he 
door.
 
With my de portment rec ord, I  wasn't re ally shock ed when the decision c ame that I had been 
expelled .
 I guess I must have h ad some vague i dea that if I didn't h ave t o go t o sch ool, I 'd be allowed to 
stay on with the Gohannas es and wander ar ound town, or mayb e get a  job if I wanted one for 
pocket m oney. But I got rock ed on my heels when a state man whom I hadn't seen before c ame 
and got me at the Gohannases' a nd took m e down to  court.
 
They told me  I was going to go to a reform scho ol. I was still thirt een years  old.
 
But first I was going to  the detentio n home. It was in Mas on, Michi gan, about twel ve m iles fr om 
Lansing. The detention home was where all th e "bad" boysan d girls from Ingh am County were 
held, on their wa y to reform school-waiting  for their he arings.
 
The white state man was a Mr. Maynard Allen. H e was  nicer to  me than mo st of the state Welfare 
people had been. He even h ad consoling wo rds for the G ohannases an d Mrs. Adcock a nd Big 
Boy; all o f them we re crying. But I wasn't. With the few clot hes I owne d stuffed into a box, we 
rode in his car to Maso n. He talk ed as he drove al ong, s aying that my sch ool m arks sh owed that 
if I would just s traighten up, I could make something of mysel f. He sai d that reform school ha d the 
wrong rep utation; he talked about what the word  "reform" meant-to change an d become better. 
He said th e school was re ally a place where b oys like me could h ave time to see their mistakes 
and start a new life and become somebody everyone would b e proud of. And he told m e that the 
lady in ch arge of the detention home, a Mrs.  Swerlin, a nd her husband were ver y good people.
 
They were go od people. Mrs. Swerlin was  bigger th an her h usband, I remember, a big, buxo m, 
robust, l aughing  woman, and Mr. Swerlin was thi n, with  black hair, and a black mu stache and a 
red face, quiet and polite, even t o me.
 
They liked m e right away , too. Mrs. Swerlin sh owed me to my room, my own ro om-th e first in my 
life. It was  in one of those h uge d ormit ory-tike buildi ngs where ki ds in d etention were ke pt in 
those d ays-and still are in m ost plac es. I discovered next, with sur prise, that I was allowed to eat 
with the Swerlins. I t was  the first ti me I'd eaten with white p eople-at l east with gro wn white 
people-since the Sevent h Day  Adve ntist co untry meetings. I t wasn't my own exclusi ve priv ilege, 
of cours e. Excep t for the very troublesom e boys and girls at the detention home, who were ke pt 
locke d up-t hose who h ad run away  and been caught a nd brough t back, or s omething like that-all 
of us ate with the Swerlins sitting a t the head of the long ta bles.
 They had a white cook-helper, I recall-Lucille L athrop. (It a mazes m e how these n ames come 
back, from a time I haven' t thought about for more than twen ty years.)  Lucille tr eated m e well, too. 
Her hu sband's n ame was Du ane Lathrop. He worked somewhere els e, but he stayed there at  the 
detention home on the weeke nds with L ucille.
 
I notice d agai n how wh ite people sm elled d ifferent from us, a nd how th eir food tasted different, 
not seasoned like Negro co oking. I b egan to sweep and mop and dust around in t he Swerlins' 
house, as I had done with Big Boy at the Gohannases'.
 
They all liked my a ttitude, and it was out of their liking  for me that I soon became acce pted by 
them-as a mascot, I know now. They would talk a bout anything an d everything  with m e standing 
right there hearing  them, the same wa y people would talk f reely in f ront of a pet canary. They 
would even t alk a bout me, or about "niggers, " as though I wasn't there, a s if I wouldn't underst and 
what th e word me ant. A hundred times a d ay, they used the word " nigger." I suppose that in their 
own minds, they meant no harm; in fact they probably  meant well. It was  the same with th e cook, 
Lucille, and her hu sband, Duane. I remember on e day whe n Mr. Swerl in, as nice a s he was, 
came in from Lansing, where h e had been through t he N egro sectio n, and said t o Mrs. Swerlin 
right in front of me, "I just c an't s ee how those niggers  can be so h appy and be so poor." He 
talked about how they lived i n shacks, b ut had those big, shini ng cars out front.
 
And Mrs. Swerl in said, me standing right th ere, "Niggers  are just that way. . . ." That sce ne always 
stayed with m e.
 It was t he same with the other white p eople, most of them loc al politicia ns, when t hey would 
come vis iting t he Swerlins. O ne of their f avorite parlor t opics was "n iggers." O ne of them was the 
judge who was in c harge o f me in Lansing. He was a close f riend of the Swer lins. He would a sk 
about me when he came, and they would call me in, and he would l ook m e up and down, his 
expression approving, like h e was exami ning a fine colt, or a pedigree d pup. I knew they must 
have t old h im how I acted and how I worked .
 
What I am tryin g to say is th at it just n ever dawne d upon them that I could un derstand, that I 
wasn't a pet, but a human being. They didn't give me credit for having the same sensitivity, 
intellect, a nd underst anding that they would h ave b een rea dy and willing to recogni ze in a white 
boy in my p osition . But it has historically  been the case with wh ite people, in their regard for black 
people, that even t hough we  might b e _with_ them, we weren't consi dered of them. Even t hough 
they appeared to have o pened the door, it was still clos ed. Thus they never did really  see _me_.
 
This is t he sort of kindly  condesc ensio n wh ich I try to clari fy today, to these in tegration-h ungry 
Negroes, a bout their "li beral" white friends, these so-calle d "go od white p eople"-most of them 
anyway. I don't care how nice one is t o you; t he thing you m ust always  remember is th at almost 
never do es he really  see you as he sees him self, as he sees his own kind. He m ay stand with you 
through thi n, but not thick ; when t he chips a re down, you'll  find that as fixed in h im as his b one 
struct ure is his s ometimes subco nscious conviction t hat he's be tter than anybody  black .
 
But I was n o more than vaguel y aware o f anythi ng like t hat in my d etention-ho me years. I di d my 
little c hores ar ound the house, and everything  was fi ne. And each weeken d, they didn't mi nd my 
catching a ride over  to Lansing  for the afternoon or evening. I f I wasn't old e nough, I  sure was big 
enough by t hen, and nobody ever questio ned my ha nging  out, even a t night, in the stre ets o f the 
Negro sectio n.
 
I was g rowing u p to be even bigger than Wilfred and Philbert, who ha d begunto m eet girls at the 
school da nces, a nd other pl aces, and intr oduc ed m e to a few. But the ones who se emed to like 
me, I didn't go f or-and vice versa. I  couldn't dance a lick, a nyway, and I couldn't see squa ndering 
my few dimes on  girls. So  mostly I pleasure d myself  these Saturday nights by gaw king aro und 
the Negro bars and res taura nts. The jukeb oxes  were wail ing Erskin e Haw kins' " Tuxedo Junc tion," 
Slim a nd Slam's " Flatfoot Floogie," things like t hat. Sometimes, b ig bands from New  York, o ut 
touring  the one-night st ands in t he sticks, would pl ay for big dances in Lansing. Everybod y with 
legs would come o ut to see any per former who bore the magic name "New  York." Which is h ow I 
first heard L ucky Thompson and Milt Jackso n, both of whom I  later got to  know we ll in H arlem.
 
Many  youngsters  from the detention home, when their dates c ame up, went off to the reform 
school. B ut whe n mine came up-two or three times-it was  always  ignore d. I saw new youngsters 
arrive an d leave. I was glad a nd grateful. I knew it was Mrs. Swerl in's doing. I didn't want to leave.
 
She finally told me  one day that I was going to  be entered in Maso n Junior High School. It was 
the only sch ool in town. No ward o f the detention h ome had ever gone to scho ol there, at least 
while still a ward. So I entered t heir seven th grad e. The only other Negroes there we re some o f 
the Lyons c hildren, younger  than I was,  in the lower g rades. The Lyonses a nd I, as it h appened, 
were the town's only  Negroes. They were, as Negroes, ver y much res pected. Mr. Lyons was a 
smart, h ardwork ing ma n, and Mrs. L yons was a very good woma n. She and my mo ther, I had 
heard my m other s ay, were two o f the four W est Indians in that whole section of Michigan.
 
Some of the white kids a t school, I f ound, were eve n friendlier than some of those in L ansing had 
been. Though so me, inclu ding the teachers, calle d me  "nigger," it was e asy to see that they didn't 
mean any mo re harm by it than the Swerlins. As the "nigger" o f my class, I  was in tact extre mely 
popular-I suppose partly  because I was  kind o f a novelty. I was in demand, I had top priority. But I 
also benefited from the special pr estige of having  the seal o f approval from that Very Important 
Woman about the town o f Maso n, Mrs. Swerlin. No body  in Mas on would h ave dre amed of getting 
on the wron g sid e of her. It became hard for me to get thr ough a  school d ay withou t someone after me  to join this or head up that-the debating socie ty, the Junior Hi gh basketball team, or 
some o ther extracurricular  activity. I never tur ned them down.
 
And I hadn't been in the sc hool long when Mrs. Swerl in, knowing I could u se spending mo ney o f 
my own, got m e a job after sc hool washing th e dis hes in a local res taura nt. My boss there was 
the father of a white class mate who m I s pent a lot of time with. His family lived over th e 
resta urant. It was  fine working  there. Ever y Frida y night when I got pa id, I'd feel at least ten feet 
tall. I  forget how much I made, but it seemed like a  lot. It was the first time I'd ever  had any money 
to speak of, all my own, in my whole lif e. As soon as I could afford it, I bought a gree n suit and 
some s hoes, a nd at scho ol I'd buy treats for the others in my class- at least a s much as any of 
them did for me.
 
English a nd history  were th e subjec ts I like d mo st. My English te acher, I recall-a Mr . Ostrowsk i-
was alwa ys giving advice a bout how to become something in li fe. The one thing I d idn't like ab out 
history class was  that the teacher, Mr. Williams, was a great one for "nigger" jokes. One day 
during my fi rst week a t sch ool, I  walked in to the room an d he started singing  to the class, a s a 
joke, "'Way down yonder in the cotton field, some folks s ay that a nigger won't st eal." Very funny. I 
liked his tory, but I never th ereafter had much liking  for Mr . Williams . Later, I remember, we came 
to the textb ook sectio n on Negro hist ory. It was exactly  one paragrap h long. Mr. Williams laugh ed 
through it pr actically  in a single bre ath, reading alo ud how the Negroes h ad been slaves a nd then 
were freed, and how they were usually lazy and dumb and shi ftless. H e added, I remember, an 
anthropological f ootnote on his own, telling  us betwee n laughs how Negroes' feet were " so big 
that when they walk,  theydon't l eave  tracks, they leave a  hole in the ground."
 
I'm sorry to say that the subject I most disliked was m athematics. I have thought about it. I think 
the reason was that mathematics le aves n o room for argument. If you m ade a mistake, that was 
all th ere was to  it.
 
Bask etball was a big thi ng in my life, though. I was on the team; we traveled to neigh boring  towns 
such as H owell and Ch arlott e, and wherever I s howed my f ace, the audiences i n the gymnasiu ms 
"niggered " and "cooned" me to death. Or c alled m e "Ras tus." It didn't bother my te ammates o r my 
coach a t all, and to tell t he truth, it b othered me only vaguely . Mine was  the same psychology  that 
makes N egroes even t oday, though it bothers t hem down inside , keep letting th e white m an tell 
them how much "progress" they are making.  They've he ard it so m uch they've al most gotte n 
brainwash ed in to believing it-or at  leas t acc epting it.
 
After the baske tball games, there would u sually  be a school d ance. W henever o ur team walked 
into another sch ool's gym  for the dance, with m e among th em, I could feel the freeze. It would 
start to ease as they saw  that I didn't try  to mix, b ut stuck cl ose t o someone on our team, or k ept 
to myself . I think I develop ed way s to do it without making it obvious . Even a t our own sch ool, I 
could se nse it almost a s a physical  barrier , that despite all t he beaming and smiling, t he m ascot 
wasn't su pposed to dance with a ny of the white gir ls.
 
It was so me kind of psychic m essage-not just f rom them, but also from within myself . I am proud 
to be able to say that much for mysel f, at leas t. I would just s tand ar ound and smile a nd talk and 
drink p unch and eat sandwiches, a nd then I would m ake some excus e and get awa y early .
 
They were typical s mall- town scho ol da nces. S ometimes a little white b and from Lansing would 
be brought in t o play. But most often, the music was a p honograp h set up on a table, with the 
volume turned up high, a nd the records scratchy , blaring  things like Gl enn Miller's "Mo onlight 
Serenade"-his ba nd was riding high t hen-or the Ink Sp ots, who we re also very  popular, singing  "If 
I Didn't Care. "
 
I used to spend a lot of time thinking  about a peculiar thing. Ma ny of these Maso n white boys, like 
the ones at the Lansing sch ool-esp eciall y if they knew me well, an d if we hung o ut a lot toge ther-
would get m e off in a corner s omewhere an d push me  to propositi on certain white gir ls, sometimes t heir own sist ers. They would tell m e that they'd alrea dy had the girls themselves-
includi ng their sisters-or t hat they were  trying to and couldn't . Later on, I came to underst and what 
was going on : If they could get th e girls into the positi on of having brok en the terrible t aboo by 
slipping o ff with m e somewhere, t hey would have that hammer over t he girls' heads, to make 
them give in to them.
 
It seemed that the wh ite boys f elt that I, being a Negro, just n aturally knew more about 
"romance," or s ex, than they did-th at I instinctively knew more a bout what to do and say with their 
own girls. I n ever did tell anybo dy that I really went for some of the white gir ls, and some o f them 
went f or me, too. They let me know in ma ny ways. But anytime we found ourselves in a ny close 
conversati ons or potentially intim ate situations , alwa ys there would c ome up between us some 
kind of a wall. The girls I really  wante d to have were a  couple o f Negro gir ls whom Wilfred or 
Philb ert ha d introd uced me  to in L ansing. Bu t with these gir ls, somehow, I lack ed the nerve.
 
From what I heard and saw on  the Saturday  nights I spent hanging aro und in t he Negro district I 
knew that rac e-mixing went o n in Lansing. Bu t stra ngely enough, this d idn't have a ny kind of 
effect on me. Ever y Negro in Lansing, I  guess, knew  how white men would d rive al ong certai n 
stree ts in t he black neighb orhoods a nd pick u p Negro s treetwalkers  who patrolled t he area. And, 
on the other hand, there was  a bridge that separate d the Negro a nd Polish neighb orhoods, where 
white women would dri ve or walk across an d pick up  Negro me n, who would ha ng aro und in 
certai n plac es clos e to the bridge , waiting f or them. Lansing's  white women , even in those days, 
were famous for chasing Negro me n. I didn't yet appreciat e how most whites accord to the Negro 
this re putation for prodigious sexual prowess. There in Lansing, I n ever heard o f any trouble 
about this mixing, f rom either side. I imagine that everyone simply  took it for granted, as I di d.
 
Anyway, from my experienc e as a little boy at  the Lansing school, I had become fairly adept at 
avoiding  the white- girl issu e-at least f or a couple o f years yet.
 
Then, in the secon d semester of the seventh grade, I was elected cl ass presid ent. It surprise d me 
even m ore than other pe ople. But I can see now wh y the class m ight h ave done it. My  grades 
were among th e high est in the sch ool. I  was unique in my class, like a pink poodle. And I was 
proud; I'm not going  to say I wasn't. In fact, by t hen, I didn't really  have mu ch feeling a bout being 
a Negro, because I was tr ying so hard, in every  way I could, to be white. Which is why  I am 
spending much of my life today telling th e American b lack m an that he's wasting his ti me straining 
to "integrate. " I know  from pers onal experienc e. I tried h ard enough.
 
"Malcol m, we're just so _proud_ of you!" Mrs. Swerl in exclaimed when s he heard about my 
election. It was all over th e res taurant where I worked. Eve n the state ma n, Maynard Allen, who 
still dropped by to see me once in a while, h ad a word o f prais e. He s aid h e never saw anybody 
prove be tter exactl y what "r eform" m eant. I really liked hi m-except for one thing: he now and then 
would dro p something th at hinted my m other h ad let u s down somehow.
 
Fairly often, I would go a nd visit the Lyons es, a nd they acted as happy as though I was on e of 
their children . And it was  the same warm f eeling when I  went in to Lansing to visit my br others and 
sisters, a nd the Gohannases . 
I remember one thing that marred this ti me for me: the movie " Gone with the Wind." When it 
played i n Maso n, I was the only Negro in the theater, and whe n Butterfly McQ ueen went into her 
act, I felt like cr awling u nder the rug.
 
Every Saturday , just about, I would go in to Lansing. I was  going  on fourteen, now. Wilfred and 
Hilda still li ved o ut by themselves a t the old family home. Hild a kept the house very  clea n. It was 
easier than my m other's plight, with eight of us alwa ys underfoot or ru nning ar ound. W ilfred 
worked where ver h e could, and he still rea d every  book he could get his hands o n. Philb ert was 
getting a reputation as one of the better a mateur fighters in this p art of the state; everyone re ally 
expect ed that he was  going  to become a p rofession al.
 Reginald a nd I, after my  fighting fiasco , had finally gott en back o n good t erms . It made me feel 
great to visit him and Wesley over at Mrs. Williams'. I'd offhandedly give them each a couple o f 
dollars t o jus t stick in their pockets, t o have so mething to spend. And little Yvonn e and Ro bert 
were doing ok ay, too, over a t the home of the West Indian lady, Mrs. McG uire. I' d give th em about 
a quarter api ece; it m ade me feel go od to see how they were coming along.
 
None of us talke d much about our mother. And we never m entioned our father. I guess none of us 
knew what to  say. We didn't want a nybody else to mention our m other e ither, I think. Fro m tim e to 
time, though, we  would all go over to  Kalamazoo to visit her . Mos t often we older o nes went 
singly, for it was  something you d idn't want t o have to exp erienc e with anyone else prese nt, even 
your brother or sist er.
 
During  this p eriod, the visit to my mo ther that I most remember was  toward the end of that 
sevent h-grade yea r, whe n our father's gro wn d augh ter by  his first m arriage, Ella , came from 
Boston to visit us. Wilfred and Hilda had exch anged some letters with Ella, and I, at Hilda's 
suggestion, had written to her from theSwerl ins'. We were all excited a nd happy when h er let ter 
told us t hat she was  coming  to Lansing.
 
I think t he major impact o f Ella's arrival, at  leas t upon me, was th at she was the first really  proud 
black woman I had ever seen in my li fe. She was plai nly proud of her ve ry dark skin. This was 
unheard o f among Negroes in t hose days, e speciall y in La nsing.
 
I hadn't been sure just what day sh e would c ome. And then one afternoon I got h ome from sc hool 
and there she was. She hugged me, stood me  away , look ed me up and down. A commanding 
woman , mayb e even bigger th an Mrs. Swerlin. Ell a wasn't just black, but like o ur father, she was 
jet black. The way  she sat, moved, talke d, did every thing, bespoke somebody  who did and got 
exactl y what s he want ed. This was  the woman my father h ad boasted of so often for having 
brought so many of their f amily out of Georgia to Boston. She own ed some pro perty , he would 
say, and she was "in society ." She had come North with nothing, an d she had worked and saved 
and had invested in property  that she built u p in value, and then she started sending money to 
Georgia for another sist er, brother, cousin , niece or nephew to come n orth to Boston. All that I 
had heard was  reflected in Ella's a ppearance a nd bearing. I h ad never b een so impress ed with 
anybo dy. She was  in her sec ond marriage; her first husband had been a doctor.
 
Ella a sked all kinds of questio ns ab out how I was doing; s he had alrea dy heard from Wilfred and 
Hilda about my el ection as class presid ent. She asked especially  about my grades , and I ran and 
got my rep ort cards . I was t hen one of the three highes t in the class. Ell a praise d me. I asked her 
about her brother, Earl, and her sister , Mary . She had the excitin g news that Earl was a si nger 
with a band in Boston. He was  singing u nder the name of Jimmy Carlet on. Mary was also doing 
well.
 Ella t old m e about other rela tives f rom that branch o f the family. A number of them I'd never 
heard o f; she had helped them up from Georgia. They, in their tur n, had helped up others. " We 
Littles have t o stick toget her," Ella said . It thrilled m e to hear her s ay that, and eve n mo re, the wa y 
she said it. I had become a mascot; our branch of the family was split t o pieces; I  had just a bout 
forgott en about being a Little in a ny family sens e. She said that different members o f the family 
were workin g in good jobs, and some even h ad small businesses going.  Most o f them were 
homeowners.
 
When Ella s uggested that all o f us Littles in L ansing accompany her on  a visit to our m other, we 
all we re grateful. We all felt that if anyon e could d o anything  that could help our mother, that might 
help her get wel l and come b ack, it would b e Ella . Anyway, all of us, for the first ti me toget her, 
went w ith Ella t o Kal amazoo.
 
Our m other was smiling when t hey brough t her out. She was extre mely  surprised when s he saw 
Ella. They made a striking  contrast, t he thin near-white wom an and the big bl ack on e hugging 
each other. I don't remember mu ch about the rest of the visit, exce pt that there was a l ot of talking, a nd Ella h ad everything in h and, and we left with all o f us feeling better than we  ever h ad 
about the circu msta nces. I know that for the first time, I felt as though I h ad visited with someone 
who had some kind of physical  illness th at had just lingered o n.
 
A few days  later, after visitin g the homes where each of us were staying, Ella left Lansing  and 
returned to Boston. But before leaving,  she told me  to write to her regularl y. And she had 
suggested that I might like to spend my s ummer h oliday  visiting  her in B oston. I jumped at that 
chance .
 
*     *     *
  
That summer of 1940, in L ansing,  I caught t he Greyhou nd bus for Boston with  my cardb oard 
suitcase, a nd wearin g my green suit. If someone had hung a sign, " HICK, " aro und my ne ck, I 
couldn't have lo oked mu ch m ore obvious . They didn't have the turnpikes then; the bus stopped at 
what se emed every  comer and cowpatch. Fro m my s eat in-you gu essed it-the back of the bus, I 
gawked out of the window  at white m an's America rolling p ast for what s eemed a month, but must 
have b een only a day an d a half.
 
When we finally arrived, Ella m et me at the terminal an d took me  home. The house was  on 
Waumbeck Street in the Sug ar Hill section of Roxbury , the Harle m of Boston. I met Ella's second 
husband, Frank, who was now a soldi er; an d her brother Earl, t he singer  who c alled h imself 
Jimmy Carlet on; a nd Mary , who was ver y different from her o lder sist er. It's funny how I s eemed 
to think of Mary as Ell a's sister , inst ead of her b eing, jus t as Ella is, my own h alf-sister . It's 
probably  because Ella a nd I alwa ys were  much closer as basic types ; we're dominant p eople, and 
Mary has always  been m ild and quiet, a lmost s hy.
 
Ella was bu sily involved in d ozens o f things. Sh e belonged t o I don't know how many di fferent 
clubs ; she was  a leading li ght of local s o-called " black socie ty." I saw and met a hundred black 
people there whose big-city talk an d way s left my mouth hanging  open.
 
I couldn't have feigne d indifference i f I had tried to. People talked cas ually about Chicago, Detroit, 
New York. I d idn't know the wor ld contained as ma ny Negroes as I saw thronging downtown 
Roxbur y at night, e speciall y on Saturdays. Ne on lights, n ightclubs , poolhalls, bars, the cars t hey 
drove! Res taura nts m ade the streets s mell- rich, greasy , down- home black c ooking! Juk eboxes 
blare d Erskin e Haw kins, Duke E llington, C ootie Williams , doze ns of others. I f somebody had told 
me then that some day I' d know them all pers onally, I'd have found it har d to believe. The biggest 
bands, like t hese, played at theRosela nd State B allroo m, on Boston's Mass achusetts Avenue-on e 
night f or Negroes, t he next night for whites.
 
I saw for the first time occasio nal bl ack-white c ouples strolling  around arm i n arm . And on 
Sundays, when Ella, Mary , or s omebody took me to church, I saw church es for black p eople s uch 
as I had never seen. They were ma ny times finer than the white churc h I had attended back in 
Maso n, Michigan. There, the white pe ople just sat and worshipe d with words; b ut the Boston 
Negroes, like a ll other Negroes I  had ever s een at churc h, threw their souls and bodies wholly 
into wo rship .
 
Two or three ti mes, I wrote l etters t o Wilfred intended for ever ybody back in L ansing.  I said I' d try 
to describ e it when I got b ack.
 
But I found I couldn't.
 
My restless ness with Maso n-and for the first time in my life a restlessn ess with  being around 
white people-began as soon as I got b ack h ome and entered eight h grade .
 
I contin ued to think co nstantly about all t hat I had seen in Bo ston, and about the way  I had felt 
there. I  know now th at it was the sens e of being a real par t of a mass of my own ki nd, for the first time.
 
The white people-class mates, the Swer lins, the people at the res taurant where I worked-no ticed 
the change. They said, "You're acting so strange . You don't seem like yourself , Malcol m. W hat's 
the matter?"
 
I kept close t o the top of the class , though. The topmost sc holastic s tanding, I r emember, kept 
shifting between me, a girl named Audrey Slaugh, a nd a boy named Jimmy  Cotton. 
It went on that way , as I became incr easingl y restless a nd disturbed through t he first semester. 
And then one day, just about when t hose of us who had passe d were ab out to move up to 8-A, 
from which we would e nter high sch ool the next year , something happened which was  to become 
the first m ajor t urning poi nt of my li fe.
 
Somehow, I happened to be alone in t he classroo m with M r. Ostrowski, my  English t eacher. He 
was a tall, rather reddish white m an and he had a thick m ustache. I had gott en some of my be st 
marks under hi m, and he had always  made me feel that he like d me . He was,  as I have 
mentioned, a natural-born "adviso r," about what you o ught to read, to do, or think-ab out any and 
everything. W e used to make unkind jok es ab out him: why  was he teaching in Mas on instead of 
somewhere els e, get ting for himsel f some of the "success in li fe" that he kept telling  us how to 
get?
 
I know that he probably meant well in what he happened to advise me that day. I doubt that he 
meant any harm. It was just in his nature a s an American white m an. I was one of his t op 
students, o ne of the school's t op students-but all he  could s ee for me was th e kin d of future "in 
your place" that alm ost a ll white people see for black p eople.
 
He told m e, "Malcol m, you o ught to be thinki ng about a career. Have you been giving it thought ?"
 
The truth is, I hadn't. I never have f igure d out why  I told h im, "Well, yes, sir , I've been thinking I' d 
like to  be a lawyer." Lansing certainly  had no Negro  lawyers-or do ctors ei ther-in those days, to 
hold up an image I m ight h ave aspired to. All I re ally knew  for certain was th at a lawyer didn't 
wash  dishes, a s I was do ing.
 Mr. Ostrowski looked surprised, I  remember , and leaned back in his chair a nd clasp ed his hands 
behind his h ead. He kind of half-smiled a nd said, "Malc olm, o ne of life's first n eeds is f or us t o be 
realistic. Do n't m isunderst and me, now. We all h ere like you, you kn ow that. But you' ve got to  be 
realistic ab out being a n igger. A lawyer-that's n o realistic goal f or a nigge r. You need to think 
about something you _c an_ be. You're go od with your  hands-m aking thi ngs. Everybody  admires 
your carpentry shop work. W hy don't you pl an on carpentry? People like you as a pers on-you'd 
get all kin ds of work."
 
The more I thought a fterwards a bout what h e said, the mo re uneasy it m ade me. It just k ept 
treading around in my mi nd.
 
What made it really begin to  disturb m e was M r. Ostrowski's  advice to  others in my class- all of 
them white. Most o f them had told him they were pla nning t o become farmers. B ut those who 
wante d to strike o ut on their own, t o try something new, he had encouraged. Some, mostly girls, 
wante d to be teachers. A few want ed other pro fessio ns, suc h as one boy who want ed to become 
a county age nt; another, a veterin arian; a nd one girl want ed to be a nurs e. They all re ported that 
Mr. Ostrowski had encouraged what they had want ed. Yet ne arly none of them had earned marks 
equal t o mine.
 
It was a surprising  thing th at I had never th ought of it that way  before, but I realized th at whatever 
I wasn't, I _was_ smarter th an nearly all of those white kids . But apparently I was  still not 
intelligent enough, in their eyes, t o become what ever _ I_ wanted to be.
 
It was t hen that I began to change-insid e. 
I drew awa y from white p eople. I  came to class, a nd I answere d when c alled u pon. It became a 
physical  strain si mply  to sit i n Mr. Ostrowski's  class.
 Where "nigger" ha d slip ped off my back before, where ver I heard it n ow, I stopped and looked at 
whoe ver s aid it. And they look ed surprised that I did.
 
I quit h earing so much "nigger" and "What's wrong?"-which was  the way I wante d it. N obody, 
includi ng the teachers, could de cide what had come over me . I knew I was be ing discuss ed.
 
In a few m ore weeks, it was  that wa y, too, at the res taura nt where I  worked washing  dishes, a nd 
at the Swerl ins'.
 
*     *     *
 
 
One day soon after, Mrs. Swerlin calle d me  into the living room, and there was the state man, 
Maynard Allen. I knew from their f aces t hat something was  about to happen. She told me that 
none of them c ould underst and wh y-after I had done so well in school, and on my jo b, and living 
with them, and after everyone in Maso n had come to like m e-I had lately begu n to make them a ll 
feel that I wasn't h appy there a nymore .
 
She said sh e felt there was no  need for me to stay at the o detention home any longer , and that 
arrange ments h ad been m ade for me to go a nd live with  the Lyons f amily, who liked me so m uch.
 
She stood up and put out her ha nd. "I guess I've asked you a hundred times, Malcolm-do  you 
want to  tell m e what's wrong?"
 
I shook her h and, and said, "N othing,  Mrs. Swerlin." Then I went and got my things, a nd came 
back down. At the living-room door I saw her wipin g her eyes. I  felt very bad. I thanked her and 
went ou t in front to Mr. Allen , who to ok m e over t o the Lyons'. 
Mr. and Mrs. Lyons , and their c hildren, d uring th e two mo nths I lived with t hem-while fi nishing 
eighth grade-also tri ed to get m e to tell them what was w rong. B ut somehow I couldn't tell them, 
either.
 
I went every  Saturday  to see my br others an d sist ers in Lansing, a nd almost every other day I 
wrote to Ella in B oston. Not s aying why, I told Ella t hat I want ed to come there a nd live.
 
I don't know how sh e did it, b ut she arrange d for official cus tody of me to be transferred from 
Michi gan to Massac huse tts, a nd the ver y week  I finished the eight h grade , I ag ain b oarded the 
Greyhou nd bus for Boston.
 
I've thought a bout that time a  lot since then. No p hysical m ove in my li fe has been m ore pivotal or 
profound in its re percussio ns.
 
If I had stayed o n in Michi gan, I would probably  have m arried o ne of those N egro gir ls I knew  and 
liked in Lansing. I might h ave be come o ne of those s tate capitol b uilding sh oeshine b oys, or a 
Lansing Cou ntry Club waiter, or got ten one of the other me nial jobs which, in those d ays, am ong 
Lansing Negroes, would have b een consider ed "successful"-or eve n become a carpenter.
 
Whatever I  have d one sinc e then, I have driven mysel f to become a success at it. I've o ften 
thought that if Mr. Ostrowsk i had encourage d me  to become a law yer, I would t oday pro bably be 
among s ome city's pr ofessio nal bl ack b ourgeoisie, sipping cock tails an d palming mysel f off as a 
community  spokesman for and leader of the suffering  black m asses, while my  primary concern 
would be  to grab a few more crum bs from the groaning bo ard o f the two-faced whites with who m 
they're b egging to "integrate."
 All praise is due to Allah that I went to Boston when I  did. If I hadn't, I'd probably still be  a 
brainwash ed bl ack Christian .
 
 
 
CHAPT ER THREE
"HOME BOY"
 
I looked like Li'l Abner. Maso n, Michigan, was wr itten all over m e. My kinky , reddish ha ir was cu t 
hick style, a nd I didn't eve n use grease in it. My green suit's coat sle eves s topped above my 
wrists, th e pants legs  showed three inc hes o f socks. Jus t a shade lighter gree n than the suit was 
my narrow -collare d, three-quarter l ength L ansing department store to pcoat. My appearance was 
too much for eve n Ella. But she told me later sh e had seen countrified members o f the Little 
family come u p from Georgia in even worse sh ape than I was.
 
Ella h ad fixed up a nice little up stairs ro om for me. And she was truly  a Georgia  Negro woman 
when s he got into the kitch en with h er po ts and pans. S he was the kind of cook who would heap 
up your  plate with such as ham hock, gree ns, bl ack-eyed peas, fried fish, cabbage, sweet 
potatoes, grits a nd gravy, and cornbread . And the more you put awa y the better sh e felt. I worked 
out at Ella's kitc hen table like there was  no tomorro w.
 
Ella still se emed to be as big, bl ack, o utspoken and impressi ve a woma n as s he had been in 
Maso n and Lansing.  Only about two weeks b efore I arrived, she had split up with her sec ond 
husband-th e soldier , Frank, whom I had met there the pr evious su mmer; bu t she was ta king it 
right in stride . I could see, though I didn't s ay, how any average ma n would find it almost 
impossible t o live  for ver y long w ith a woma n whose every instinct was t o run everything an d 
everybody she had anything  to do with-includi ng me. About my s econ d day there in Roxbury , Ella 
told me  that she didn't want m e to start h unting for a job right away, like m ost newco mer Negroes 
did. She said that she had told all t hose she'dbrought North t o take their time, to walk around, to 
travel  the buses a nd the subwa y, and get t he feel of Boston, before they tied themselves  down 
working  somewhere, b ecause they would n ever again h ave the tim e to really see and get t o know 
anything a bout the city they were li ving in. Ella s aid s he'd help me  find a job when it was tim e for 
me to go to  work.
 
So I went gawk ing ar ound the neighb orhood-th e Waumbeck an d Humboldt Avenue Hill  sectio n of 
Roxbur y, which is s omething like Harle m's S ugar Hill, where I' d later live. I saw those Roxbury 
Negroes ac ting and living differently from any black p eople I' d ever dre amed of in my  life. This 
was the snooty-black neighb orhood; they calle d themselves  the "Four Hu ndred," and looked 
down t heir no ses a t the Negroes of the black ghe tto, or so-c alled " town" s ectio n where Mary , my 
other h alf-sister , lived.
 
What I thought I was seeing th ere in Roxbury were high-class, educated, importa nt Negroes , 
living wel l, working  in big jobs a nd positions . Their quiet homes sat back in their mowe d yards. 
These Negroes walked along the sidewalks  looking ha ughty  and digni fied, on their wa y to work, 
to shop, to visit, to church . I know now, of course, that what I  was really seeing was on ly a b ig-city 
version of those " successful" Negro bo otblacks a nd janitors back in Lansing. The only difference 
was that the ones in Boston had been brainwashe d even more thoroughly. They prid ed 
themselves o n being inc omparably more "culture d," "cultivated," "dignified," and better o ff than 
their black br ethren down in the gh etto, which was  no further awa y than you could throw a r ock. 
Under the piti ful misappre hension that it would make them "better," these Hill  Negroes we re 
breaking  their b acks try ing to imit ate white people.
 
Any black family that had been around Boston long en ough to own the home they lived in was 
considere d am ong t he Hill elite. It didn't m ake any di fference that they had to rent out rooms to 
make ends me et. Then the native-bor n Ne w England ers among t hem looked down u pon rec ently 
migrate d Southernhome-owners who li ved n ext do or, like Ella . And a big percentage o f the Hill dwellers were in Ell a's cat egory-Southern strivers and scra mblers, and West Indian N egroes, 
whom b oth the N ew Englan ders a nd the Southerners called "Black Jews."
 
Usually  it was th e Southerners an d the West Indians who n ot only managed to own t he plac es 
where th ey lived, b ut also a t least o ne other h ouse which th ey rented as income p roperty. The 
snooty New Engla nders u sually owne d less than they.
 
In those d ays on the Hill, any who c ould claim " professio nal" status-te achers, preachers, practic al 
nurses-also consid ered t hemselves su perior . Foreign dipl omats c ould h ave mo deled their 
conduc t on the way  the Negro p ostmen, Pullma n porters, a nd dining car waiters o f Roxbury 
acted, striding  around as if they were wearing to p hats a nd cutawa ys.
 
I'd guess t hat eight o ut often of the Hill Negroes o f Roxbury , despite the impressive -sounding job 
titles t hey affected, a ctually worked as m enials a nd servants. " He's in banking," or "He's in 
securities." It sounded as though t hey were disc ussing  a Rock efeller or a Mello n-and not some 
gray-headed; dignit y-pos turing  bank ja nitor, or bond-house m essenger . "I'm with  an old family" 
was the euphemis m us ed to digni fy the pro fessio ns of white folks' c ooks a nd maids who t alked so 
affectedly am ong t heir own kin d in R oxbury that you c ouldn't even underst and them. I don't know 
how many forty-and fifty-year- old erra nd boys  went down t he Hill dress ed like ambass adors in 
black suits a nd white collars, t o downtown jobs " in governm ent," "in fir nance," or "i n law ." It has 
never ce ased to amaze me  how so ma ny Negroes, then and now, could s tand the indignit y of that 
kind of self-delusion.
 
Soon I ranged out of Roxbury  and began to explore Boston proper. Historic  buildings every where 
I turned, and plaqu es an d markers a nd statues for famousevents a nd men. One statue in the 
Boston Com mons astonishe d me : a Negro n amed Crispus Attucks, who h ad been the first man to 
fall in the Boston Massacr e. I had never k nown  anything like t hat.
 
I roamed every where. I n one directio n, I walked as far as Boston Univers ity. Another day, I took 
my first subway ride. When most of the people got o ff, I followed. It was Ca mbridge, a nd I circled 
all aro und in t he Harvard Universit y campus . Somewher e, I had alre ady heard of Harva rd-though 
I didn't know  much m ore about it. No body that day could have t old me I would give  an address 
before the Harva rd Law School For um s ome twenty  years la ter.
 
I also did a lot of exploring downt own. W hy a city  would have two big railroa d stations-Nort h 
Station and South Station-I c ouldn't understa nd. At both of the stations , I stood around and 
watche d people arri ve and leave. And I did the same thing at  the bus station where Ella had met 
me. My wand erings eve n led me down al ong th e piers an d docks where I  read plaques t elling 
about the old sailing ships that used to put into port there.
 
In a letter to Wilfred, Hilda, Philbert, and Reginal d back in L ansing,  I told them about all t his, a nd 
about the winding, narrow , cobblesto ned stre ets, a nd the houses that jammed up agai nst e ach 
other. Downtown  Boston, I wrote t hem, had the biggest s tores I' d ever se en, and white p eople's 
resta urants an d hotels. I made up my mind that I was  going  to see every  movie that came to the 
fine, air-con dition ed theaters.
 
On Massac huse tts Avenue, next door to one of them, the Loew's St ate Theater, was  the huge, 
excitin g Ros eland State Ballro om. Big posters ou t in front advertise d the nationally  famous bands, 
white and Negro, t hat had played t here. "COMING N EXT WEEK," whe n I went by that first time, 
was Glenn Miller. I remember thinking  how nearly  the whole evening's mu sic at  Maso n High 
School d ances h ad been Glen n Miller's  records. W hat would n't that crowdhave  given, I 
wondere d, to be standing where Glenn Miller's  band was ac tually  going to play? I d idn't know how 
familiar with Ros eland I was going  to become.
 
Ella b egan to grow  concern ed, becaus e even when I had finally had enough sight- seeing, I  didn't 
stick aro und ver y much on the Hill. Sh e kept dropping hin ts that I ought t o mingle with the "nice young  people my age" who were to be seen in the Townse nd Drugstor e two blocks f rom her 
house, and a couple of other pl aces. But even b efore I came to Boston, I had always  felt and 
acted toward anyon e my age a s if they were in the "kid" class, like my younger br other Reginald. 
They had alwa ys looked up to me as if I were co nsidera bly old er. On week ends back in L ansing 
where I'd go to get awa y from the white p eople in Maso n, I'd hung ar ound in the Negro par t of 
town w ith Wilfred's and Philbert's s et. Though all of them were s everal years ol der th an me, I was 
bigger, and I actually looked older than m ost of them.
 
I didn't want to disa ppoint or upset Ell a, but despite h er advice, I began going down into the town 
ghett o section . That world of grocery  stores, walk- up flats, cheap res taurants, poolroo ms, b ars, 
store front churches, and pawnshops seemed to hold a  natural lure f or me.
 
Not o nly was this p art of Roxbury much more exciting, b ut I felt more relaxed among Negroes 
who were being t heir na tural s elves a nd not putting on airs. Even t hough I di d live  on the Hill, my 
instinc ts we re never- and still aren't-t o feel mysel f better than any ot her Negro.
 
I spent the first m onth in town with my mo uth hanging  open. The sharp-dresse d young "c ats" who 
hung on the comers a nd in the poolroo ms, b ars an d restaurants , and who o bviousl y did n't work 
anywhere , comple tely entranced me . I couldn't get over marveling  at how their h air was straight 
and shiny like white m en's hair; Ella t old m e this was  called a "conk." I had nevertas ted a sip of 
liquor, never even sm oked a cigarette, and here I saw little bl ack childre n, ten and twelve years 
old, shooting cra ps, pl aying cards, fighting, getting g rown- ups to put a penny or a nick el on  their 
number for them, things like t hat. And these childre n threw aro und swear words I' d never h eard 
before, even, and sla ng expressi ons t hat were just a s new to  me, such a s "stud" and "cat" and 
"chick" a nd "cool" a nd "hip." Ever y night a s I lay in b ed I turned these new wo rds over in my  mind. 
It was sh ocking  to me that in town, e speciall y after dark , you'd o ccasio nally see a white girl and a 
Negro man strolling ar m in ar m along th e sid ewalk, a nd mixed c ouples drinki ng in the neon-
lighted bars-no t slipping o ff to some dark c orner , as in Lansing. I  wrote Wilfred and Philbert about 
that, too.
 
I want ed to find a job myself , to surprise Ella. One afternoon, so mething tol d me to go insi de a 
poolroo m whose window  I was  looking t hrough. I had looked through t hat windo w many tim es. I 
wasn't yearning  to play pool; in fact, I had never he ld a cue stick. B ut I was drawn by  the sight o f 
the cool-looking  "cats" standing aro und insid e, bending over the big, green , felt-topped tables, 
making bets an d shooting  the bright-colore d balls into the holes. As I stared t hrough the windo w 
this p articular a fternoon, something made me decide t o ven ture insi de and talk t o a dark, st ubby, 
conk-headed fellow who racke d up balls for the pool-pl ayers, who m I'd heard c alled " Shorty." One 
day he  had come outsid e and seen me  standing there an d said "Hi, Red ," so that made me figure 
he was friendly.
 
As inc onspicuo usly as I could, I  slipp ed insi de the door an d around the side o f the poolroo m, 
avoiding  people, and on to the back, where S horty  was filling an aluminu m can with th e powder 
that pool players  dust on their hands. He lo oked up at me. Later on , Shorty  would enjoy teasing 
me about how with  that first glanc e he knew my whole st ory. "Man, that cat s till smelle d country!" 
he'd say, laughing. "C at's legs was  so long and his p ants so short his knees showed-an ' his h ead 
looked like a briar p atch!" 
But that afternoon Shorty did n't le t it show in his face how "country"  I appeared when I  told him I'd 
appreciat e it if he'd tell me how could so mebody go ab out getti ng a job like his.
 
"If you m ean racking u p balls," s aid S horty , "I don't know of no pool joints ar ound here n eeding 
anybo dy. You m ean you jus t want a ny slave you c an find?" A "slave" meant work,  a job.
 
He a sked what kind of work I h ad done. I told him that I'd washe d rest aurant dis hes in Maso n, 
Michi gan. He n early  dropped the powder can. "My  homeboy! Man, gim me s ome skin! I'm from 
Lansing!"
 I never told Shorty-and he never s uspec ted-that he was about ten years  older than I. He t ook us 
to be about the same age. At first I would have b een embarrasse d to tell hi m, later I  just n ever 
bothered. Shorty had dropped out of first-year  high school in L ansing,  lived awhile with an  uncle 
and aunt in D etroit, a nd had spent the last six  years liv ing with his c ousin in Roxbury . But when I 
mentioned the names of Lansing people and places, he remembered ma ny, and pretty soon we 
sounded as if we ha d been rais ed in the same block . I could sens e Shorty's  genuine gladness, 
and I don't have to  say how lucky I felt to find a friend as hip as he obviousl y was.
 
"Man, this is a swinging town i f you d ig it," Shorty  said. "You're my homeboy-I'm going  to sc hool 
you to the happenings." I stood there and grinne d like a  fool. "You got to go anywhere n ow? W ell, 
stick aro und until I get off."
 
One thing I liked immediately  about Shorty  was his frankness . When I told him where I lived, h e 
said what I alr eady  knew- that nobody in t own could stand the Hill Negroes . But he thought a 
sister who gave  me a "pad," not charging  me rent, not eve n run ning me out to find "some slave, " 
couldn't be all ba d. 
Shorty's slave in t he poolroo m, he said, was just to keep ends toget her whi le he learn ed his hor n. 
A couple o f years b efore, he'd hit the numbers an d bough t a saxoph one. "Got it right in there in 
the clos et now, for my less on tonight." Shorty was  taking lesso ns "with s ome other s tuds," and he 
intended one day t o organize  his own s mall ba nd. "There's a lot of bread to be made gig ging right 
around here in Roxbury ," Shorty explain ed to me. "I don't dig joining some big ba nd, one-nighting 
all over  just t o say I played with  Count or Duke or somebody ." I thought t hat was smart. I wished I 
had studied a horn; but I never h ad been expos ed to one.
 
All afternoon, between tri ps up  front to rack b alls, S horty  talke d to me  out of the corn er of his 
mouth: which h ustlers-sta nding aro und, or playing at  this or that table-sold "r eefers," or ha d just 
come o ut of prison , or were "s econd-story  men." Shorty told me that he played at least a dollar a 
day on  the numbers. He sai d as soon as he hit a  number, he would u se the winnings t o organize 
his b and.
 
I was as hamed to have t o admit that I had never played t he numbers. " Well, you ain't never ha d 
nothing t o play with," he said, excusing m e, "but you start whe n you get a  slave, a nd if you hit , 
you got a  stak e for something."
 
He p ointed out some ga mblers a nd some pimps. S ome of them had white whores , he whispered . 
"I ain't going  to lie-I d ig them two- dollar white chicks, " Shorty  said. "There's a  lot o f that action 
around here, nights : you'll  see it." I said I alr eady  had seen some. "You ever had one?" he asked.
 
My embarrass ment at my inexperie nce s howed. " Hell, m an," he said, "don't be ashamed. I had a 
few before I left Lansing- them Polack c hicks th at used to come over t he bridge. Here , they're 
mostly Italians a nd Irish. But it don't matter whatkind, they're so mething else ! Ain't no different 
nowhere-t here's n othing they love be tter than a black st ud."
 
Through the afternoon, Shorty  introd uced me  to players an d loungers. " My homeboy," he'd say, 
"he's lo oking  for a slave if  you h ear a nything." They all s aid they'd look out.
 
At seven o'cl ock, when the night b all-racker ca me o n, Shorty told m e he had to hurry  to his 
saxop hone less on. But before he left, he held out to me the six or seven d ollars he  had collecte d 
that day in nickel a nd dime ti ps. "Y ou got enough br ead, home-boy?"
 
I was ok ay, I told hi m-I h ad two d ollars. B ut Shorty ma de me take three mo re. "Little fattening f or 
your pocket," he said. Before we  went out, he opened his saxoph one cas e and showed m e the 
horn. It was  glea ming brass against the green velvet, an  alto sax. He said, "Keep cool, homeboy, 
and come back to morrow . Some of the cats wi ll turn you up  a slave."
 
*     *     * 
 
When I got home, Ella said t here had been a telephone call f rom somebody named Shorty. He 
had left a message t hat over  at the Ros eland State Ballroo m, the shoeshine b oy was quitting th at 
night, a nd Shorty had told him to hold the job for me.
 
"Malcol m, you h aven't had any exp erience s hining sh oes," Ella said. Her expression and tone of 
voice told me she wasn't h appy about my t aking  that job. I didn't particularly  care , because I  was 
alrea dy speechless t hinking ab out being somewhere clos e to the great est b ands in the wo rld. I 
didn't even wait to eat any dinner. 
The ballro om was all lighte d when I got there. A man at the front door was le tting in members o f 
Benny Goodman's band. I told h im I wante d to see the shoeshin e boy , Freddi e.
 
"You're going  to be the new one?" he asked . I said I thought I was, an d he laughe d, "Well, mayb e 
you'll hit the numbers a nd get a  Cadillac, too." He told m e that I'd find Fred die u pstairs in the 
men's ro om on the sec ond floor.
 
But downst airs before I went u p, I stepped over a nd snatched a glimpse inside the ballroom. I just 
couldn't believe t he size o f that waxed fl oor! At the far end, under the soft, rose-colored lights, 
was the bandstand with the Benny Go odman mu sicians moving  around, laughing an d talking, 
arranging  their horns a nd stands .
 
A wiry, brown-skinn ed, c onked fellow upstairs in the men's room greet ed m e. "You Shorty's 
homeboy?" I said I was, a nd he said he was Freddie. "Good old boy ," he said. " He called m e, he 
just h eard I hit the big number, and he figured right I' d be quitting." I told Fre ddie what the man at 
the front door h ad said about a Cadillac. H e laugh ed and said , "Bums them white cats up  when 
you get yoursel f something. Yeah, I told them I was going  to get me  one-jus t to bug t hem."
 
Freddie th en said for me to pay close a ttentio n, that he was going to be busy and for me to watch 
but not get in the way , and he'd try to get m e ready to take over at the next d ance, a  couple of 
nights la ter.
 
As Fre ddie busied hi msel f setting up the shoeshi ne stand, he told m e, "Get here early  . . . your 
shoeshi ne rags an d brushes by  this f ootstand . . . your  polish bottles, paste wax,  suede br ushes 
over here . . . everything  in place, you get rushed, you never ne ed to waste mo tion. . . ." 
While you shi ned shoes, I  learned , you als o kept watch o n customers inside , leaving  the urinals. 
You darted over an d offered a small white hand towel. "A  lot of cats who ai n't pl anning to wash 
their hands, sometimes you c an run up with a towel  and shame them. Your towels ar e really your 
best hustle in her e. Cost you a  penny apiece t o launder-you always  get at least a nick el tip ."
 
The shoeshi ne customers, a nd any f rom the inside rest ro om who t ook a towel,  you 
whiskbro omed a couple of licks.  "A nickel or a  dime tip, jus t give 'em that," Fre ddie s aid. "But for 
two bits, U ncle Tom a little-w hite cats especiall y like th at. I've had them to come back two, three 
times a dance."
 
From down be low, the sound of the m usic h ad begun floating u p. I guess I  stood trans fixed . "You 
never se en a big da nce?" ask ed Fre ddie. "Ru n on awhile, a nd watch. "
 
There we re a few co uples alrea dy dancing u nder the rose-c olored lights. But even m ore excitin g 
to me was the crowd thronging in. The most glamor ous-looking white wome n I'd ever  seen-young 
ones, o ld ones, white ca ts buying  tickets at the window, sticking  big wads o f gree n bills  back int o 
their pockets, c hecking t he wom en's c oats, and taking th eir arms and squirin g them insid e.
 
Freddie ha d some early customers when I got ba ck up stairs. B etwee n the shoes hine stand and 
thrus ting towels  to them just as they approached the washbasin , Fred die s eemed to be doing four 
things at once. "Here, you c an take over the whiskbro om," he said, "just two or thr ee licks- but let 'em feel it."
 
When things slowed a little , he said, "You ain't se en nothing to night. You wait until you s ee a 
spooks' d ance! Ma n, our pe ople carry  _on_!" Whenever h e had a moment, he kept sc hooling m e. 
"Shoelaces , this drawer  here. You just startingo ut, I'm going t o make these t o you a s a pres ent. 
Buy them for a nickel a  pair, tell cats they need lac es if they do, and charge t wo bits."
 
Every Benny Goodman record I' d ever he ard in my lif e, it seemed, was f iltering f aintly into where 
we were. During an other c ustomer lull, Fre ddie let m e slip back outside again t o liste n. Peggy Lee 
was at the mike singing. B eautiful! She had just joi ned the band and she was f rom Nort h Dak ota 
and had been singing wi th a grou p in Chic ago when Mrs. Be nny Go odman disc overed her , we 
had heard some c ustomers say. She finished the song and the crowd b urst in to applause. She 
was a big hit.
 
"It knocke d me  out, too, when I first br oke in her e," Fred die s aid, grinning, when I  went b ack in 
there. " But, look, you ever shined any shoes ?" He la ughed whe n I said I hadn't, excep ting my 
own. " Well, let's get t o work.  I never had neither." Fred die got o n the stand and went t o work  on 
his own s hoes . Brus h, liquid po lish, br ush, paste wax,  shine rag, lacquer sol e dressing . . . step 
by step, Fred die s howed m e what to do.
 
"But you got to  get a  whole lot faster. You can't waste ti me!" Fre ddie showed m e how fast on my 
own shoes. Then, because b usiness was  tapering  off, he had time to give me a demonstratio n of 
how to make the shine rag  pop like a  firecrack er. "Dig th e action ?" he asked. H e did it in sl ow 
motion. I got down a nd tried it on his s hoes. I had the pri nciple o f it. "Just got t o do it faster," 
Freddie sai d. "It's a  jive noise, that's all. Cats ti p better, they figure you're kn ocking  yoursel f out!"
 
By the end of the dance, Freddi e had let me shine t he shoes o f three or four stray  drunks he 
talked in to having shi nes, and I had practiced picking  up my speed on Freddi e's shoes u ntil they 
looked like mirrors. After we h ad helped the janitors to  clea n up the ballroo m after the dance, 
throwin g out all the paper and cigarett e butts and empty liquor bottles, Freddi e was  nice e nough 
to driveme all t he way home to Ella's on the Hill  in the secon dhand maroon Buick he said he was 
going  to trade in on his Cadillac. H e talk ed to me all the wa y. "I guess it's all ri ght if I tell you, pick 
up a couple o f dozen packs o f rubbers, two-bits a piece. You notice s ome of those c ats that came 
up to me around the end of the dance? W ell, when some h ave new chicks going ri ght, they'll 
come a sking  you for rubbers. Charge a  dollar, gen erally you'll get an extra tip. "
 
He lo oked across at me. "Some hustles you're t oo new for. Cats wi ll ask you for liquor , some will 
want ree fers. B ut you don't need to have nothing excep t rubbers-un til you can dig who's a  cop."
 
"You can ma ke ten, twel ve dollars a d ance for yourself  if you work  everything ri ght," Fre ddie said, 
before I got o ut of me car in front of Ella's. " The main thing you got t o remember is that everything 
in the world is a hustle. S o long, Red ."
 
 
The next ti me I ran into Fred die I was downtown one night a few weeks lat er. He was  parke d in 
his p earl-gray Cadillac, sh arp a s a tack, "cooling  it."
 
"Man, you s ure sch ooled me!" I said, and he laughed ; he knew what I  meant. It hadn't taken me 
long on  the job to find out that Fre ddie h ad done less s hoes hining an d towel-hu stling  than selling 
liquor a nd reefers, a nd putting wh ite "Johns" in touch with Negro whores. I  also learn ed that white 
girls always  flocked to the Negro da nces-some of them whores whose pi mps brought th em to mix 
business a nd pleasure , others who c ame with their black b oy friends, and some who ca me in 
alone, for a little f reelance lus ting among a plentiful availa bility of enthusias tic Negro men.
 
At the wh ite dances, o f course, n othing black was allowed, and that's where th e black whores' 
pimps soon showed a  new shoes hine boy what he  could pick up on the sid e by slipping a phone number or a ddress to the white Jo hns whocame aro und the end of the dance looking  for "black 
chicks. "
 
*     *     *
 
 
Most o f Roseland's da nces we re for whites o nly, and they had white ba nds only . But the only 
white band ever to play there at a Negro d ance, to my rec ollection , was  Charlie Bar net's. The fact 
is that ver y few white bands c ould have s atisfied the Negro d ancers. Bu t I know  that Ch arlie 
Barnet's " Cher okee " and his "R edskin Rhumba" dr ove those Negroes wild. They'd ja m-pack that 
ballro om, the black g irls in wa y-out silk a nd satin dress es an d shoes, their hair d one in all kinds of 
styles, the me n sharp in t heir zoot s uits an d crazy conks, a nd everybody  grinning and greased 
and gasse d.
 
Some of the bandsmen would c ome up to the m en's room a t about eight o'clock and get 
shoeshi nes b efore they went to work. Duk e Ellington , Cou nt Basie, Lionel Ha mpton, Cootie 
Williams , Jim mie L unceford we re just a  few of those who s at in my chair . I would r eally make my 
shine rag  sound like so meone had set off Chin ese firecrackers. Duk e's great a lto saxma n, Jo hnny 
Hodges-he  was Shorty's idol-still  owes m e for a shoe-shin e I gave hi m. H e was  in the chair one 
night, h aving a friendly argum ent with the drummer, Sonny Gre er, who was st anding there, when I 
tapped the bottom of his shoes to signal th at I was  finished. Hodges st epped down, r eachi ng his 
hand in his p ocket to pay me, but then snatched his ha nd out to gestur e, and just f orgot me, and 
walked away . I wouldn' t have d ared to bother the man who could do  what h e did with "Daydrea m" 
by asking  him for fifteen cents.
I remember that I struck u p a little s hoeshin e-stand conversation with Co unt Basie's g reat blues 
singe r, Jimmie Rushing. (He's t he one famous for "Sent For You Yesterd ay, Here You C ome 
Today" and things  like th at.) R ushing's  feet, I remember, were big  and funny-shaped-n ot long like 
most big f eet, but they were ro und and roly -poly  like Rushi ng. Anyh ow, he even in troduc ed me 
tosome of the other Basie cats, like L ester Young, Harry  Edis on, Buddy Tate, Don Byas, Dickie 
Wells, and Buck Clayton. They'd wa lk in the rest r oom later, by th emselves. "Hi, Re d." They'd b e 
up there in my chair, and my shi ne rag was  popping t o the beat of all o f their records , spinning in 
my head. Musicians n ever have h ad, anywhere, a  greater s hoeshin e-boy fan than I was.  I would 
write to  Wilfred and Hilda and Philbert and Reginald back in L ansing, trying to describe it.
 
*     *     *
 
 
I never got any de cent tips until the middle o f the Negro dances , which is when the dancers 
started feeling goo d and getting genero us. After the white d ances, whe n I helped to clean out the 
ballro om, we would t hrow  out perhaps a dozen e mpty liquor bo ttles. But after the Negro dances, 
we would h ave t o throw ou t cartons full of empty fi fth bottles-not rotgut, e ither, but die best 
brands, and especially  Scotch.
 
During  lulls up there in t he men's ro om, sometimes I 'd get in five minutes of watching  the dancing. 
The white people danced as though s omebody had train ed them-left, one, two; right, three, four-
the same steps and patterns over and over , as though so mebody  had woun d them up . But those 
Negroes-nobody in t he world co uld h ave ch oreograph ed the wa y they did whatever  they f elt-jus t 
grabbing par tners, even t he white chicks who ca me to the Negro da nces . And my black brethren 
today may hate me for saying it, but a lot of black girls  nearly  got run over by so me o f those 
Negro males scra mbling  to get at  those white women; you would h ave thought God had lowered 
some o f his angels. Tunes have s ure ch anged ; if it happened today, those same black girls would 
go after those Negro  men-and the white women, too.
 
Anyway, some c ouples were  so abandoned-flingin g high a nd wide, improvising  steps an d 
move ments-th at you c ouldn't believe it. I could feel the beat in my b ones, eve n though I had 
never da nced. 
"_Showtime!_" people would s tart h ollering  about the last hour of the dance. Then a couple of 
dozen really  wild co uples would stay  on the floor, the girls ch anging  to low  white sneakers. The 
band now would really  be blasting, a nd all the other dancers would f orm a clapping, s houting 
circle to watch that wild competiti on as it b egan , coverin g only a quarter or so of the ballroo m 
floor. The band, the spec tators and the dancers would b e malting t he R osela nd Ballroo m feel like 
a big, rocking  ship. The spotlight would b e turning, pi nk, yello w, green, a nd blue, p icking  up the 
couples lin dy-hopping as if they had gone mad. _"Wail, man, wail!"_ people would be shouting at 
the band; and it would b e wail ing, u ntil first one and then another c ouple just r an out of strength 
and stumbled off toward t he crowd, exh austed and soaked with sweat . Sometimes I would be 
down m ere s tanding insid e the door ju mping up and down in my gray jacket with th e whiskbroo m 
in the pocket, and the manager would h ave to come and shout a t me that I had customers 
upstairs.
 
The first liquor I drank, my f irst cigaret tes, even my fi rst re efers, I  can't specifically  remember . But 
I know they were all m ixed toge ther with my fi rst sh ooting craps, p laying cards , and betting my 
dollar a  day on the numbers, as I started hanging  out at night wi th Shorty and his friends. S horty's 
jokes about how country  I had been made us all la ugh. I still was  country , I know now, but it all felt 
so grea t becaus e I was accep ted. All of us would b e in somebody's place, usually  one of the 
girls', and we'd b e turning on , the reefers making everybody's  head light, or the whisk y aglow  in 
our m iddles. Everybody  understo od that my he ad had to stay lanky awhile longer , to grow long 
enough f or Shorty  to conk it for me. One of these nights, I  remarke d that I had saved about half 
enough t o get a zoot .
 
"_Save? _" Shorty couldn't believe it. "Homeboy, you n ever heard of credit ?"He told me  he'd c all a 
neigh borho od clothi ng store the first thing in the mo rning, a nd that I should b e there early .
 
A sales man, a young Jew , met me when I  came in. "Y ou're S horty's  friend?" I said I was; it 
amazed m e-all o f Shorty's contacts. The salesm an wrote my n ame on a form, and the R ose-lan d 
as where I  worked, and Ella's a ddress as where I lived. Sh orty's name was pu t down as 
recommending me. The sales man sai d, "Shorty's on e of our best c ustomers. "
 
I was me asured, and the you ng salesm an picke d off a rack a zoot suit that was  just wi ld: sky-blue 
pants thirty inches in the knee and angle- narrowed down t o twel ve inc hes a t the bottom, and a 
long co at that pinc hed my wa ist and flared out below my knees. 
 
As a gift, the salesman said, the store would gi ve m e a narrow lea ther belt with my initial " L" on it. 
Then he said I ought to also b uy a hat, and I did-bl ue, with a feather in t he four-inc h brim . Then 
the store gave  me another pr esen t: a long, t hick- linked, gold- plated chain that swung  down lower 
than my c oat hem. I was  sold f orever  on credit.
 
When I modeled the zoot for Ell a, sh e took a  long look a nd said, "Well, I guess it h ad to happen." 
I took three of those twenty-five-ce nt se pia-to ned, whi le-you-w ait pic tures o f mysel f, posed the 
way "hipsters" wearing  their zoots would "c ool it "-hat dangled, knees dr awn clos e toge ther, feet 
wide a part, both ind ex fingers jabbed toward th e floor. The long co at and swinging ch ain a nd the 
Punjab pants were m uch mor e dramatic if  you st ood that way. One pic ture, I autographed and 
airmailed t o my bro thers a nd sisters in Lansing, to  let them s ee how well I was  doing. I gave 
another on e to Ella, and the third to Shorty, who was re ally moved : I could tell by  the wa y he said, 
"Thanks , homeboy." It was part of our "h ip" code not to show  that kin d of affectio n.
 Shorty soon decided that my h air was finally long en ough to be conked . He h ad promised to 
school me  in how to beat the barbersho ps' three-an d four-doll ar price by  making up congole ne, 
and then conking  ourselves.
 
I took the little list o f ingredie nts h e had print ed out for me, and went to a grocery  store, where I 
got a can of Red Devil lye, two eggs, an d two m edium-si zed wh ite potatoes. Then at a drugstore 
near the poolro om, I asked for a large jar o f Vaseline, a  large bar of soap, a large- toothed comb and a fine-toothed comb, one of those ru bber hoses wi th a metal spray- head, a rubber a pron and 
a pair of gloves.
 
"Going to lay on that first conk?" the drugstore m an asked m e. I proudly told him, grinning, 
"Right!"
 
Shorty paid six  dollars a  week f or a room in his c ousin's s habby apartment. His cousin wasn't at 
home. "It's like t he pad's mi ne, he spends so m uch time with his wom an," Shorty  said. "Now , you 
watch me -"
 
He p eeled the potatoes a nd thin-sliced them into a quart- sized Mas on fruit jar, then started stirring 
them with a woode n spoon as he gradually poured in a little over  half the can of lye. "Never us e a 
metal spoon; the lye wi ll turn it black," he told me. 
 
A jelly-like, starchy -looking  glop result ed from the lye and potatoes, and Shorty  broke in the two 
eggs, s tirring real f ast-his own c onk a nd dark f ace bent down clos e. The congolen e turned pale-
yellowish. "Feel the jar," Shorty said . I cupped my  hand against t he outside , and snatched it away . 
"Damn right, it's ho t, that's th e lye," h e said. "So you k now it's going to  burn when I  comb it in-it 
burns _b ad_. But the longer you c an stand it, the straight er the hair."
 
He m ade me sit down, a nd he tied the string of the new rubber apron tightlyaroun d my ne ck, a nd 
combed up my b ush of hair. Then, from the big Vaseline jar, he took a handful and massaged it 
hard all t hrough my h air and into the scalp. He als o thickly  Vaseline d my  neck, e ars an d forehead. 
"When I get t o washing  out your he ad, be sure to tell m e anywhere you f eel any little stinging," 
Shorty warned me, washing  his h ands, then pulling on the rubber gloves, a nd tying on  his own 
rubber apr on. "You always  got to  remember that any co ngolen e left in bums a s ore in to your 
head."
 
The congolene just f elt warm when S horty start ed combing it in. But then my head caught fire.
 
I gritted my teeth and tried to pull t he sides o f the kitche n table toget her. The comb felt as if it was 
raking  my skin off.
 
My eyes  watered, my nose was  running.  I couldn't st and it any lo nger;  I bolted to the washb asin. I 
was cursin g Shorty  with every  name I could think of when h e got the spray  going  and started 
soap-lath ering  my h ead.
 
He la there d and spray -rinsed , lathered and spray-rinsed , mayb e ten or twelve  times, e ach time 
gradually  closi ng the hot-water f aucet, until the rinse was  cold, and that helped some.
 
"You feel any stinging  spots?"
 
"No," I managed to say. My knees we re trembling.
 
"Sit back down, then. I think we  got it all o ut okay."
 
The flame came back a s Shorty, with a thick towel, st arted drying my head, rubbi ng hard. "_Easy , 
man, easy!_ " I kept shouting.
 "The first ti me's always  worst. You get used to it b etter before long. You took it re al good , 
homeboy. You got a good conk ."
 
When Shorty let me stand up and see in the minor, my ha ir hung d own in lim p, damp strings. My 
scalp still flamed, but not as badly; I could b ear it . He dr aped the towel  around my shoulders, over 
my rubber apr on, and began ag ain V aselining  my h air.
 
I could f eel him combing, straight b ack, first the big c omb, then the fine-tooth one. 
Then, he was usi ng a razo r, very delica tely, on the back o f my ne ck. Then, finally, shaping t he 
sideburns.
 
My first view in the mirror bl otted out the hurting. I'd seen some pretty conks, b ut when it's t he first 
time, on your own h ead, the trans formation , after the lifetime of kinks, is stagger ing.
 
The mirror  reflected Shorty behind me . We both were gr inning and sweating. And on top of my 
head was this thick , smooth sheen of shining red hair-real red-as s traight as a ny white man's.
 
How ridiculo us I was! S tupid en ough to stand there sim ply lost in admiratio n of my hair n ow 
looking "white ," reflected in the mirror in S horty's  room. I vowed t hat I'd never again be without a 
conk, a nd I never was f or many years.
 
This was  my first really  big step toward s elf-degrad ation : when I  endured all o f that pain, literally 
burning my f lesh to have it lo ok like a  white ma n's h air. I had joine d that multitude of Negro me n 
and wom en in America who are br ainwashed into beli eving that the black p eople ar e 
"inferior"-an d white p eople"superior"- that they will even violate and mutilate their G od-crea ted 
bodies t o try to look " pretty" by white st andards.
 
Look ar ound today, in every  small town an d big city , from two-bit c atfish and soda-po p joints in to 
the "integrat ed" lobby of the Waldorf-Astoria, and you'll  see conks on black men. And you'll se e 
black women wearing th ese green and pink a nd purple a nd red and platinu m-blo nde wigs. 
They're  all mo re ridiculo us than a sl apstick c omedy. It makes you wonder if the Negro has 
comple tely lost his se nse of identity, lost t ouch with hims elf.
 
You'll see the conk worn by  many, many so-called "upper-class " Negroes, and, as mu ch as I hate 
to say it about them, on all too m any Negro e ntertainers. One of the reasons th at I've especiall y 
admired some o f them, like Lionel Ha mpton and Sidney Poiter, among ot hers, is that they have 
kept their na tural h air an d fought to the top. I admire any Negro man who h as never had himsel f 
conked , or who h as had the sense to get rid o f it-as I finally did.
 
I don't know wh ich kind o f self-defacing co nk is th e great er shame-the one you'll  see on the 
heads of the black so-calle d "middle class " and "upper cl ass," who ought to know  better, or the 
one you'll  see on the heads of the poorest, m ost downtro dden, ignorant black m en. I mean the 
legal- minimum-wa ge gh etto-dwellin g kin d of Negro, a s I was when I  got my fi rst one. It's generally 
among t hese poor fools that you'll  see a black kerchi ef over th e man's he ad, like Aunt Jemima; 
he's trying to make his c onk last lo nger, betwee n trips t o the barbersho p. Only for special 
occasions is t his kerc hief-protected conk exp osed-t o show off how "sharp " and "hip" its owner is. 
The ironic thi ng is that I have n ever heard any woma n, white or black, express a ny admira tion f or 
a conk. Of course , any white woma n with a black m an isn't t hinking ab out his hair. But I don't see 
how on earth a black woman with any race prid e could walk  down t he street with any black m an 
wear ing a conk-t he emblem of his s hame that he is black. 
To my own s hame, when I say all o f this I'm talking f irst o f all a bout myself-b ecause you can't 
show me any Negro who ever co nked more faithfully than I did. I'm sp eaking fr om person al 
experienc e when I  say of any black m an who c onks t oday, or any white- wigged bl ack woma n, 
that if they gave the brains in their he ads just h alf as m uch attention as they do their hair, they 
would be  a thousand times be tter off.
 
 
CHAPT ER FOUR
LAURA
 
Shorty would t ake me to groovy, frantic scen es in different c hicks' an d cats' p ads, where w ith the 
lights and juk e down m ellow , everybod y blew gage an d juiced b ack a nd jumped. I met chicks who 
were fine as May  wine, a nd cats who we re hip to all h appenings. 
That paragraph is d eliberate , of course; it's j ust to dis play a bit m ore of the slang t hat was used by 
everyone I res pected as "hip" in those days. And in no time at all, I was  talking th e sla ng like a 
lifelong hi pster .
 
Like hundreds of thousands of country -bred Negroes who h ad come to the Norther n black ghett o 
before me, and have c ome since , I'd also acquired all t he other fashionable ghe tto adornm ents-
the zoot s uits a nd conk that I have d escribe d, liquor , cigarettes, then reefers-all t o erase my 
embarrassing b ackgroun d. But I still harbored one secret h umilia tion: I couldn't dance.
 
I can't r emember when it was that I actually learned how-that is t o say, I can't rec all the specific 
night or nights. B ut dancing  was the chief actio n at those "pad parties," so I've no doubt about 
how and why  my initiatio n into lindy- hopping came a bout. With alcohol o r mariju ana lightening my 
head, andthat wild mu sic wa iling away  on those p ortable rec ord pl ayers, it didn't ta ke lo ng to 
loosen up the dancing instinc ts in my African herit age. All I remember is that during  some party 
around this ti me, when n early  everyone b ut me was up dancing, so me girl grab bed me-t hey o ften 
would ta ke the initiative  and grab a  partner, for no girl at those p arties ever would dream that 
anyon e presen t couldn't dance-a nd there I was o ut on the floor.
 
I was up  in the jostling  crowd-an d suddenly, unexpect edly, I go t the idea. It was as though 
somebody  had clicked on a light. My long-suppress ed African ins tincts br oke t hrough, and loose .
 
Having sp ent so m uch tim e in Mason's white environment, I had alwa ys believed and feared that 
dancing invol ved a  certain or der or p attern o f specific steps-as dancing  is done by whites. But 
here am ong my own less inhibit ed people, I disc overed it was sim ply letting your f eet, hands and 
body spontaneously act out whatever im pulses were stirred by the music.
 
From then on, hardly a party took place without m e turning up-inv iting myself , if I had to-an d lindy-
hopping my h ead off.
 
I'd always  been fast at picki ng up new things. I made up for lost ti me n ow so fast that soon gir ls 
were asking  me to dance with them. I worked my par tners h ard; that's why  they like d me  so 
much.
 
When I was at  work, up in the Ros eland men's room, I just c ouldn't keep still. My shine rag 
popped with t he rhyth m of those great bands rocking th e ballroo m. W hite customers on  the shine 
stand, especially , would laugh t o see my f eet suddenly bre ak lo ose o n their own a nd cut a few 
steps. W hites are correct i n thinking  that black pe ople are natural d ancers. Even little kids are-
except for those Negroes t oday who ar e so " integrated," as I had been, that their instincts are 
inhibit ed. You know those "dancing jibagoo " toys  that you windu p? W ell, I was like a live  one-
music just wou nd m e up.
 
By the next d ance for the Boston black f olk-I r emember th at Lionel Ha mpton was co ming in t o 
play-I had given my n otice to the Rosel and's manager .
 
When I told E lla wh y I had quit, sh e laughed aloud: I told her I couldn't find time to shine shoes 
and dance, too. She was glad, b ecause she had never liked t he idea of my working  at that no-
prestige jo b. W hen I told S horty , he said h e'd k nown I'd soon outgro w it a nyway.
 
Shorty could d ance all right hi msel f but, for his own re asons , he never c ared a bout going  to the 
big dances. He loved j ust the m usic-ma king end of it. He pr acticed his saxop hone and listen ed to 
records . It astonish ed m e that Shorty  didn't care to go and hear the big bands play. He h ad his 
alto sax  idol, J ohnny Hodges, with Duke Ellington's b and, but he said he thought too many young 
musicians were on ly carb on-co pying the big-band names on the same ins trument. Anyway, 
Shorty was  really  serio us ab out nothing exce pt his music, an d about working  for the day whe n he 
could st art his own little group to gig aro und Boston. 
The morning after I quit R osela nd, I was  down a t the men's clot hing store bright and early. The 
sales man checke d and found that I'd miss ed only one weekl y payme nt: I had "A-1" credit. I told 
him I'd just quit my jo b, but he said t hat didn't m ake any difference; I could m iss paying  them for a 
couple o f weeks i f I had to; he knew I'd get straight.
 
This time, I studied care fully ever ything in my size  on the racks. And finally I picke d out my 
second zoot. I t was  a sharkskin gray , with a big, long c oat, and pants ba llooning out at the knees 
and then tapering down t o cuffs so narr ow that I had to take off my shoes to  get t hem on and off. 
With the salesm an urging me  on, I got a nother shirt, a nd a hat, and new shoes-the kind that were 
justcoming int o hipster style; d ark ora nge color ed, with p aper-thin s oles an d knob sty le toes. It all 
added up to seven ty or eighty  dollars.
 
It was suc h a red-let ter day t hat I even went an d got my first barbersh op conk. This tim e it di dn't 
hurt so m uch, jus t as Shorty had predict ed.
 
That night, I timed myself  to hit Rosela nd as the thick o f the cr owd was  coming  in. In the 
thronging lobby, I saw some of the real Roxbury hipst ers eyeing  my zoot , and some fine wome n 
were giv ing me that look. I sauntered up to the me n's room for a short drink from the pint in my 
inside coat-pocket. My  replace ment was th ere-a sc ared, narrow- faced, hungry-looking  little 
brown- skinned fellow  just in town fr om Kansas City . And when he recognized m e, he couldn't 
keep down his a dmira tion a nd wonder . I told nun to "keep cool," that he'd soon catch on to the 
happenings. Everything  felt right when I  went in to the ballroo m.
 
Ham p's b and was  working,  and that big, wa xed f loor was  packed with people lin dy-hopping like 
crazy. I grab bed some gir l I'd never s een, and the next t hing I k new we we re out there Un dying 
away and grinning  at each other. It couldn' t have b een finer.
 
I'd been U ndying previously  only in cra mped littl e apartment living rooms, and now I had room to 
maneuver. Once I  really  got myself  warmed and loosen ed up, I was sn atchi ng partners from 
among t he hundreds of unattached, free-la ncing  girls along t he si delines-al most every one of 
them could really  dance-and I just a bout went wild! Ham p's b and wai ling. I was whi rling girls so 
fast their skirts  were s napping. Black girls, brownskins, high yellows, eve n a couple o f the white 
girls there. B oosting them over my hi ps, my sh oulders, int o the air. Though I  wasn't quite sixtee n 
then, I was tall a nd rawboned and looked like twen ty-one; I was als o pre tty strong for my age . 
Circling,  tap-dancing, I was un derneath them when they landed-doi ng the "flapping e agle," "the 
kangaroo" and the "split."
 
After that, I never missed a Rosela nd lin dy-hop as long as I  stayed in Boston.
 
*     *     *
 
 
The greatest lindy -dancing par tner I  had, everything  considere d, was  a girl named Laura. I met 
her a t my n ext job. When I quit shoeshini ng, Ella was  so happy that she went ar ound aski ng 
about a job for me-one she would a pprove. Just two b locks f rom her house, the Towns end Drug 
Store was  about to replac e its s oda fountain cl erk, a fellow who was  leavin g to go o ff to college.
 
When Ella t old m e, I didn't like it. She knew I couldn't stand those Hill charact ers. Bu t speaking 
my mind right then would have m ade Ella ma d. I didn't want that to happen, so I put on the white 
jacke t and started serv ing up  sodas, sundaes, s plits, sh akes and all t he rest o f that fountain st uff 
to those f ancy-acting  Negroes.
 
Every evening when I got o ff at eight a nd came h ome, Ella would k eep sayin g, "1 hope you'll 
meet some o f these nic e young  people your  age h ere in Roxbury." But those penny-ante squares 
who came in there p utting on their m illionaires' airs, t he young  ones and the old ones both, only annoyed m e. People like t he sl eep-in maid for Beacon Hill white f olks who used to come in with 
her " ooh, my deah" manners a nd order corn pl asters i n the Jew's drugstore for black f olks. Or t he 
hospital c afeteria-line s erving wom an sitti ng there on her day off with a cat fur around her neck, 
telling  the proprietor s he was a "dietitia n"-bo th of them knowing sh e was  lying. Eve n the you ng 
ones, my ag e, whom Ella was  always  talking  about. The soda fountain was  one of their ha ng-
outs. They s oon had me ready to quit , with their a ccen ts so phonied upthat if you just h eard them 
and didn't see them, you wouldn't even k now they were Negroes . I couldn't wait f or eight o'clock 
to get ho me to eat out of those s oul-food pots of Ella's, t hen get dr esse d in my zoot a nd head for 
some o f my f riends' pl aces i n town, t o lindy-hop and get high, or s omething,  for relie f from those 
Hill clowns.
 
Before long, I d idn't see how I was going  to be able to stick it o ut there eight hours a d ay; an d I 
nearly didn't. I remember o ne night, I  nearly quit be cause I  had hit the numbers f or ten cents-t he 
first time I had ever hit-o n one of the sidelin e bets that I'd ma de in the drugstore . (Yes, there were 
several  runners on  the Hill; even d ignified Negroes played t he numbers.) I won sixt y dollars, and 
Shorty and I had a ball with it. I wished I had hit for the daily dollar t hat I played with  my town 
man, paying  him by th e week. I would s urely have quit t he drugstore . I could have b ough t a car.
 
Anyway, Laura lived in a  house that was catercorn er across t he street from the drugstore. After a 
while, a s soon as I saw her coming in, I'd start m aking u p a banana split. S he was a real b ug for 
them, and she came in late every afternoon-after sch ool. I imagine I'd been shoving that ice 
cream dis h under h er nose for five or six  weeks before s omehow it b egan t o sink in that she 
wasn't like t he res t. She was certainly  the only Hill girl that came in there a nd acted in any way 
friendly and natural.
 
She alwa ys ha d some book with her, and poring  over it , she would m ake a thirty-minute job of 
that daily dish of banana split. I bega n to notice t he books s he re ad, They were pr etty heavy 
school st uff-Latin, a lgebra, t hings like t hat. Watching her ma de me reflect that I hadn't read even 
a newspap er since leaving Mas on.
 
_Laura_. I heard h er name called by a few of the others who c ame in when she was there. But I 
could se e they didn't know her too we ll; they said " hello"-th atwas  about the exte nt of it. She kept 
to herself, and she never said more than "Thank you"' t o me. Nice voice. So ft. Quiet. Never 
another wo rd. But no airs like t he others, n o black B ostonese. She was  just h ersel f.
 
I liked that. Before too long, I struck u p a conversa tion. Just what su bject I  got o ff on I don't 
remember, but she re adily opened up and began talking, a nd she was very friendly. I found out 
that she was a high sch ool ju nior, an honor st udent. Her par ents ha d split up when s he was a 
baby, and she had been raise d by her gran dmother, an old lady on a pension, who was  very strict 
and old-fashioned and religious , Laura h ad just one clos e friend, a girl who li ved over in 
Cam bridge, whom she had gon e to sch ool with. They talk ed on the telephone every  day. Her 
grandmother scarc ely ever let her go to  the movies, let alone on dates.
 
But Laura really  liked sc hool. Sh e said s he want ed to go o n to college. Sh e was ke en for algebr a, 
and she pl anned to major in scie nce. Laura n ever would have dr eamed that she was a year  older 
than I was. I ga uged that indirectly . She looke d up to me as though she felt I had a wor ld of 
experienc e more than she di d-which re ally was t he truth. But sometimes, when s he had gon e, I 
felt let down, thi nking  how I had turned away  from the books I  used to like when I was b ack in 
Michi gan.
 
I got to the point where I  look ed forward to her coming in every  day after scho ol. I stopped le tting 
her p ay, and gave her extra ice cream. And she wasn't h iding th e fact that she liked me.
 
It wasn't long be fore she had stopped rea ding her b ooks when s he came in, and would j ust sit 
and eat and talk with m e. And soon she began trying to get me to talk a bout myself . I was 
immedi ately  sorry when I dropped that I had once thought about becomi ng a lawyer. She didn't want to  let me rest a bout that. "Malcolm , there's n o reason you ca n't pick up right where you are 
and become alawyer." Sh e had the idea that my sister Ella would help me  as mu ch as she could. 
And if Ella had ever t hought t hat she could he lp any member of the Little family put up any kind of 
profession al shingle-as a  teacher, a foot-doctor, anything- why, you would have h ad to tie her 
down t o keep her from taking in washing.
 
I never mentioned Laura to Shorty . I just k new she never would have underst ood him, or that 
crowd. And they wouldn't have u ndersto od her. She had never be en touched, I'm certai n she 
hadn't, or eve n had a drink , and she would n't eve n have k nown what a reefer was.
 
It was a great surprise  to me when o ne afternoon Laura h appened to let d rop that she "just loved" 
lindy-hopping. I asked her how had she been able to go ou t dancing.  She sai d she'd b een 
introduce d to lindy- hopping at a party given by t he parents o f some Negro fri end just acce pted by 
Harvard.
 
It was just about time to start closing down t he soda fountain, and I said that Count Basie was 
playin g the R osela nd that weeken d, and would sh e like t o go?
 
Laura's eyes got wide. I thought I' d have t o catch her, she was so excite d. She said she'd never 
been there, s he'd heard s o mu ch about it, s he'd imagine d what it was like, she'd just give 
anything- but her grandma would h ave a fit.
 
So I said m aybe s ome other ti me.
 
But the afternoon before the dance, Laura c ame in f ull of excitement. She whispere d that she'd 
never lied to her gran dma before, but she had told her she had to attend some school f unction 
that eve ning.  If I'd get her h ome early, she'd meet me-if I'd still take her .
 I told h er we'd have to go by for me to change clo thes at the house. She hesit ated, b ut said okay. 
Before we le ft, I telephoned Ell a to say I'd be bringing a girl  by on  the way  to the dance. Though 
I'd never be fore done anything like it, Ella covered up her surprise.
 
I laughed to myself  a long tim e afterward  about how Ella's m outh flew open when we showed up 
at the front door-me  and a well -bred Hill girl. Laura, when I  intro duced her, was  warm a nd sincere . 
And Ella , you would h ave thought she was closi ng in on her third h usband.
 
While they sat and talked downstairs, I d resse d upstairs in my room. I remember ch anging  my 
mind about the wild sharksk in gray zoot I had planned to wear , and deciding inst ead to put on the 
first one I'd got ten, the blue zoo t. I knew  I should wear  the most conservati ve thing I h ad.
 
They were like old friends when I came back d own. Ella h ad even m ade tea. Ella's hawk -eye just 
about rake d my zoot right o ff my ba ck. B ut I'm sure s he was g rateful that I'd at least p ut on the 
blue one. Knowing Ella, I  knew that she had alre ady extrac ted Laura's e ntire li fe story -and all b ut 
had the wedding bells ar ound my ne ck. I grinned all the wa y to the Rosel and in the taxi, because 
I had showed Ella I could hang out with Hill girls if I want ed to.
 
Laura's eyes were so big. She said al most none of her acquaint ances kn ew her grandmother, 
who never went a nywhere b ut to church , so t here wasn't m uch danger of it getting b ack t o her. 
The only perso n she had told was  her girl friend, who h ad shared h er excite ment.
 
Then, suddenly , we were in the Ros eland's jostling lob by. And I was getting wa ves a nd smiles 
and greeti ngs. They shouted "My  man!" and "Hey, Red! " and I answered "D addy-o."
 She and I never before had danced togeth er, but that certainly  was no problem . Any two p eople 
who can lindy  at all c an lindy togeth er. We just st arted out there on the floor am ong a  lot of other 
couples.
 
It was m aybe h alfway  in the number b efore I became aware o f how she danced. 
*     *     *
 
If you've ever lindy -hopped, you'll  know what I'm talking ab out. With most girls, you kin d of work 
opposit e them, circlin g, side-ste pping, le ading. W hichever arm you l ead with is h alf-bent out 
there, your h ands ar e giving th at littl e pull, that little push, touching her waist, h er shoulders, h er 
arms . She's in , out, turning, whir ling, where ver you guid e her . With poor par tners, you feel their 
weight. They're slow  and heavy. But with re ally good partners, all you n eed is jus t the push-p ull 
suggestion. They guide n early  effortlessly , even off the floor and into the air, and your  little s olo 
maneuver is done on the floor b efore they land, when they join you , whirling, right in step.
 
I'd danced with plenty of good par tners. But what I became suddenly aware o f with Laura was 
that I'd never before felt so little wei ght! I'd nearly just _ think _ a maneuver, and she'd res pond.
 
Anyway, as she danced up, down, under my ar m, flinging ou t, while I f elt her out and exami ned 
her s tyle, I  glimpsed her footwork. I  can clos e my  eyes ri ght now and see it, like so me b lurrin g 
balle t-beautiful! And her lightness, like a shadow! My  perfect partner, if somebody had asked m e, 
would have b een one who ha ndled as lightl y as Laura and who would have h ad the stre ngth t o 
last t hrough a long, to ugh sh owtime. But I knew that Laura wouldn' t begin to be that stro ng.
 
In Harlem, years  later, a friend of mine called " Sammy The Pimp" taugh t mesomething I wi sh I 
had known  then to look for in Laura's face. It was  what Sammy de clared was his infallible clue f or 
determi ning the "unconscio us, tru e person ality" of wom en. C onsid ering all t he women he had 
picke d out of crowds an d turned in to prostitu tes, Sammy quali fied as an exp ert. Anyway, he 
swore t hat if a woma n, any wom an, ge ts really  carried away while d ancing, what she truly  is-at 
least potentially -will surface and show  on her face.
 
I'm not suggesting th at a lady-of-easy- virtue look da nced to the surface in L aura-although lif e did 
deal her cruel bl ows, st arting  with her me eting me. All I am saying is that it m ay be that if I had 
been equipp ed with Sammy's ability, I might have s potted in Laura then some of the subsurface 
potential, d estined to become real, th at would have s hocke d her grandma.
 
A third of the way or so through the evening t he m ain vocali zing and instru mental styl ings would 
come-an d then showtime, when only the greatest lindy -hoppers would st ay on the floor, to try and 
elimin ate each other. All th e other dancers would f orm a big "U " with  the band at the open end.
 
The girls who intended to compete would slip over t o the si delines and change f rom high he els 
into low white s neak ers. In  competitio n, they never could surv ive in he els. And always among 
them were four or five u nattache d girls who would ru n aro und trying to hook up with some guy 
they knew could re ally lindy.
 
Now Co unt Basie turned on the showtime blast, a nd the other dancers m oved o ff the floor, 
shifting for good watching  positi ons, a nd began their h ollering  for their favorites. " All right now, 
Red! " they shouted to me, "Go get ' em, Red." And then a free-la ncing  lindy-girl I'd danced with 
before, Mami e Bevels, a  waitress  and a wild da ncer, ran up to me, with Laura standing ri ght 
there. I  wasn't sur e what t o do. But Laura st arted backing  away  toward th e crowd, still looki ng at 
me. 
The Count's b and was  wailing.  I grabb ed M amie and we  started to work.  She was  a big, rough, 
strong gal, a nd she lindie d like a  bucking  horse. I remember the ver y night t hat she became 
known a s one of the showtime favorites t here a t the Rosela nd. A band was screa ming when s he 
kicked off her s hoes an d got barefooted, and shouted, and shook hersel f as if she were in some 
African jungle f renzy, and then she le t loos e with  some d ancing,  shouting wi th every step, until 
the guy  that was out there wi th her n early  had to fight to control h er. The crowd loved a ny way-out 
lindying sty le that made a color ful show like th at. It was how Ma mie h ad become known.
 
Anyway, I started driving her like a horse, the wa y she liked. W hen we came off the floor after the first number, we both were w ringing wet  with sweat, and people were sh outing and pounding our 
backs.
 
I remember leavin g early with Laura, to get h er home in time. She was ver y quie t. And she di dn't 
have m uch to say for the next week or s o when s he came into the drugstore. Even t hen, I had 
learn ed enough a bout wom en to know not to pressur e them when t hey're thinking s omething o ut; 
they'll tell you when t hey're  ready.
 
Every time I saw Ella, even br ushing my  teeth in the m orning,  she turned on the third degree . 
When was I seeing Laura agai n? W as I going  to bring her by again ? "What a nice girl she is!" E lla 
had pick ed her out for me.
 
But in that kind of way, I thought h ardly  anything  about the girl. When it came to person al ma tters, 
my mind was  strictl y on getting  "sharp" in my zoot a s soon as I left work, and racing  downtown t o 
hang out with Shorty and the other guy s-and with  the girls th ey knew-a million miles away from 
the stuck-up Hill.
 I wasn't eve n thinking  about Laura whe n she came up to me in the drugstore a nd asked m e to 
take her to the next Negro dance at the Rosela nd. Duke Ellington was going  to play, and she was 
beside h ersel f with excite ment. I had no way  to know what was  going  to happen.
 
She asked me to pick h er up  at her house this ti me. I didn't want any co ntact wi th the old 
grandma s he had described , but I went. Gr andma answered the door-an old-fashioned, wrinkled 
black woman, with fuzzy gray hair. She just o pened the door enough f or me to get i n, not eve n 
saying as much as "Come in, dog." I've  faced armed detectives a nd gangsters less hostile th an 
she was.
 
I remember the mu sty living roo m, full of those old C hrist pictures , prayers  woven in to tapestries, 
statuettes of the crucif ixion, other religious o bjects on the mantel, s helves, t able tops, wal ls, 
everywhere.
 
Since the old lady wasn't sp eaking t o me, I didn't s peak to  her, either. I comple tely sympa thize 
with her now, of course.
 
What could sh e have thought o f me in my zoot a nd conk an d orange s hoes? S he'd have done us 
all a favor if she had run scre aming f or the police. I f something lo oking  as I did then ever ca me 
knocking  at my d oor today, asking to  see one of my f our daugh ters, I know  I would explo de.
 
When Laura rushe d into the room, jerking  on her coat, I could see that she was upset and angry 
and embarrasse d. And in t he taxi, sh e started crying. She had hated hersel f for lying be fore; she 
had decided to tell the truth about where s he was going, a nd there ha d been a scre aming ba ttle 
with gran dma. Laura had told the old lady that she was  going to start going  out when a nd where 
she wante d to, or s he would quit school an d get a job and move out on her own- and her gran dma 
had pitched a fit. Laura jus t walked out.
 When we got to the Ros eland, we  danced the early par t of the eveni ng with ea ch other an d with 
different partners. And finally the Duk e kicke d off showtime.
 
I knew, and Laura knew, that she couldn't m atch the veteran s howtime girls,  but she told me that 
she wante d to compete. And the next thing I knew , she was am ong t hose gir ls over on  the 
sidelin es ch anging  into s neakers. I  shook my h ead when a  couple of the free-lancing gi rls ran u p 
to me.
 
As alwa ys, the crowd cla pped and shouted in tim e with  the blasting  band. "Go, Red, go!" P artly it 
was my re putation, and partly  Laura's ball et style  of dancing  that helped to turn the spotlight-an d 
the crowd's  attention-to  us. They never ha d seen the feather-li ghtness t hat she gave to Undying, 
a completely fresh style-an d they were c onnoisseurs o f styles. I turned up the steam, Laura's feet 
were flying; I had her in the air, down, si dewa ys, aro und; backwards , up again , down, whirling . .  . .
 
The spotlight was work ing m ostly just us. I caught glimps es of the four or five o ther co uples , the 
girls jungle- strong, a nimal-like, b ucking a nd charging.  But little L aura inspire d me  to drive  to new 
heights . Her ha ir was all over h er face, it was ru nning s weat, and I couldn't believe her strength . 
The crowd was sh outing and stomping. A new favorite was being discovered ; there was a wall of 
noise aro und us. I felt her weake ning,  she was  lindying like a fighter ou t on her feet, and we 
stumbled off to the si delines . The band was still bl asting. I h ad to half-carry her; she was gasping 
for air . Some of the m en in the band applauded.
 
And even Duke Ellington half rais ed up from his pi ano stool and bowed.
 
If a showtime crowd liked your p erformance, when you ca me o ff you were m obbed, mauled, 
grasped, and pummeled like th e team that's just t aken theseries. One bunch of the crowd 
swarm ed Laura; they had her clear u p off her feet. And I was be ing pounded on the back. . . when 
I caught t his fine blonde's eyes. .  . . This o ne I'd never seen among the white gi rls who ca me to 
the Ros eland black dances . She was eyeing  me level ly.
 
Now at that time, in R oxbury, in any black ghett o in America, to have a white woman who wasn't a 
known, c ommon whore was- for the average bl ack ma n, at leas t-a status symbol o f the first or der. 
And this on e, standing th ere, eyeing me, was almost too fine to believe. S houlder-length h air, well 
built, and her clot hes had cos t somebody ple nty.
 
It's shameful to admit, but I had just about forgot ten Laura when she got lo ose f rom the mob and 
rushed up, big-eyed-an d stopped. I guess s he saw what t here was t o see in t hat girl's face-and 
mine-as we move d out to dance.
 
I'm going  to call her Sophia.
 
She didn't dance well, at least not by Negro  standards. B ut who c ared? I could feel the staring 
eyes o f other c ouples aro und us. We talked. I told h er sh e was  a good dancer, and ask ed her 
where sh e'd le arned. I was trying to find out why  she was  there. Mos t white wome n came to the 
black dances f or reasons I knew, but you s eldom saw her ki nd ar ound there.
 
She had vague answers  for everything.  But in the spac e of that dance, we agre ed that I would get 
Laura h ome early and rus h back in a taxicab. And then she ask ed if I'd like to go for a drive  later. I 
felt very lucky .
 
Laura was ho me and I was back at the Rosel and in an hour flat. Sophia was waiting  outside.
 
About five blocks d own, sh e had a low  convertible. She knew where s he wasgoing.  Beyon d 
Boston, sh e pulled off into a sid e road, and then off that into a  desert ed lane. And turned off 
everything bu t the radio.
 
*     *     *
 
For th e next several mo nths, S ophia would pick me  up downtown, an d I'd take her to dances, a nd 
to the bars around Roxbur y. We drove all over . Sometimes it would b e nearly  daylight when s he 
let m e out in front of Ella's.
 
I paraded her. The Negro me n loved her . And she just se emed to love all Negroes. Two or t hree 
nights a  week, we  would go ou t togeth er. Sophia admitted that she als o had dates wi th white 
fellows,  "just for the looks of things, " she said . She swore t hat a white m an couldn' t interest h er.
 
I wond ered for a long ti me, but I never did find out why she approac hed me  so boldly that ver y 
first night. I alwa ys th ought it was  because of some e arlier experienc e with  another Negro, b ut I never ask ed, and she never said. Never a sk a woman about other m en. Either s he'll tell you a  lie, 
and you s till won't k now, or if she tells you t he truth, you might not have wanted to hear it in t he 
first plac e.
 
Anyway, she seemed entranced with me. I bega n to see less o f Shorty . When I did see him  and 
the gang, h e would gibe , "Man, I had to comb the burrs ou t of my ho meboy's  head, and now he's 
got a Beacon Hill chick." B ut truly, because it was kn own that Shorty had "schooled" me, my 
having  Sophia gave S horty  status. W hen I intro duced her to him, she hugged him like a  sister , 
and it just a bout finished Shorty off. His best had been white pr ostitut es and a few o f those poor 
specime ns th at worked around in the m ills and had "discovered" Negroes .
 
It was when I  began to be seen aro und town wi th Sophia that I really  began tomature int o some 
real st atus in bl ack d owntown R oxbury. Up to then I had been jus t another a mong all of the 
conked and zoot ed you ngsters. Bu t now, with the best-looking wh ite woma n who ever  walked in 
those b ars a nd clubs , and with her giving me the money I spent, too, eve n the big, importan t 
black hustlers and "smart boys"-th e clu b managers, na me gam blers, n umbers b ankers, a nd 
others-w ere cla pping m e on the back, se tting us u p to drinks at  special ta bles, and calling me 
"Red." Of course I knew their reas on like I knew my own n ame: they wante d to steal my  fine white 
woman away from me.
 
In the ghet to, as in suburbia, it's th e same status s truggle to stand out in s ome envied wa y from 
the rest . At sixtee n, I didn't have the mo ney t o buy a Cadillac, b ut she had her own f ine "rubber," 
as we calle d a car hi t hose days. And I had her, which was eve n better.
 
Laura n ever again c ame to the drugstore as long as I contin ued to work there. The next ti me I 
saw her, she was  a wreck  of a woma n, notorious ar ound bl ack Roxbury , in a nd out of jail. S he 
had finished high sc hool, but by then she was alre ady going t he wrong  way. Defying her 
grandmother, she had started going  out late and drinking  liquor. This le d to dope, and that to 
selling  hersel f to men. Learning to hate the men who b ough t her, she also b ecame a L esbian. 
One of the shames I  have c arried for years  is that I blame mysel f for all o f this. To have tr eated 
her a s I did for a white woman made the blow do ubly heavy. The only excus e I can offer is th at 
like so many of my bl ack bro thers t oday, I was just d eaf, dumb, and blind.
 
In any case, it wasn't l ong after I m et Sophia that Ella f ound out about it, and watching  from the 
windows on e early mor ning, saw  me getting ou t of Sophia's c ar. Not surprisingl y, Ella bega n 
treating me like a viper.
 
About then, Shorty's co usin f inally move d in with t he wom an he was so crazy about, and Sophia 
financed me to take over half of the apartment withShorty -and I quit th e drugstore a nd soon found 
anew job.
 
I became a busboy at the Parker Ho use in Bo ston. I wore a starche d white jack et out in the dining 
room, where t he waiters would put the customers' dirty  plates an d silver  on big aluminum trays 
which I would t ake b ack to the kitch en's dis hwashers.
 
A few weeks later, one Sunday mo rning, I ran in to work expec ting to get fired, I was  so late. But 
the whole kitc hen crew was  too excited and upset to notice: J apanese pl anes ha d just b ombed a 
place calle d Pearl Harbor .
 
 
 
CHAPT ER FI VE
HARLEMI TE
 
"Get'ch a goo od haaaaam an' cheeeeese . . . sandwiches! Coffee! Candy! Cake ! Ice Cream !" 
Rocking  along the tracks every  other day for four hours b etwee n Boston and New York in the coach aisl es of the New  York, New  Haven & H artford's " Yankee Clipper."
 
Old Ma n Ro untre e, an elderly  Pullma n porter a nd a friend of Elk's , had rec ommended the railroad 
job for me. He h ad told her the war was  snatching awa y railroad men so fast that if I could pass 
for twen ty-one, he could get me on.
 
Ella want ed to get me out of Boston and away from Sophia. She would have loved nothing be tter 
than to have se en m e like on e of those Negroes who were alre ady thronging Roxbur y in t he 
Army's  khaki a nd thick s hoes-home on leave fr om boot camp. But my age o f sixtee n stopped that.
 
I went a long with  the railroa d job for my own re asons . For a  long ti me I' dwanted to visit New  York 
City. Since I had been in Roxbury , I had heard a  lot about "the Big Apple," as it was  called by the 
well-traveled mu sicians, merc hant mariners, sales men, ch auffeurs f or white f amilies, a nd various 
kinds of hustlers I ran into. Even as far back as Lansing, I had been hearing  about how f abulous 
New York was, a nd especially  Harle m. In fact, my father had describ ed Harle m with  pride , and 
showed us pic tures o f the huge parades by the Harlem f ollowers o f Marcus Garve y. And every 
time Joe Louis won a  fight ag ainst a  white opponent, big front-page pict ures in the Negro 
newspa pers suc h as the _C hicago De fender_, the _Pi ttsburgh Courier_, and the _Afro-
American _ showed a s ea of Harlem Negroes cheering  and waving and the Brown Bo mber 
waving back at them from the balcony of Harle m's Theresa Hot el. Every thing I' d ever he ard a bout 
New York City was exciting- things  like Broadway's  bright lights a nd the Savoy Ballro om a nd 
Apollo Theater in Harle m, where great bands played a nd famous songs and dance steps a nd 
Negro stars originat ed.
 
But you co uldn' t just pick up  and go to visit New York from Lansing, or B oston, or anywhere els e-
not without money. So I'd never really  given t oo m uch thought to  getting t o New  York un til the free 
way to travel there c ame in the form of Ella's t alk wi th old m an Rountre e, who was a member of 
Ella's c hurch.
 
What Ella di dn't know , of course, was that I would continue to see Sophia. Sophia c ould get away 
only a few nights a week. S he said , when I  told her about the train jo b, that she'd get away  every 
night I got b ack in to Boston, and this would me an ever y other night , if I got the ru n I wanted. 
Sophia didn't want m e to leave at  all, b ut she believed I was  draft age a lready , and thought the 
train j ob would k eep me  out of the Army.
 
Shorty thought it would b e a great c hance f or me. He was  worr ied sick hi msel f about the dra ft call 
that he knew was so on to come. Lik e hundreds of the black ghett o's young me n, he was taking 
some s tuff that, it was said, would make yourh eart s ound defective to the draft board's d octors.
 
Shorty felt about the war  the same way I and most ghet to Negroes did: "Whitey owns ever ything. 
He wants u s to go a nd bleed for him ? Let him fight."
 
Anyway, at the railroad personnel hiring  office down o n Dover Stre et, a tire d-acting ol d wh ite clerk 
got d own to the crucial po int, when I came to sign u p. "Age, Little ?" When I told hi m "Twenty -one," 
he never li fted his eyes from his p encil. I  knew I h ad the job.
 
I was pro mised the first availabl e Boston-to-Ne w York fourth-co ok job . But for a while, I worked 
there in the Dover  Street Yard, helping to load food requisitio ns on to the trains . Fourth c ook, I 
knew, was just a glorifi ed name for dis hwash er, but it wouldn' t be my firs t time, and just as lo ng as 
I traveled where I want ed, it di dn't m ake any difference t o me. Temporarily  though, they put me on 
"The Col onial" that ran to Washingto n, D.C.
 
The kitchen crew , headed by a West Indian chef named Duke V aughn, worked with al most 
unbelievable efficiency in t he cram ped quarters. Agains t the sound of the train clacki ng along, t he 
waiters were ja bbering th e customers' or ders, t he cooks operated like machines, a nd five 
hundred mil es of dirty pots a nd dishes a nd silverware rat tled b ack to me. Then, on the overnight layove r, I naturally went sightseeing in d owntown W ashingto n. I was astounded to find in the 
nation's capit al, just a few bl ocks f rom Ca pitol Hill,  thousands of Negroes living worse t han any I'd 
ever seen in t he poorest sectio ns of Roxbury;  in dirt-fl oor s hacks a long u nspeakably filthy lanes 
with names like Pig Alley  and Goat Alley . I had seen a lot, but never such a d ense concentra tion 
of stumble bums, p ushers, h ookers, p ublic cra p-shooters, eve n little kids running around at 
midnight begging  for pennies, h alf-naked and barefooted. Some of the railroa d cooks an d waiters 
had told m e to be very care ful, because muggings,  knifings an d robberies went o n every  night 
among t hese Negroes .  . . just a  few bl ocks fr om the White House.
 
But I saw other Negroes be tter off; they lived  in blocks o f rundown red brick  houses . The old 
"Colonial" railroaders had told me about Washington having  a lot of "middle-class " Negroes with 
Howard Universit y degre es, who were wo rking  as la borers, janitors, porters, guards , taxi- drivers, 
and the like. For t he Negro in Washingto n, mail-carrying was  a prestige job .
 
After a few of the Washingto n runs , I snatched the chanc e when one day person nel s aid I could 
temporaril y replace a sandwich ma n on the "Yanke e Clipp er" to  New  York. I was in to my zoot s uit 
before the first passe nger got off.
 
The cooks to ok m e up to Harlem in a cab. White New York passed by like a movie s et, then 
abruptly, when we le ft Cen tral Park a t the upper e nd, at 110th Street, the people's complexion 
bega n to change.
 
Busy  Seven th Avenu e ran along in front of a place calle d Sm all's Par adise . The crew ha d told m e 
before we left Boston that it was  their favorit e night s pot in Harle m, and not to miss it . No N egro 
place of business had ever im presse d me  so much. Around the big, luxurious-lo oking, circular  bar 
were thirty or f orty Negroes, mostly me n, drinking an d talking.
 
I was hit f irst, I think, by their c onservati ve clo thes an d manners. Wherever I'd seen as many as 
ten Boston Negroes-let alone Lansing Negroes-drinking, t here had been a big noise.
 
But with all of these H arlemites drinking  and talking,  there was  just a  low murmur o f sound. 
Customers came and went. The bartenders k new what most of them drank and automatically 
fixed it. A bottle was  set on the bar b efore some. 
Every Negro I'd ever kn own h ad made a point of flashing whatever  money he had. But these 
Harlem Negroes quietly  laid a bill on the bar. They dr ank. They nonchalantly  nodded to the 
bartender to pour a drink f or some friend, while the bartenders, s mooth as any of the customers, 
kept making ch ange f rom the money on  the bar.
 
Their m anners s eemed natural; they were not putting o n any airs. I was  awed. W ithin the first five 
minutes in S mall's, I  had left Boston and Roxbury  forever.
 
I didn't yet know  that these we ren't what you m ight c all everyda y or average H arlem Negroes . 
Later on, eve n later that night, I would find out that Harlem contained hundreds of thousands of 
my people who were jus t as loud and gaudy as Negroes a nywhere els e. But these were th e 
cream of the older, more mature o perators in Harlem. The day's  "numbers" business was do ne. 
The night's ga mbling  and other forms of hustling hadn't yet b egun . The usual night-lif e crowd, 
who worked on regular jobs all day , were a t home eating their di nners. The hustlers at this time 
were in the daily six o'clock congregatio n, having th eir favorite b ars all over Harlem largely to 
themselves.
 
From Small's, I t axied over to the Apollo Theater. (I re member so well  that Jay McSh ann's band 
was playing, be cause his vocalist  was la ter my close friend, Walter Br own, t he one who u sed to 
sing "Hooty Hooty Blues.") From there, o n the other sid e of 125th Street, at Seven th Avenu e, I 
saw the big, tall, gra y Theresa H otel. It was th e finest in New  York Cit y where Negroes c ould then 
stay, years b efore the downtown  hotels would a ccept the black m an. (The Theresa is n ow best 
known a s the place where Fi del Castro went duri ng his U.N. v isit, a nd achieved a psychological coup over t he U. S: State De partment when it confined him to Man hattan, never dr eaming  that 
he'd stay uptown in Harlem a nd make such an impression a mong th e Negroes .)
 The Braddock Hotel was just up 126th Str eet, near the Apollo's b ackst age entranc e. I knew  its 
bar was f amous as a Negro celebrity hang-out. I walked in and saw , along t hat jam-p acke d bar , 
such famous st ars as Diz zy Gillespi e, Billy  Ecks tine, Billie Holiday , Ella Fitzgerald, and Dinah 
Washingto n.
 
As Din ah W ashington was le aving with some friends, I overhe ard so meone say  she was on her 
way to. the Savoy  Ballroo m where Li onel H ampton was  appearing t hat night-she was then 
Ham p's vocalist. The ballroom made the Ros eland in B oston look s mall a nd shabby by 
comparison. And the lindy-hopping t here m atched the size an d eleganc e of the place. Ham pton's 
hard-driving o utfit kept a red-ho t pace with his greats suc h as Amett Cobb, Illinois J acquet, Dexter 
Gord on, Alvin Hayse, Jo e Newma n, and George Jenkins . I went a couple o f rounds o n the floor 
with gir ls from the sidelin es.
 
Probably  a third o f the sid eline b ooths were f illed with white p eople, mostly just watchi ng the 
Negroes dance; but some of them danced together, and, as in B oston, a few white wom en were 
with Negroes . The people kept shouting for Hamp's " Flyin' Ho me," and finally he did it. (I could 
believe t he story  I'd heard in Bo ston about this nu mber-that once in the Apollo, H amp's "Flyin' 
Hom e" had made some ree fer-smoki ng Negro in the sec ond balc ony believe he  could fly, so he 
tried-an d jumped-a nd broke his leg, a n eve nt later im mortalized in song when E arl Hines wrote a 
hit tune called " Second Balc ony Jump.") I had never se en such f ever-heat dancing. After a couple 
of slow nu mbers c ooled the place o ff, they bro ught o n Din ah W ashington. When she did her 
"Salty Papa Blues," those people just a bout tore the Savoy  roof off. (Poor Dinah's f uneral was 
held not long ago in C hicago. I read that over twenty  thousand people viewed h er bo dy, and I 
should h ave be en there mysel f. Poor Dina h! We became great friends, back in those days.)
 
But this night o f my fi rst vi sit was  Kitch en Mecha nics' Ni ght at the Savoy , the traditio nal Thursday 
night o ff for domestics. I' d say  there were  twice a s ma nywom en as men in there, not only kitch en 
workers a nd maids, b ut also war  wives a nd defense-worker wome n, lonely and looking. O ut in the 
stree t, when I left the ballroo m, I heard a  prostitut e cursing bit terly that the profession als co uldn't 
do any bu siness because of the amateurs.
 
Up a nd down, al ong an d betwee n Lenox a nd Sevent h and Eighth ave nues, Harle m was  like 
some technicolor b azaar. Hundreds o f Negro sol diers  and sailors,  gawking  and young  like me , 
passed by. Harle m by  now was o fficially off limits to white servicemen. There had already  been 
some m uggings a nd robberies, a nd several  white servicemen had been found murdered. The 
police were also try ing to  disco urage white civ ilians f rom coming uptown, but those who wanted 
to still did. Every  man without a wom an on his arm was being "worked " by the pros titutes. "Baby, 
wanna have s ome fun?" The pimps would si dle u p clos e, stage-whispering, " All kinds o f wom en, 
Jack-want a white woman ?" And the hustlers were  merc handising: "H undre d-dollar ring, ma n, 
diamond; ninety-dollar watch, too-look a t 'em. Take 'em both for twenty -five."
 
In another two  years,  I could h ave gi ven t hem all l essons . But that night, I was  mesmerized. This 
world was  where I b elonged. O n that night I  had started on my wa y to becoming a Harlemit e. I 
was going to  become o ne of the most depraved p arasitical h ustlers a mong New  York's  eight 
million p eople-four million of who m work,  and the other four million o f who m live off them.
 
I couldn't quite believe all t hat I'd heard a nd seen that night a s I lugged my shoulder-strap 
sandwich b ox and that heavy five-gallo n alu minum c offee pot up and down the aisles o f the 
"Yankee Clipper" back to Boston. I wished that Ell a and I had been on better ter ms s o that I could 
try to describe t o her how I f elt. But I did talk to Shorty, urging hi m to at leas t go to  see the Big 
Apple m usic world. So phia liste ned to me, too. She told m e that I'd never b e satisfied anywhere 
but New  York. S he was so right. In one nigh t, New  York-Harlem-ha d jus t about narc otized me . 
That sandwich man I'd replace d had little chance of getting  his jo b back. I went b ellowing up and 
down t hose train aisles. I  sold sandwiches, co ffee, candy , cake, and ice cream as fast as the railroad's c ommissary  department could supply them. It didn't t ake me a week to learn t hat all you 
had to do was g ive white people a s how and they'd buy anything you o ffered them. It was  like 
popping your sh oeshine r ag. The dining car waiters  and Pullma n porters k new it too, and they 
faked their Uncl e Tomming t o get bigger  tips. We were in that world o f Negroes who ar e both 
servants a nd psychologists, aware t hat white people are so obsess ed with their own im porta nce 
that they will pay liber ally, even dearly, for the impression of being catere d to and entertai ned.
 
Every layover  night in H arlem, I ran and explore d new places. I first got a room at the Harlem 
YMCA, b ecause it was  less th an a block f rom Small's P aradis e. Then, I got a  cheaper ro om a t 
Mrs. Fisher's roo ming ho use which was clos e to the YMCA. M ost o f the railroa d men stayed a t 
Mrs. Fisher's. I combed not only the bright-light ar eas, b ut Harlem's reside ntial ar eas f rom best to 
worst, from Sugar Hill  up near the Pol o Gro unds, where m any f amous celebrities lived, d own to 
the slu m blocks o f old rat-trap apartment houses , just crawling with  everything you co uld m ention 
that was ille gal a nd immoral. Dirt, garb age ca ns overf lowing or kicke d over; dru nks, d ope addicts, 
beggars. Sle azy bars, st ore-fr ont churches with gosp els being shouted insid e, "bargain " stores, 
hocksho ps, u ndertaking p arlors. Gre asy "home-cooking" rest aurants, beauty shops s moky  inside 
from Negro wome n's hair get ting fried, barbersho ps advertising  conk experts. Cadillacs, 
secondhand and new, cons picuo us among the cars o n the stree ts.
 
All of it was  Lansing's  West Side or R oxbury's South End mag nified a thousand times. Littl e 
basement dance halls with "F or Rent" signs o n them. People o ffering you little cards a dvertisin g 
"rent-raising  parties. " I went to  one of these-thirty or f orty Negroes sweating, eating, drinking, 
dancing, a nd gamblingin a  jammed, beat-up apartment, the rec ord pl ayer going f ull blast, the fried 
chicke n or c hitlins w ith potato sala d and collard gree ns for a dollar a p late, and cans of beer or 
shots o f liquor for fifty ce nts. Negro and white ca nvassers sidled up alongside you, t alking  fast as 
they trie d to get you t o buy a copy of the _D aily Worker_: "This pa per's tryin g to keep your re nt 
controlled .  . . Make that gree dy lan dlord kill th em rats i n your  apartment . . . This p aper 
repres ents the only politic al party  that ever ran a black m an for the Vice Pr eside ncy of the Unit ed 
States . . . Just want you t o read, won't ta ke but a little of your ti me . . . Who do you thi nk fought 
the hardes t to help free those Scottsb oro b oys?" Things I overhe ard am ong N egroes when t he 
sales men we re around let m e know  that the paper so mehow was tie d in with the R ussians, but to 
my sterile mi nd in those early  days, it didn't m ean much; the radio br oadcasts and the 
newspa pers were  then full of our-ally -Russia, a  strong, muscular p eople, peasants, with th eir 
backs to the wal l helping Americ a to fight Hitler an d Mussolini.
 
But New  York was  heave n to me. And Harle m was  Seven th He aven! I hung around in Sm all's an d 
the Bra ddock bar so m uch that the bar tenders b egan to pour a shot of bourbon, my f avorite brand 
of it, when they saw  me walk in t he door. And the steady  customers in both plac es, the hustlers in 
Small's and the entertai ners in t he Brad dock , bega n to call m e "Red," a natural en ough nickn ame 
in vie w of my bright r ed conk. I now had my conk d one in Boston at the shop of Abbott and 
Foge y; it was the best conk sh op on the East Co ast, a ccordi ng to the m usical greats who h ad 
recommended it to me.
 
My friends now inclu ded musicians like D uke Ellingto n's g reat drummer, Sonny Gre er, and that 
great person ality with the violin, R ay Nanc e. He's the one who used to stag in that wild "scat" 
style: "Blip-blip-d e-blo p-de-bla m-bla m-" And people like Co otie Williams, and Eddie "Cle anhead" 
Vinson, who'd kid m e about his co nk-he had nothing up there but skin . He was hit ting the heights 
then with his s ong, "H ey, Pret tyMam a, Ch unk Me In  Your Big  Brass B ed." I also knew Sy Oliver; 
he was married to a red-complexioned girl, an d they lived u p on Sugar Hil l; Sy di d a lot of 
arranging  for Tommy Dorsey  in those d ays. His  most famous tune, I believe, was "Y es, Indeed!"
 
 
The regular  "Yankee Clipper" sandwich m an, when he came b ack, was put on another train . He 
complain ed about seniorit y, but my sales rec ord m ade them placate him so me other wa y. The 
waiters a nd cooks ha d begun to call me  "Sandwich Red. "
 By that time, they had a laughing b et going t hat I wasn't going t o last , sales or not, because I had 
so ra pidly become such an uncouth, wild young  Negro. Profanity had become my la nguage. I 'd 
even c urse cus tomers, e speciall y servicem en; I couldn't st and them. I remember th at once, when 
some p assenger co mplai nts h ad gotte n me  a warning, a nd I want ed to be careful, I was wo rking 
down t he aisle a nd a big, b eefy, red-faced cracker sol dier got u p in front of me, so dru nk he was 
weaving,  and announced loud enough that everybody  in the car heard him, "I'm going  to fight 
you, nigge r." I remember the tension. I laughe d and told him, "Sure, I'll fight, but you've got t oo 
many clothes on ." He h ad on a big Army  overcoat. He took t hat off, and I kept laughing an d said 
he still had on too m any. I was abl e to keep that crack er stripping o ff clothes u ntil h e stood there 
drunk with nothing on  from his p ants up, and the whole car was  laughing  at him, and some other 
soldiers got him out of the way . I went o n. I never would forget t hat-that I couldn't have whipped 
that white m an as badly with a club as I had with my mi nd.
 
Many  of the New Haven L ine's cooks and waiters still  in railroad service today will remember old 
Pappy Cousins . He was th e "Yankee Clipp er" st eward, a white m an, of course, from Maine . 
(Negroes had been in dining car s ervice as much as thirty  and forty years, bu t in those d ays there 
were no Negro stewardson the New  Haven Line.) Anyway, Pappy Cousins loved whisk y, and he 
liked everybody , even me. A lot of passenger  complain ts ab out me, Pappy had let slide. H e'd a sk 
some o f the old N egroes wo rking  with m e to try and cal m me down.
 
"Man, you c an't tell hi m no thing!" th ey'd exclaim. And they couldn't. At home in Roxbury, they 
would se e me  parading with So phia, dresse d in my wi ld zoot s uits. Then I'd come to work,  loud 
and wild and half-high on liquor or reefers, and I'd stay that way, jamming sandwiches a t people 
until we got t o New York. Off the train, I'd go through th at Gr and Cen tral St ation afternoon rush-
hour cro wd, and many white pe ople sim ply sto pped in their tracks t o watch m e pass . The drape 
and the cut o f a zoot s uit sh owed to the best a dvant age if  you were tall-an d I was over six  feet. 
My conk was fire-re d. I was re ally a clown, b ut my ignora nce m ade me think I was "s harp." My 
knob-to ed, orange-col ored " kick-up" shoes were n othing but Florshei ms, t he gh etto's Cadillac o f 
shoes in those d ays. (Some s hoe companies made these ridicul ous styles f or sale o nly in the 
black ghett oes where ignor ant N egroes like me  would p ay the big-name price for something t hat 
we associa ted with being rich.) And then, between Small's P aradise, t he Brad dock H otel, and 
other pl aces-as m uch as my  twenty-or twenty -five-do llar pay would allow , I drank liquor, smoked 
mariju ana, painted the Big Apple red with incre asing  numbers of friends , and finally in Mrs. 
Fisher's ro oming ho use I got a few h ours o f sleep before the "Yankee Clipper" rolled ag ain.
 
*     *     *
 
It was in evitable th at I was  going  to be fired sooner or lat er. What finally finished me was an angry 
letter from a pass enger . The conductors ad ded their-bit, telling how many verbal co mplai nts 
they'd had, and how many warnings  I'd been given.
 But I didn't care , because in those wartime days  such jobs as I could as pire to  were going 
beggin g. When the New  Haven Line pai d me off, I decided it would be nice to make a trip t o visit 
my brothers a nd sisters in L ansing.  I had accu mulated some railroad free-travel  privileges.
 
None of them back in Michigan c ould believe it was me . Only my ol dest b rother, Wilfred, wasn't 
there; h e was awa y at Wilberforce Universit y in O hio s tudying a trade. But Phil bert a nd Hilda 
were workin g in Lansing. Reginald , the one who had alwa ys look ed up to me, had gotte n big 
enough t o fake his age , and he was pl anning soon to enter the m erchant marine. Yvonne, W esley 
and Ro bert were in sc hool.
 
My conk and whole c ostume were so wild that I might have b een taken as a m an from Mars. I 
caused a minor a utomobile c ollision; one driver st opped to ga pe at me, and the driver be hind 
bumped into him. My appearanc e staggered the older b oys I had once envied; I'd stick out my 
hand, sayin g "Skin m e, daddy-o!" My stories a bout the Big Apple, my reefers keeping me  sky-
high- wherever  I went, I was  the life of the party . "My ma n! . . . Gimme some skin!"
 The only thing t hat brought me down to earth was  the visit to  the state hospital i n Kal amazoo. My 
mother sort o f half-sensed who I was.
 
And I looked up Shorty's  mother. I knew he 'd be touched by my doing t hat. She was an  old lady , 
and she was glad t o hear from Shorty  through me . I told her that Shorty  was doing fi ne and one 
day was  going t o be a great leader of his own ba nd. She asked me  to tell Shorty that she wished 
he'd write her, and send her something.
 
And I dropped over to  Maso n to see Mrs. Swer lin, the woma n at the detentio n home who h ad 
kept me those couple of years.  Her mouth flew open when shecame to the door. My sharkskin 
gray "Cab Callo way" zoot s uit, the long, n arrow, knob-toed shoes , and the four-inch-brimm ed 
pearl-gray hat over my co nked fire-red hair; it was just a bout too mu ch for Mrs. Swerl in. She jus t 
manage d to pull hersel f toget her e nough to  invite me  in. Between the way  I looked and my style 
of talk, I made her so nervous a nd uncomfortable t hat we were b oth glad when I left.
 
The night b efore I left, a dance was gi ven in the Lincoln S chool g ymnasium . (I've  since l earned 
that in a strange city , to find the N egroes without a sking  where, you jus t check in t he phone book 
for a "Lincoln School. " It's alwa ys locat ed in the segregat ed black ghe tto-at least it was, in those 
days.)  I'd left Lansing unable to dance, but now I went around the gymnasiu m floor flinging little 
girls over my s houlders an d hips, showin g my mo st startling  steps. S everal  times, the littl e band 
nearly stopped, a nd nearly ever ybody left the floor, watching  with their eyes like s aucers. That 
night, I  even signed autographs-"Harle m Re d"-an d I left Lansing sh ocked and rock ed.
 
Back in New  York, s tone broke a nd without any means of support, I realized t hat the railroa d was 
all th at I actually  knew anything  about. So I went over to the Seaboard Line's hiring  office. The 
railroads n eeded men so badly that all I had to do was tell them I had worked on the New  Haven , 
and two d ays later I was on  the "Silver Met eor" to St. Petersb urg and Mia mi. Re nting pillo ws and 
keeping th e coach es cle an and the white p asse ngers  happy, I made about as much as I had with 
sandwiches .
 
I soon ran a foul of the Florid a cracker who was assist ant conductor. Back in New  York, t hey told 
me to find another jo b. But that afternoon, when I walked i nto S mall's Paradise, o ne of the 
bartenders, k nowing how mu ch I loved N ew York, called me asid e and said t hat if I were wi lting to 
quit th e railroa d, I might b e able to replac e a day waiter who was ab out to go int o the Army .
 The owner o f the bar was  Ed Small. He a nd his br other Charlie we re inseparable, a nd I guess 
Harlem didn't have two m ore popular and resp ected people. They knew I was a railroa d ma n, 
which, for a waite r, was th e best kind o f recommendation. Ch arlie Small was the one I actually 
talked with in t heir o ffice. I was afraid he'd want t o wait to ask s ome of his o ld-tim er railroad 
friends for their o pinio n. Ch arlie wouldn't h ave gon e for anybo dy he heard was wi ld. But he 
decided on the basis o f his own i mpressio n, having se en me in his place so many times, sitting 
quietly , almost in awe, ob serving th e hustling set . I told him, when h e asked, that I'd never been in 
trouble with th e police-an d up to then, that was the truth. Ch arlie told me their rules f or 
employees: no lateness , no laziness, n o stealing, n o kin d of hustling  off any cust omers, es pecially 
men in uni form. And I was hired .
 
This was  in 1942.I had just turned seventeen.
 
*     *     *
 
With Small's pr acticall y in the center of ever ything, waiting  tables th ere was Seven th Heaven 
seven ti mes over. Charlie Small had no need to caution me  agai nst b eing lat e; I was so anxious 
to be there, I 'd arrive  an hour early . I relieved the mo rning wa iter. As far as he was concer ned, 
mine was  the slowest, m ost no-ti ps tim e of day, and sometimes he'd s tick around most of that 
hour teaching me things, f or he didn't want to see me fired.
 
Thanks t o him, I learn ed very quickl y dozens o f little things that could re ally ingratia te a new waiter with th e cooks a nd bartenders. B oth of these, depending on how they liked t he waiter, 
could ma ke his jo b mis erable or ple asant-an d I meant to become indisp ensa ble. I nside of a week, 
I had succeeded with b oth. And the customers who h ad seen m e among t hem aro und the bar, 
recogniz ing me now in t he waiter's jack et, were pl eased and surprise d; and they couldn't have 
been more friendly. And I couldn' t have b een more solicitous . 
"Another dri nk? .  . . Right away, sir . .  . Would you like d inner? . . . It's very  good . . . Could I get 
you a m enu, sir? . .  . Well, maybe a  sandwich?"
 
Not o nly the bartenders an d cooks, who knew everything ab out ever ything, it seemed to me , but 
even t he customers, also bega n to sch ool m e, in little conversatio ns by  the bar when I wasn't 
busy. Sometimes a  customer would t alk to  me as he ate. Sometimes I 'd have long t alks-
absorbing ever ything- with th e real old-ti mers, who h ad been around Harlem si nce Negroes first 
came there.
 
That, in fact, was  one of my big gest surprises: that Harle m hadn't alwa ys be en a community of 
Negroes.
 
It first had been a Dutch set tlement, I learn ed. Then bega n the m assive wa ves o f poor and half-
starved a nd ragged immigrants from Europe, arriv ing with every thing they owned in the wor ld in 
bags a nd sacks o n their b acks. The Germans c ame first; t he Dutc h edg ed away  from them, and 
Harlem became all G erman.
 
Then came the Irish, running from the potato famine. The Germ ans ran, looking down t heir n oses 
at the Irish, who took over  Harlem . Next, th e Italians ; same thing-th e Irish ra n from them. The 
Italians h ad Harlem when the Jews ca me down th e gangplanks-an d then the Italians left.
 
Today, all t hese same immigrants' d escendants are running as hard a s they can to escap e the 
descen dants o f the N egroes who helped to unload the immigrant ships.
 
I was staggered whe n old-ti mer Harle mites t old m e that while  this immigrant m usical chairs ga me 
had been going on , Negroes h ad been in New  York City  since 1683, before any of them ca me, 
and had been ghett oed all over th e city .They had first been in the Wall Stre et area; then they 
were pushed into Gre enwich V illage. The next sh ove was up  to the Pennsylvania St ation area. 
And men, the last st op before Harle m, the black gh etto was  concentra ted aro und 52nd Street, 
which is h ow 52nd Street got t he Swing Street name and reputation that las ted long a fter the 
Negroes were  gone .
 
Then, in 1910, a Negro real es tate man somehow got two or three Negro f amilies in to one Jewish 
Harlem apartment house. The Jews flew fr om that house, then from that block, a nd more 
Negroes ca me in to fill their apartments. Then whole bl ocks o f Jews  ran, and still mo re Negroes 
came u ptown, until in a short time, Harle m was  like it still  is today-virtually  all b lack.
 
Then, early in t he 1920's m usic a nd entertainm ent spra ng up as an industry in Harlem , supported 
by downtown wh ites who po ured uptown ever y night. I t all s tarted about the time a tough young 
New Orle ans c ornet man named Louis "Satchm o" Armstro ng clim bed off a train in New York 
wear ing clo dhopper police men's sh oes, and started playin g with Fletc her Hen derso n. In 1925, 
Small's Paradise h ad opened with crowds all acr oss Seven th Avenu e; in 1926, the great Cotton 
Club, where Duke E llington's b and would pl ay for five years; a lso in 1926 the Savoy  Ballroo m 
opened, a whole block f ront on Lenox Avenue, with a two- hundred-f oot dance floor u nder 
spotlights before two b andstands and a disa ppearing  rear st age.
 
Harlem's f amous image spread until it swarme d nightly  with wh ite people from all over t he world. 
The tourist buses c ame there. The Cotton Club catered to whites o nly, and hundreds of other 
clubs ranging  on down to cellar sp eakeasies c atered t o white p eople's m oney. Some of the best-
known were Con nie's I nn, the Lenox Club , Barro n's, The Nest Club, Jimmy's  Chicken Shack, a nd 
Minto n's. The Savoy , the G olden G ate, and the 
Renaissanc e ballrooms battled for the crowds-th e Savoy introduce d suc h attracti ons a s Thursday 
Kitch en Mecha nics' Ni ghts, bathing beauty contests, and a new car gi ven away  each Saturday 
night. They had bands from all acr oss th e country in the ballroo ms an d the Apollo and Lafayet te 
theaters. They ha d colorful bandleaders like 'F ess W illiams in his diamond-stu dded suit and top 
hat, and Cab Callo way in his white zoot s uit to end all zoots, a nd his wide- brimmed white h at and 
string  tie, setting Harle m afire with "Tiger Rag" a nd "St. James Infirmary" an d "Mi nnie t he 
Mooc her."
 
Blackt own cr awled with wh ite people, with pim ps, p rostit utes, bootleggers, w ith hustlers of all 
kinds , with colorful charact ers, a nd with police a nd prohibition agents . Negroes d anced like th ey 
never have anywhere b efore or since. I guess I must have h eard twenty -five of the old-ti mers in 
Small's swear t o me that they had been the first to dance in the Savoy  the "Lindy Hop" which was 
born there in 1927, named for Lindbergh, who ha d jus t made his f light to Paris.
 
Even t he little cellar pl aces with o nly pia no spac e had fabulous keybo ard artists s uch as James P. 
Johnso n and Jelly Roll Morton , and singers  such a s Ethel Waters. And at four A.M., when all t he 
legitimat e clu bs ha d to clos e, from all over town the white a nd Negro musicia ns would c ome to 
some pr earrange d Harle m after-hours spot and have t hirty-and forty-piec e jam sessi ons t hat 
would last into the next d ay.
 
When it all e nded with the stock m arket cras h in 1 929, Harlem had a world rep utation a s 
America's Cas bah. Small's ha d been a part of all that. There, I heard the old-tim ers reminisce 
about all t hose great times.
 
Every day I liste ned raptly  to customers who f elt like t alking, an d it all ad ded to my ed ucation . My 
ears s oaked it up like sp onges when one of them, in a rare burst of confidence, or a little b eyond 
his u sual n umber of drinks, would t ell me  insid e things  about the particular f orm of hustling th at he 
pursued as a wayof life. I was t hus sc hooled well, by  experts in s uch hustles as the numbers, 
pimping, co n gam es of many kinds , peddling d ope, and thievery of all sorts , inclu ding armed 
robbery.
 
 
 
CHAPT ER S IX
DETR OIT RED
 
Every day, I would gam ble all o f my tips-a s high as fifteen and twenty  dollars-on  the numbers, 
and dream of what I would do when I  hit.
 
I saw pe ople on their long, wi ld spending spre es, a fter big hits. I don't m ean just h ustlers who 
always  had some money. I mean ordinary working pe ople, the ki nd that we otherwise al most 
never saw  in a bar like Small's, who, wi th a good enough hit , had quit t heir jo bs work ing 
somewhere d owntown  for the white man. Often they had bought a Cadillac, a nd sometimes f or 
three and four days, th ey were se tting up drinks a nd buying  steaks f or all their friends. I would 
have t o pull two tables t ogeth er into one, and they would b e throw ing m e two-an d three-doll ar tips 
each time I came with my tray .
 
Hundreds o f thousands o f New  York City  Negroes , ever y day but Sunday, would pl ay from a 
penny on up to large sums on  three-digit  numbers. A hit m eant duplicating th e las t three figures o f 
the Stock Exch ange's prin ted daily total of U.S. domestic a nd foreign sales.
 
With the odds at six hundred to one, a penny hit won $ 6, a dollar won $6 00, and so on. On $15, 
the hit would me an $9,000. Famous hits like that had bought c ontrolling int erests in lots o f 
Harlem's b ars a nd resta urants, or eve n bought some o f them outright. The chances of hitting 
were a thousan d to one. Many  players  practice d what was calle d "combinating." For exa mple six centswould pu t one penny on each of the six possible c ombinati ons o f three digits. The number 
840, combinated, would incl ude 840, 804, 048, 084, 408, and 480.
 
Practic ally everyone p layed every  day in t he poverty -ridde n black ghet to of Harle m. Every  day, 
someone you knew was likely  to hit and of course it was neighbor hood news; if big enough a  hit, 
neigh borho od excitement. Hits generally  were sm all; a nickel, d ime, or a  quart er. Mos t people 
tried t o play a dollar a day, but split it up among different n umbers and combinat ed.
 
Harlem's n umbers industry hummed ever y morning and into the early  afternoon, with th e runners 
jotting down people's bets on  slips o f paper in apartment house hallways, bars, b arbersho ps, 
stores , on the si dewalks. The cops l ooke d on; no runner last ed lo ng who didn't, o ut of his po cket, 
put in a  free "figger" f or his workin g area's f oot cops, a nd it was  generally  known that the numbers 
bankers p aid off at higher levels  of the police department.
 
The daily small ar my of runners e ach got te n percent of the m oney they tur ned in, al ong w ith the 
bet slips, t o their c ontrollers. (A nd if you hit, you ga ve the runner a ten perc ent tip.) A controller 
might h ave as many as fifty runners wo rking f or him, and the controller  got five perce nt of what he 
turned over to the banker, who pa id off the hit, p aid off the police, a nd got rich o ff the balance .
 
Some people played o ne number all year . Many  had lists o f the daily hit numbers going  back f or 
years;  they figured reappearanc e odds, and used other systems . Others pl ayed their hunches: 
addresses , licens e numbers o f passing  cars, a ny numbers on letters, tel egrams, la undry slips, 
numbers fr om anywhere. Drea m books th at cost a  dollar would say  what number ne arly any 
dream s uggested. Evangelists who on  Sundays peddled Jesus , and mystics, would pray a lucky 
number for you , for a fee. 
Rece ntly, the last three numbers o f the post office's new Zip Co de for a postal dis trict of Harlem 
hit, and one banker al most went br oke. Let this very book circula te widel y in t he black gh ettoes o f 
the country, and-alt hough I'm  no longer a  gam bling  person-I'd lay  a small wa ger for your favorite 
charity that millions of dollars would b e bet by my poor, foolish black br others an d sist ers upon, 
say, whatever ha ppens to be the number of this page , or what ever is t he total of the whole b ook's 
pages .
 
Every day in Sm all's Par adise Bar was f ascinati ng to me. And from a Harlem point of view, I 
couldn't have b een in a  more e ducational sit uation. Some of the ablest o f New  York's bl ack 
hustlers to ok a liking to me, and knowing that I still was green by their t erms, soon began i n a 
paternal way to "straighte n Re d out."
 
Their m ethods would b e indirect. A dark , business man-looking W est Indian often would sit at one 
of my tables. O ne day when I brough t his b eer, he said, " Red, hold still a minute." He went over 
me with one of those yellow tape me asures, a nd jotted figures in his notebook . When I came to 
work the next a fternoon, one of the bartenders h anded me  a package. I n it was a n exp ensive, 
dark b lue suit, cons ervativel y cut. The gift was t houghtful, and the m essage clear .
 
The bartenders let me know that this c ustomer was on e of the top execu tives o f the fabulous 
Forty  Thieves ga ng. That was the ga ng of orga nized b oosters, who would delive r, to order, in one 
day, C.O.D., a ny kind o f garm ent you de sired. You would pay ab out one-third o f the store's price.
 
I heard how th ey made mass h auls. A well-dressed member of the gang who wouldn' t arouse 
suspicion by his m anner would go into a select ed store a bout closing  time, hide somewhere , and 
get lock ed insi de when the store clos ed.The police p atrols would have b een timed beforehand. 
After dark , he'd pack s uits in b ags, t hen turn off the burglar al arm, and use the telephone to call a 
waiting truck a nd crew. When the truck ca me, timed with the police patrols, it would b e loaded 
and gon e within a few minutes. I later got t o know several m embers of the Forty  Thieves.
 
Plaincl othes de tectives s oon were quie tly identified to me, by a nod, a wink. K nowing  the law 
people in t he area was elementary for the hustlers, a nd, like t hem, in time I would learn to sense the presenc e of any p olice types. In late 1942, each of the military  serv ices had their ci vilian-
dress eyes and ears picking up  anythi ng of interest to them, such as hustles bei ng used to avoid 
the draft, or who ha dn't registered , or h ustles that were be ing worked on serv icemen.
 
Longshore men, or fences f or them, would c ome into the bars selling guns, cameras, perfumes, 
watches, and the like , stolen f rom the ship ping docks. These Negroes got what white-
longsh orem an thiever y left over . Merch ant marin e sailors o ften brought in foreign items, bargains, 
and the best marijuan a cigarett es to be had were ma de of the _gunja_ and _kisca_ that merchant 
sailors sm uggled in from Africa a nd Persia .
 
In the daytim e, whites were gi ven a  guard ed treatment. Whites who c ame at night got a better 
reception ; the several Harle m nightcl ubs t hey patronized we re geared to entertai n and jive  the 
night white crowd to  get t heir mo ney.
 
And with  so m any law  agencies gu arding  the "morals" o f serv icemen, any of them that came in, 
and a lot did, were gi ven what they asked for, and were s poke n to if they spok e, and that was all, 
unless so meone knew them as n atives o f Harle m.
 
What I was learni ng was th e hustling socie ty's first rule ; that you n ever trusted anyone outside of 
your own cl osemouthed circle, a nd that you s elect ed withtim e and care b efore you m ade any 
intim ates even a mong th ese.
 
The bartenders would le t me know which am ong t he regular  customers were mostly "fronts," and 
which really had something going; which we re really in the underworld, with d owntown p olice o r 
political c onnecti ons; which re ally handled some money, and which were m aking it f rom day to 
day; which we re the real ga mblers, a nd which  had jus t hit a little luck; a nd which ones never to 
run a foul of in any way.
 
The latter were extre mely  well known ab out Harle m, and they were feared and resp ected. It was 
known that if upset, they would b reak open your h ead and think no thing o f it. These we re old-
timers, no t to be confused with the various hotheaded, wild, young h ustlers o ut trying to make a 
name for themselves f or being craz y with a pistol trigger or a knife. The old h eads that I'm talki ng 
about were such as "Black Sammy ," "Bub" Hewlett, "King" Padmore a nd "West Indian Archi e." 
Most o f these tough o nes had worked a s stro ngarm me n for Du tch S chultz  back when h e 
muscled into the Harle m nu mbers in dustry  after white ga ngsters  had awake ned to the fortunes 
being made in what t hey had previously  consid ered " nigger p ennies" ; and the numbers gam e was 
referred to by the white racke teers a s "nigger po ol."
 
Those tough Negroes' heyday  had been before the big 19 31 Seabury Investigatio n that started 
Dutch Schultz on the way out, until his car eer en ded with his 1 934 assassin ation . I heard stories 
of how they had "persuaded" people with le ad pi pes, wet cement, baseball ba ts, brass k nuckles , 
fists, f eet, and blackj acks.
 
Nearly  ever y one of them had done some time, and had come b ack o n the sce ne, and sinc e had 
worked as t op runners f or the biggest ba nkers who s pecialized in l arge bettors.
 
There seemed to be an understa nding t hat these N egroes and the tough blackc ops n ever 
clash ed; I guess both knew that someone would di e. They ha d some bad black c ops in Harle m, 
too. The Four Horse men that worked S ugar Hil l-I remember the worst one had freckles- there was 
a tough quartet . The biggest, black est, worst c op of them all in Harlem was t he W est Indian, 
Brisba ne. Negroes crosse d the street to avoid hi m when h e walked his 1 25th Street and Sevent h 
Avenue beat. When I was in prison, someone brought me a story  that Brisb ane had been shot to 
death by a scared, nervous you ng kid who hadn't been up from the South long enough t o realize 
how bad Brisb ane was.
 
The world's m ost unlikely  pimp was "Cadillac " Drake. He was  shiny  baldheaded, built like a football; he  used to call his hug e belly  "the chippies' playground." Cadillac h ad a string  of about a 
dozen of the stringiest, scrawniest, black a nd white stre et prostitu tes in Harlem . Afternoons 
around the bar, the old-ti mers who kn ew Ca dillac well enough would tease hi m about how wom en 
who looked like his ma de enough to feed themselves, le t alone him. He'd roar wi th laught er right 
along with us ; I can hear him now, "Bad-looking wome n work  harder."
 
Just about the complete opposit e of Cadillac was th e you ng, smooth, independent-acting pi mp, 
"Sammy the Pimp." He c ould, as I have m entioned, pick o ut potential pr ostitu tes by watching  their 
expressions in dance halls. Sa mmy an d I became, in time, each other's closest friend. Sammy , 
who was from Kentucky , was a c ool, collect ed exp ert in his business, and his b usiness was 
women . Like Cadillac, he too had both black a nd white women out making his liv ing, bu t Sammy's 
women-who would c ome into Small's so metimes , looking  for him, to give hi m money, and have 
him buy th em a drink-were ab out as beautiful as any pros titutes who op erated anywhere , I'd 
imagine .
 
One of his white wom en, known as "Alabama Peach," a blonde, could put ever ybody in s titches 
with her drawl; even t he several  Negro women numbers controllers  around Small's really  liked 
her. What made a lot of Negroes aro undthe bar laugh t he hardest was the way  she would t ake 
three syllables to  say "nigge r." But what sh e usually  was saying was  "Ah jes' l u-uv ni-uh-gu hs-." 
Give her two drinks and she would t ell her li fe story in a minute; how in what ever little Alabama 
town it was sh e came from, the first thing sh e remembered b eing co nscious of was that she was 
suppos ed to "hate niggers." And then she started hearing old er girls in grade scho ol wh ispering 
the hush-hu sh that "niggers" were suc h sexual giants a nd athletes , and she started gro wing up 
secretly  wanti ng to try one. Finally, right in h er own ho use, with  her family away , she threatened a 
Negro man who worked f or her father that if he didn't take her sh e would swear  he tried rape. He 
had no choice , except that he quit working  for them. And from then until she finished high school, 
she ma nage d it s everal ti mes with other Negroes-and she somehow came to New  York, a nd went 
straight t o Harle m. Later on, Sammy t old m e how he had happened to spot her in the Savoy, not 
even d ancing with anyb ody, just standing on  the si delines , watching, an d he could tell. And once 
she really  went f or Negroes, t he more the better, Sammy sai d, and wouldn't h ave a white man. I 
have wond ered what ever  became of her.
 
There was  a big, f at pimp we called " Dollarbill." He loved to flash his " Kansas City roll," pr obably 
fifty one-dollar bills f olded with a twenty  on the insid e and a one-hundred dollar bill o n the outside. 
We alwa ys wondered what Dollarbill would d o if someone ever st ole his hundred-dollar " cove r."
 
A man who, in his prime , could h ave stolen Dollarbill's whole roll, blin dfolded, was  threadbare, 
comic old "Fewcloth es." Fewclot hes h ad been one of the best pickp ockets in Harle m, back when 
the white p eople swarme d up ever y night in the 1920's, but then during  the Depressi on, he had 
contract ed a bad case o f arthritis in his hands. His finger joints were k notted and gnarle d so that it 
made people uncomfortable to look a t them. R ain, sle et, or sn ow, every afternoon, about six, 
Fewclothes would be at Small's, telling tall t ales a bout the old days, a nd it was  one of the day's 
rituals f or one or another regular cus tomer to ask t he bartender to give hi m drinks, and me to feed 
him.
 
My heart goes out to all o f us who in those afternoons at Small's enacted our sce ne with 
Fewclothes. I wish you could have s een him, pl easantly  "high" with drinks , take his seat with 
dignit y-no begging, n ot on anybo dy's W elfare-an d open his na pkin, and study the day's me nu that 
I gave nu n, and place his order. I'd tell the cooks it was Fewc lothes and he'd ge t the best in the 
house. I'd go ba ck an d serve it a s though he were a millio naire.
 
Many  times since , I have th ought about it, a nd what it re ally meant. In one sens e, we we re 
huddled in there, b onded togeth er in se eking  security  and warmth and comfort from each other, 
and we did n't know it. All of us-who m ight have probed spac e, or cured cancer, or built ind ustries-
were, inste ad, black victims o f the white man's American s ocial system . In another se nse, the 
tragedy  of the once m aster pickp ocke t made him, for those b rother ol d-timer h ustlers, a "there b ut for the grace of God" symbol. To wolves who still were ab le to catch s ome rabbits, it had meaning 
that an old wolf  who ha d los t his f angs was  still eating.
 
Then there was the burgla r, "Jumpst eady." In the ghettoes the white m an has built for us, he has 
forced us not to aspire to  greater t hings, b ut to vie w ever yday  living as survival-and in that kind of 
a community, survival is what is res pected. In any average white ne ighborhood bar , you c ouldn't 
imagine a known cat-m an thief regularly  exposing hi msel f, as o ne of the most popular people in 
there. B ut if Jumpsteady miss ed a few days ru nning in S mall's, we would b egin inquirin g for him.
 
Jumpst eady was  called t hat because, it was  said, when he worked in white reside ntial ar eas 
downt own, h e jumped from roof to roof and was so steady that he maneuvered a long window 
ledges, leaning,  balancing, e dging  with his t oes. If he fell, h e'd have b een dead. He got in to 
apartments thr ough windo ws. It wassaid t hat he was so cool that he had stolen even with pe ople 
in the next roo m. I later found out that Jumpsteady alwa ys keyed hi msel f up high o n dope when 
he worked. He taught me  some things that I was t o em ploy in la ter years  when h ard ti mes would 
force me to have my own b urglary ring.
 
I should stress t hat Small's wasn't a ny nest of criminals. I  dwell  upon the hustlers be caus e it was 
their world th at fascinated me. Actually , for the night-lif e crowd, S mall's was  one of Harle m's t wo 
or three m ost decorous nights pots. In fact, the N ew York City police d epartment reco mmended 
Small's to white people who would ask for a "safe" place i n Harlem .
 
The first room I got a fter I left the railroa d (hal f of Harlem ro omed) was  in the 800 block o f St. 
Nicholas Avenu e. You could walk  into one or another room in this ho use and get a hot fur coat, a 
good camera, fine perfume, a gun, anything f rom hot women to hot cars, eve n hot ice. I was one 
of the ver y few m ales in this rooming  house. This was  during th e war , when you couldn't turn on 
the radio an d not hear ab out Guadalca nal or N orth Africa. In several o f the apartments the 
women tenants were pros titutes. The minority  were  in some other rack et or hustle-boosters, 
numbers run ners, or dope-peddlers- and I'd guess t hat everyone who lived i n the house used 
dope of some kin d. This shouldn't reflect too badly on that particular bu ilding, be caus e almost 
everyone in Harle m needed some ki nd of hustle to survive, and needed to stay high in s ome wa y 
to forget what they had to do to survive.
 
It was in t his h ouse that I learned mo re about wom en than I ever did in any ot her single pl ace. It 
was these work ing pros titutes who sch ooled me to things  that every  wife and every  husband 
should k now. Later on, it was  chiefly the wome n who we ren't pr ostitu tes who t aught me to be very 
distrust ful of most women; there s eemed to be a higher code of ethics a nd sisterliness a mong 
those p rostit utes than among nu merous l adies o f the churc h who have m ore men for kicks th an 
the prostitut es have for pay. And I am talking ab out both black andwhite. Ma ny of the black o nes 
in those wa rtime days were ri ght in step with th e white o nes in h aving hu sbands fighting  overseas 
while they were layin g up with ot her m en, eve n giving th em their husbands' m oney. And many 
women just f aked as mo thers an d wives, whi le playing th e field as hand as pr ostitu tes-w ith their 
husbands a nd childre n right there in New York. 
 
 
I got my first scho oling  about the cess pool morals of the wh ite ma n from the best p ossibl e source, 
from his own wom en. And then as I got deeper into my  own life of evil, I saw the wh ite ma n's 
morals w ith my own eyes. I even made my living helping to guide h im to the sick things h e 
wante d.
 
I was young, wo rking in t he bar, not bothering w ith these wome n. Pr obably I touche d their kid-
brother ins tincts, something like that. Some would drop into my  room when t hey we ren't busy, and 
we would s moke reefers a nd talk. It generally  would b e after their m orning rus h-but let m e tell you 
about that rush.
 
Seeing the hallways and stairs bu sy any ho ur of the night with white a nd black me n coming and going  was no  more than one would expect when o ne lived in a building ou t of which pros titutes 
were workin g. But what as tonis hed me was the full-ho use crowd that rush ed in between, say, six 
and seven-thirty in t he morning,  then rushe d away , and by ab out nine, I would b e the only man in 
the house.
 
It was h usbands-who h ad left home in time to stop by this St . Nichol as Avenue house before they 
went on  to wo rk. O f course n ot the same ones every  day, but alwa ys en ough of them to make up 
the rus h. And it incl uded white m en who had come in c abs a ll the wa y up from downt own.
 
Domi neering, c omplaining, d emanding wives who ha d just a bout psychologically  castrated their 
husbands were res ponsi ble for the early  rush. These wives were so d isagreea ble a nd had made 
their men so tense that they were ro bbed of the satisfaction of being m en. To esca pe this tensio n 
and the chance o f being ridicule d by his own w ife, each of these me n had gott en up early  and 
come to a pros titute.
 
The prostit utes ha d to make it their bu siness to be students of men. They said t hat after m ost 
men passed their vi rile twenties, they went t o bed mainly to satisfy their egos, a nd because a lot 
of women don't understa nd it that way , they da mage and wreck  a man's ego. N o ma tter how little 
virility a man has to offer, prostitu tes m ake him feel for a time that he is t he grea test man in the 
world. That's why  these prostit utes ha d that morning rush of business. Mor e wives could k eep 
their husbands i f they realized th eir greatest urge is _t o be men_.
 
Those wome n would t ell me anythi ng. Funny little s tories a bout the bedroom differences t hey saw 
between white a nd black men. The perversities! I thought I had heard the whole range of 
perversities un til I later be came a  steerer t aking  white men to what t hey wante d. Everyone in the 
house laughe d about the little I talian fellow  who m they called t he "Ten Dollar A Minut e Man ." He 
came witho ut fail every  noontime, f rom his little b asement resta urant up near the Polo Grou nds; 
the jok e was  he never last ed m ore than two m inutes. . . but he alwa ys left twenty dollars.
 
Most m en, the prostit utes felt, were too easy to push ar ound. Every day these prostitu tes h eard 
their customers complaining t hat they never h eard anything b ut griping  from women who were 
being taken care o f and given everything. The pros titutes said that most men needed to know 
what th e pimps knew. A woma n should occasion ally be babied enough t o show her the man had 
affection, but beyon d that she should b e treated firmly. These tough women said that it worked 
with _them_. All wome n, by th eir nature, are fragile a nd weak: t hey are attract ed to the male in 
whom t hey see strengt h. 
*     *     *
 
From time to time, Sophia would c ome over to  see me  from Boston. Even a mong Harlem 
Negroes, h er looks ga ve m e status. They were just like th e Negroes everywhere els e. That was 
why the white prostit utes made so m uch money. It didn't m ake any di fference if you were in 
Lansing, B oston, or New York-what t he white racist sai d, and still says, was ri ght in those days! 
All you ha d to do was pu t a white gi rl anyw here close to the average black man, and he would 
respond. The black woman also m ade the wh ite ma n's eyes light u p-but he was slick  enough t o 
hide it.
 
Sophia would co me in on  a late afternoon train. She would c ome to Small's an d I'd introduce h er 
around until I got o ff from work. S he was b othered about me living among t he pr ostitutes u ntil I 
introduce d her to some o f them, and they talked, and she thought they were great. They would 
tell h er they were ke eping me  straight for her. We would go t o the Br addock Ho tel bar, where we 
would me et some o f the musicians who n ow would gree t me like a n old friend, "Hey, Red-who 
have we got h ere?" They would m ake a big deal over her; I couldn' t even t hink about buying  a 
drink. N o Negroes in the wo rld were m ore white-woma n-crazy in those days th an most of those 
musicians. People in sh ow bu siness , of course, were less in hibite d by social a nd racial t aboos.
 
The white racist won't t ell you that it also works  in reverse. W hen it got lat e, Sophia a nd I would go to some o f the after-hours p laces and speak easies . When the downtown nightclu bs ha d 
close d, most of these H arlem places cr awled with wh ite people. These whites were jus t mad for 
Negro "atmosphere, " especi ally some of the places which h ad what you might call Negro so ul. 
Sometimes Negroes would t alk ab out how a lot of whites s eemed unable to have e nough o f being 
close around us, a nd among u s-in groups . Both white m en and women, it seemed, would get 
almost m esmerized by  Negroes. 
I remember one really peculiar case of this-a white gir l who n ever m issed a single n ight in the 
Savoy  Ballroom . She fascinated my fr iend Sammy; he had watche d her several tim es. D ancing 
only with Negroes, she seemed to go n early  into a trance. If a white m an asked her to dance, sh e 
would re fuse. Then when t he place was  ready to close, early  in the morning, sh e would le t a 
Negro take her as far as the subway entrance . And that was it. S he never would t ell anyon e her 
name, let alone reveal where s he lived.
 
Now, I'll tell you a nother peculiar case that worked o ut differently, and which t aught me something 
I have since learn ed in a thousand other wa ys. This was  my b est early  lesson in how mo st white 
men's h earts and guts will turn over insid e of them, whatever  they may have you ot herw ise 
believe, whe never  they se e a Negro man on clos e terms with a white wom an.
 
A few of the wh ite me n around Harlem, younger  ones whom we called " hippies, " acted more 
Negro than N egroes . This p articular o ne talke d more " hip" talk th an we did. He would have fough t 
anyon e who suggeste d he felt any rac e difference. Musicia ns aro und the Braddock c ould h ardly 
move witho ut falling over hi m. Every  time I saw him, it was  "Daddy! Co me on, let's get our heads 
tight!" Sammy co uldn't stand him; he was underfoot wherever  you went. He even wore a wi ld zoot 
suit, used a heavy greas e in h is hair t o make it lo ok like a  conk, a nd he wore the knob-to ed 
shoes, t he long, sw inging  chain-everything.  And he not only wouldn't be seen with  any woma n but 
a black o ne, but in fact he lived with two o f them in the same little apartment. I never was  sure 
how they worked t hat one out, but I had my id ea.
 
About three or four o'clock o ne morning, we  ran in to this white b oy, in Creol e Bill's  speakeasy. He 
was high-in t hat marijuan a glo w where th e wor ld relaxes. I i ntrod uced Sophia; I went awa y to say 
hello to someone else. When I returned, S ophia looke d peculiar-bu t she wouldn' t tell m e until we 
left. He h ad askedher, "Why is a  white gi rl like you t hrowing yourself  awa y with a spade?"
 
Creole Bill-na turally  you kn ow he was  from New  Orle ans-be came a nother good f riend of mine. 
After Sm all's close d, I'd bring f ast-sp ending white p eople who s till wante d some drinking ac tion t o 
Creole Bill's s peak easy. That was my  earliest experienc e at steering.  The speakeasy was  only 
Creole Bill's a partment. I think a partiti on had been knocked out to make the living room larger. 
But the atmosphere, plus the food, made the place one of Harle m's so ul spots.
 
A record player  maintained the right, soft music. There was any kin d of drink. And Bill s old pl ates 
of his spicy , delicious Cre ole dis hes-gumb o, jambalaya. Bill's g irl friend-a beautiful black gi rl-
served th e customers. Bill called h er "Brown  Sugar ," and finally everyone else d id. If a good 
number of cust omers we re to be served at one time, Creole Bill would bri ng out some pots, 
Brown  Sugar would bri ng the plates, a nd Bill would serve  everyone big  platefuls; and he'd heap a 
plate for him self and eat with us. It was a treat to watch hi m ea t; he loved his f ood so; it was 
good . Bill could co ok rice like t he Chines e-I mean rice t hat stood every  grain o n its own, but I 
never kn ew the Chi nese to do what Bill co uld wi th seafood and beans.
 
Bill made money enough i n that apartment speakeasy to open up a Cre ole rest aurant famous in 
Harlem . He was a grea t baseball fan. All over  the wal ls were fr amed, autographed photographs o f 
major leagu e stars, and als o some political a nd show bu siness celebrities  who would co me there 
to eat, bringing  friends. I wonder what's b ecome of Creole Bill? His place is sold, and I haven' t 
heard a nything  of him. I must rem ember to ask so me o f the Seven th Avenu e old-timers, who 
would kn ow.
 
Once, when I called S ophia in Boston, she sai d she couldn' t get awa y until th e following weeken d. She had jus t marrie d some well-to-do Boston white fellow . He was in the serv ice, he 
had been home on leave, and he had just gone back. She didn't m ean it to change a thing 
between us. I told her it made no difference. I had of course in troduced Sophia to my friend 
Sammy , and we  had gon e out together so me nights. And Sammy and I had thoroughly  discusse d 
the black ma n and white woma n psychology . I had Sammy to  thank that I was entirely  prepared 
for Sophia's m arriage.
 
Sammy said that white wom en were ver y practical; he had heard so m any o f them express h ow 
they felt. They kn ew that the black ma n had all the strikes against him, that the wh ite ma n kept 
the black ma n down, u nder his h eel, unable to get a nywhere, re ally. The white woma n wante d to 
be comfortable, she wante d to be looked upon with favor by her own kind, but also she wante d to 
have h er pleasur e. So some of them just m arried a  white m an for convenie nce a nd security, and 
kept right on going  with a Negro. It wasn't th at they we re necessaril y in love w ith the Negro, bu t 
they were  in love wi th lust-partic ularly "taboo" lust.
 
A white ma n was n ot too unusual if he had a ten-, twenty-, thirty -, forty-, or fifty-thousand-d ollar- a-
year job. A Negro m an who made even f ive thousan d in the wh ite ma n's world was  unusual. The 
white woman with a Negro ma n would be with him for one of two re asons: eit her extre mely 
insane love, or to satis fy her lust.
 
When I had been around Harlem long en ough to show  signs o f permanence , inevitably  I got a 
nickn ame that would identify m e beyon d any co nfusion with t wo other re d-conke d and well-known 
"Reds" who were ar ound. I had met them both; in fact, later on I'd work  with them both. One, "St. 
Louis Re d," was a professio nal ar med robber. When I was se nt to priso n, he was serv ing ti me for 
trying to stick up a dining car st eward o n a train be tween N ew York and Philadelphia. He was 
finally freed; now , I hear, he is in prison for a New York City jewel ro bbery.
 The other was  "Chic ago Red. " We became goo d buddies in a  speakeasy  where l ater o n I was a 
waiter; Chicago Re d was  the funniest dishwash er on this e arth. Now  he's m aking his living being 
funny as a nationally known st age an d nigh tclub c omedian. I don't see any reason why  old 
Chicago Re d would mi nd me telling th at he is R edd Foxx.
 
Anyway, before long, my nickn ame happened. Jus t when, I don't know-but people, knowing I was 
from Michi gan, would a sk m e what city. Since most New  Yorkers h ad never he ard o f Lansing,  I 
would na me Detroit . Gra dually, I began to be calle d "De troit Re d"-an d it stuck.
 
*     *     *
 
One afternoon in e arly 1943, before the regular six  o'clock crowd ha d gat hered, a black soldier 
sat drinking  by himself at one of my ta bles. He m ust have b een there an hour or m ore. He lo oked 
dumb and pitiful and just u p from the Dee p South. The fourth or f ifth drink I s erved this s oldier , 
wiping  the table I bent over close a nd asked him if he wante d a wom an.
 
I knew better. It wasn't only Small's P aradise law , it was th e law  of every tavern th at want ed to 
stay in business-n ever get involved with anythi ng that could b e interpret ed as "impairing the 
morals" o f servicem en, o r any kind of hustling off them. This had cause d trouble for dozens o f 
places: s ome had been put off limits by  the military;  some h ad lost t heir st ate or city  licenses.
 
I played right into the hands of a military  spy. He sure would like a wom an. He a cted so grateful. 
He even put on an extre me S outhern acc ent. And I gave hi m the phone number of one of my be st 
friends am ong t he prostit utes where I lived.
 
But something f elt wrong. I gave the fellow  a half-hour to get th ere, and then Itelephoned. I 
expect ed the answer I got-t hat no soldi er had been there.
 
I didn't even b other to go b ack o ut to the bar. I just went straight t o Ch arlie Small's o ffice.
 "I just d id something, C harlie," I said. "I don't know wh y I did it-" and I told hi m.
 
Charlie lo oked at me. "I wish you hadn't done that, R ed." We both knew what h e meant.
 
When the West Indian plainclo thes de tective, J oe Baker, came in, I was  waiting. I didn't even ask 
him any questio ns. W hen we got t o the 135th Str eet p recinct , it was  busy with police i n uni form, 
and MP's with sol diers  in tow. I was  recognized by  some other detectives who, like J oe Baker, 
sometimes dr opped in a t Small's.
 
Two things were in my f avor. I'd never gi ven t he police any tro uble, and when that black spy 
soldier h ad tried to tip m e, I had waved it away , telling him I was jus t doing him a favor. They mu st 
have agre ed that Joe Baker sh ould just sc are m e.
 
I didn't know  enough t o be aware t hat I wasn't taken to the desk an d booked. Joe Baker took m e 
back insid e of the precinct b uilding, int o a small room. In the next roo m, we co uld h ear s omebody 
getting wh ipped. _Whop! Whop!_ He'd cry  out, "Please! Please don't beat my f ace, that's h ow I 
make my liv ing!" I  knew from that it was  some pimp. _Whop! W hop!"_ Please! P lease!"
 
(Not m uch later, I heard that Joe Baker h ad gotte n trapped over in N ew Jersey , shaking down a 
Negro pimp and his white pros titute. He was discharged f romthe New York City police force, the 
State of New Jersey  convicted him, and he went off to do some ti me.)
 
More bi tter than getting f ired, I was barred f rom Small's. I c ould underst and. Even i f I wasn't 
actually what was calle d "hot," I was now going t o be under survei llance-and the Small br others 
had to protect their business.
 
Sammy proved to be my friend in ne ed. He put the word on  the wire for me to come over to his 
place. I had never been there. His plac e seemed to me a small p alace; his wom en really kept him 
in style. W hile we talk ed about what kind of a hustle I should get in to, Sammy  gave m e some of 
the best m arijua na I'd ever u sed.
 
Various n umbers controllers, Sm all's regulars, h ad offered m e jobs as a runner. But that meant I 
would ear n ver y little until I could b uild u p a clie ntele . Pim ping, as Sammy did , was  out. I felt I had 
no abilities in that directio n, and that I'd cert ainly starve to death trying to  recruit pr ostitu tes.
 
Peddling ree fers, S ammy and I pretty soon agree d, was th e best thing. I t was  a relatively 
uninvolved lo ne-wo lf type of operatio n, and one in which I could m ake mo ney im mediately. For 
anyon e with even a  little br ains, n o experienc e was  needed, especiall y if one had any kn ack a t all 
with people.
 
Both Sammy and I knew  some merchant seamen and others who co uld s upply me with loose 
mariju ana. And mu sicians , among who m I h ad so many goo d contacts, were t he heaviest 
consisten t market f or reefers. And then, musicia ns also used the heavier narc otics, i f I later 
wante d to graduate to them. That would be more risky , but also more mo ney. Handling  heroin and 
cocaine c ould earn one hundreds of dollars a  day, but it required a lot of experie nce with th e 
narcotics squa d for one to be able to last long en ough to make anything.
 I had been around long en ough either to know or to spot ins tinctivel y most regular de tectives a nd 
cops, though not the narcotics p eople. And among t he Small's veteran h ustler regulars, I h ad a 
variety of potentially helpful contacts. This was import ant because just as Sammy could get m e 
supplied with m arijua na, a  large f acet of any hustler's  success was  knowing where h e could get 
help when h e needed it. The help could invol ve police a nd detectives- as wel l as higher u ps. B ut I 
hadn't yet reached that stage. S o Sammy staked m e, about twenty  dollars, I  think it was.
 
Later that same n ight, I knock ed at his do or and gave hi m back his money and asked him if I 
could le nd hi m some. I had gon e straight f rom Sammy's  to a supplier he had mentioned. I got j ust 
a small a mount of mariju ana, and I got s ome of the paper to roll up my own sticks. As they were only about the size  of stick matches, I was able to make enough o f them so that, after selling 
them to musicians I knew  at the Bra ddock Hot el, I c ould pay back Sa mmy an d have e nough pro fit 
to be in business. And those musicians when they saw  their buddy, and their f an, in business: "My 
man!" "Craz y, Red!"
 
In every band, at least half of the mu sicians smoked reefers. I'm no t going to  list na mes; I'd have 
to includ e some of those m ost prominent then in popular m usic, even a  number of them around 
today. In one case , ever y man in one of the bands which is still f amous was on  marijuan a. Or 
again, any number of musicians c ould tell you who I mean when I say that one of the most 
famous singers sm oked his r eefers through a c hicken thighb one. He had smoke d so ma ny 
through th e bone that he could jus t light a match before the empty bone, draw the heat through, 
and get what he calle d a "contact" high.
 
I kept turning over my pro fit, incre asing  my supplies, a nd I sold ree fers like a  wild ma n. I scarcel y 
slept; I was wherever  musicia ns co ngregat ed. A roll o f money was  in my po cket. Ever y day, I 
cleare d at least fifty or sixt y dollars. I n those days (or f or that matter these days), this was a 
fortune to a seventeen-year- old Negro. I felt, for the first time in my li fe, that great feeling  of 
_free_! Suddenly, now , I was  the peer of the other young  hustlers I h ad admired.
 
It was a t this time that I discovered the movies. Sometimes I m ade as many as f ive in one day, 
both downtown an d in Harlem . I loved the tough guys,  the action, Hum phrey  Bogart in 
"Cas ablanca," and I loved all of that dancing and carry ing on in suc h films as "Stormy Weather" 
and "Cabin in the Sky." After leaving  the movies, I 'd make my co nnec tions for supplies , then roll 
my sticks, a nd, about dark , I'd start my rounds. I' d give a couple o f extra s ticks when s omeone 
bought t en, which was five do llars' worth. And I didn't sell and run, because my customers were 
my friends . Often I'd smoke al ong w ith them. None of them stayed any more high t han I did.
 
Free n ow to do what I pleased, u pon an impulse I went to Boston. Of course, I saw Ella. I gave 
her s ome money: it was just a token of appreciatio n, I told her, for helping me when I  had come 
from Lansing. S he wasn't the same old Ella; s he still hadn't forgiven me  for Laura. She never 
mentioned her, nor di d I. But, eve n so, Ella a cted better than she had when I had left for New 
York. We reviewed t he family changes. W ilfred had proved s o goo d at his tr ade they had aske d 
him to stay on at Wilberforce a s an instruc tor. And Ella h ad gotte n a card from Reginald who h ad 
manage d to get in to the merc hant marine .
 
From Shorty's ap artment, I called Sophia. She met me at the apartment just a bout as Shorty went 
off to work. I would have like d to take her ou t to some of the Roxbury  clubs, b ut Shorty had told 
us that, as in New  York, t he Boston cops us ed the war as an excuse t o harass interracial c ouples, 
stopping t hem an d gril ling the Negro ab out his d raft status. Of course S ophia's n ow being m arried 
made us m ore cautious , too.
 
When Sophia caught a cab home, I went to hear Sh orty's band. Yes, he had aband now. He had 
succeeded in getting a 4-F classi fication, and I was pl eased for him an d happy to go. His band 
was-well, fair. But Shorty  was making o ut well  in Bo ston, playing in small clubs . Back in t he 
apartment, we  talke d into the next d ay. "Ho meboy, you're s omething els e!" Shorty kept saying. I 
told him  some o f the wild thi ngs I'd done in H arlem, and about the friends I had. I told him the 
story  of Sammy the Pimp.
 
In Sammy's  native Paducah, Kentucky , he had gotte n a girl pregna nt. H er parents m ade it so hot 
that Sammy had come to Harlem, where he got a  job as a restaurant waiter . When a wom an 
came in to eat alone, and he found she really  was alone, not married, or living with somebody, it 
generally  was no t hard for smooth Sammy to get invited to her apartment. He'd insist o n going ou t 
to a nearby rest aurant to bring ba ck so me dinner, and while  he was out he would have her k ey 
duplicat ed. Then, when h e knew she was away , Sammy would go in and cle an out all her 
valuables . Sammy was  then able to offer some little stake, to help h er back o n her feet. This 
could be  the beginning o f an emotional and financial dependency, which Sammy kn ew how to develo p until she was  his virtual sl ave.
 
Around Harlem, the narcotics squa d detectives d idn't take long to find out I was selling  reefers, 
and occasio nally one of them would f ollow me. Many  a peddler was in jail because he had been 
caught with the evidenc e on his p erson; I figured a  way to avoid th at. The law specified that if the 
evidence wasn't ac tually in your possession , you co uldn't be arrest ed. Hollo wed-o ut shoe heels, 
fake hat-linings, th ese things were  old stuff to the detectives.
 
I carried about fifty sticks in a  small pa ckage insid e my co at, under my ar mpit, keeping my arm 
flat against my side. M oving about, I kept my eyes open. If anybo dy look ed suspicio us, I' d quickl y 
cross t he street, or go t hrough a door, or turn a  comer, loosening my ar m enough to  let the 
package dr op. At night, when I usually did my s elling, a ny suspicious person would n't be  likely  to 
see thetrick. I f I decided I had been mistaken, I'd go back and get my s ticks.
 
Howeve r, I lost many a stick t his wa y. Sometimes, I knew I h ad frustra ted a d etective. And I kept 
out of the courts.
 
One morning, t hough, I came in and found signs t hat my room ha d been entered. I knew it had 
been detectives. I' d heard too ma ny times how if  they couldn't find any evide nce, they would pl ant 
some, where you would never f ind it, then they'd come back in a nd "find" it. I didn't eve n have to 
think twice what to do. I packed my f ew be longings  and never looke d back. W hen I went t o sle ep 
again, it was  in another ro om.
 
It was t hen that I began carrying a littl e .25 automatic. I got it, for some ree fers, f rom an addict 
who I knew had stolen it s omewhere. I carried it presse d under my belt right d own th e center of 
my back . Someone had told me that the cops never hi t there in any rou tine p atting-down. And 
unless I k new who I  was with, I never allowed mysel f to get ca ught in any crush o f people. The 
narcotics co ps ha d been known to rush u p and get t heir o  hands on you an d plant evidenc e whi le 
"searching." I felt that as long as I kept on the go, an d in the open, I had a good chance. I don't 
know now what my real t houghts were ab out carry ing the pist ol. Bu t I imagine I felt that I wasn't 
going  to get put awa y if somebody trie d framing me in any situation that I could help.
 
I sold less t han before because h aving to be so care ful co nsumed so much time. Every now and 
then, on a hunch, I'd m ove t o another ro om. I told nobody but Sammy where I  slept.
 
Finally , it was  on the wire th at the Harlem narcotics squad had me on its sp ecial list.
 
Now, ever y other d ay or s o, usually in some p ublic p lace, they would f lash thebadge to  search 
me. But I'd tell them at once, loud enough f or others s tanding about to hear me , that I had nothing 
on me, and I didn't want to  get a nything  planted on me. Then they wouldn' t, because H arlem 
alrea dy thought little e nough o f the law , and they did have to be careful that some crowd  of 
Negroes would n ot intervene roughly . Negroes we re starting t o get ver y tense i n Harlem . One 
could al most smell trouble rea dy to break o ut-as it did very soon.
 
But it was really  tough o n me then. I was  having  to hide my sticks in var ious pl aces n ear where I 
was selling. I' d put five sticks i n an empty cigarette pack, a nd drop the empty-looking pa ck by  a 
lamppost, o r behind a garbage ca n, or a box. And I'd first tell customers t o pay me, and then 
where to pick u p.
 
But my regular cust omers did n't go f or that. You co uldn' t expec t a well -known m usicia n to go 
grubbing be hind a garbage ca n. So I began to pick up some o f the stree t trade, the people you 
could se e looked high. I collect ed a number o f empty Red Cross ba ndage b oxes an d used them 
for drops. That worked pre tty goo d.
 
But the middle-Harle m narcotics f orce found so many wa ys to harass m e that I had to change my 
area. I move d down t o lower  Harlem, around 110th Street. There we re many more reefer smokers around there, b ut these were a  cheaper type, t his was  the wo rst of the ghett o, the poorest people, 
the ones who in ever y ghet to keep themselves n arcotized t o keep from having  to face their 
miser able existe nce. I didn't last lo ng down th ere, either. I lost too much of my product. After I sold 
to some o f those ree fer smokers who h ad the ins tincts o f animals, t hey followed me  and learn ed 
my pattern. They would dar t out of a doorway, I'd dro p my stu ff, and they would b e on it like a 
chicke n on corn. W hen you b ecome an animal, a vulture , in the ghett o, as I had become, you 
enter a world of animals and vultures. It becomes truly  the survival of only the fittest.
 Soon I found mysel f borrow ing little st akes , from Sammy , from some of the mu sicians. Enough t o 
buy su pplies, e nough t o keep high myself , enough s ometimes to just e at.
 
Then Sammy gave me  an idea.
 
"Red, you s till got your ol d railroa d ide ntification?" I did have it. They hadn't taken it back . "Well, 
why don't you us e it to make a few runs, u ntil the heat cools? "
 
He was  right.
 
I found that if you walked u p and showed a railroad lin e's em ployee i dentification card , the 
conduc tor-even a real crack er, if you approac hed him right, not begging- would jus t wave you 
aboard. And when h e came around he would p unch you o ne of those littl e coach s eat slips to  ride 
where ver di e train went.
 
The idea came tome mat, this wa y, I could travel all over th e East C oast s elling reefers a mong my 
friends who we re on tour with their ba nds.
 
I had the New  Haven identification. I worked a couple o f weeks f or other railroa ds, to get their 
identification, a nd men I was  set.
 
In New York, I rolle d and packed a great qu antity  of sticks, a nd sealed them into jars. The 
identification card wo rked perfectly. If you pers uaded the conductor you were a  fellow  employee 
who had to go h ome on some family business , he just did the favor f or you without a second 
thought . Most whites d on't give a Negro credit f or having  sens e enough to  fool them-or nerve 
enough.
 
I'd turn up in towns where my f riends were pl aying.  "Red!" I was an  old friend from home. In the 
sticks, I was somebody from the Braddock Hotel. _"My  man!Da ddy-o!"_ And I had Big Apple 
reefers. No body  had ever h eard of a traveling  reefer peddler.
 
I followed no particular ba nd. Each b and's m usicia ns kn ew the other bands' o ne-nighter to uring 
schedules. W hen I ran o ut of supplies, I 'd return t o New  York, a nd load up, then hit the road 
again. Auditoriums or gymnasiums all lighted up, the band's ch artere d bus outside, the dr esse d-
up, excited , local dancers p ouring in. At the door, I'd announce that I was so me b andman's 
brother; i n mo st cases t hey th ought I was  one of the m usicia ns. Througho ut the dance, I'd show 
the country folks some plai n and fancy lindy-hopping. S ometimes, I'd stay overnight i n a town. 
Sometimes I'd ride the band's b us to their next s top. Sometimes, b ack in Ne w York, I would stay 
awhile. Things ha d cooled down. Word was around that I had left town, and the narcotics squad 
was satisfied with that. In some of the small towns, p eople thinking I was with  the band even 
mobbed me for autographs . Onc e, in Buffalo, my suit was n early  torn off.
 
My brother Reginald was waiting  for me one day when I  pulled in to New  York. The day before, his 
merc hant ship ha d put into por t over  in New  Jersey . Thinking I still worked a t Small's, Reginald 
had gon e there, and the bartenders ha d directe d him to Sammy , who pu t him up.
 
It felt good to see my br other. It was  hard to believe that he was once the littl e kid who t agged 
after me . Reginald n ow was  almost six  feet tall, but still a f ew inc hes short er than m e. His 
complexion was dark er man mine, but he had greenish eyes, a nd a white str eak in his h air, which was otherwise dark reddis h, something like m ine.
 
I took Reginald every where, intr oduci ng nun. Studyin g my br other, I liked h im. He was  a lot more 
self-possesse d than I had been at sixteen.
 I didn't have a  room right at  the time, but I had some money, so did Reginald , and we ch ecke d 
into the St. Nich olas Hot el on  Sugar Hill. It has since been torn d own.
 
Reginald a nd I talked all night a bout the Lansing years, a bout our family. I told hi m things  about 
our rather and mother that he couldn't remember. Then Reginald filled me in on our brothers a nd 
sisters. W ilfred was still a tr ade instruc tor at  Wilberforce University . Hilda, still in L ansing,  was 
talking o f getting m arried; s o was  Philb ert.
 
Reginald a nd I were th e next two in line . And Yvonne, Wesley, and Ro bert were still  in Lansing, in 
school.
 
Reginald a nd I laughe d about Phil bert, who, the last time I had seen him, had got ten deeply 
religious ; he wore one of those round straw ha ts.
 
Reginald's s hip was  in for about a week ge tting some kin d of repairs  on its engin es. I was pleased 
to see that Reginal d, though he said little a bout it, admired my living by  my wits. Reginald 
dress ed a little t oo loudly, I thought . I go t a reefer customer of mine to get hi m a more 
conservative overcoa t and suit. I told
 
Reginald what I had learn ed: that in order t o get something you had to look as though you alre ady 
had something.
 
Before R eginald le ft, I urged hi m to leave the me rchant marine and I would he lp him get started in 
Harlem . I must have f elt that having  my kid bro ther ar ound m e would be a good t hing. Then there 
would be  two pe ople I could trust-Sa mmy was  the other.
 
Reginald was co ol. At his age, I  would h ave been willing to run b ehind thetrain, t o get to New York 
and to Harle m. But Reginald, when he left, said, "I'll think about it."
 
Not long after Reginald l eft, I dragged out the wildest zoot s uit in N ew York. This was 1943. The 
Boston dra ft board had written me at Ella's , and whe n they had no results t here, had notified the 
New York draft board, and, in care of Sammy , I received Uncl e Sam's Gr eetings.
 
In those d ays only three things in the wo rld sc ared me: jail, a  job, and the Army. I had about ten 
days be fore I was  to show  up at the inductio n center. I went ri ght to work. The Army Intelligenc e 
soldiers, those b lack s pies in civi lian cloth es, h ung ar ound in Harlem with their ears open for the 
white man downtown. I knew  exactl y where to  start dropping th e word. I started noising  around 
that I was frantic t o join. . . the Japanese Army .
 
When I sensed that I had the ears o f the spies, I  would talk and act high a nd crazy. A lot of 
Harlem hustlers actually had reach ed that state-as I would l ater. It was in evitable when one had 
gone long en ough on heavier and heavier n arcotics, a nd under the steadily  tight ening v ise o f the 
hustling  life. I'd snatch out and read my Greetings aloud, to make cert ain th ey heard who I was, 
and when I'd report downtown. ( This was pro bably the only  time my real n ame was ever he ard in 
Harlem in those days.)
 
The day I went down th ere, I costumed like a n actor. With my wi ld zoot s uit I wore the yellow 
knob-to e shoes, and I frizzled my h air up into a reddish bush of conk.
 
I went i n, skip ping and tipping, an d I thrust my t attered Gr eetings at that reception desk's white 
soldier-"Craz y-o, daddy-o, get m e moving.  I can't wait t o get in that brown"-very likely that soldier 
hasn't rec overed from me yet. They had their w ire on  me from uptown, all ri ght. But they still put me through t he lin e. In that big 
starting ro om were f orty or f ifty other prospective  inductees. The room had fallen vacuu m-quiet, 
with m e runni ng my m outh a mile a minute, talking n othing but slang. I  was going t o fight on all 
fronts; I was going to  be a general, man, before I got d one-such talk a s that.
 
Most o f them were wh ite, of course. The tender-looking on es appeared re ady to run from me. 
Some others h ad that vinegar y "worst  kind o f nigger" lo ok. And a few were amused, seeing me  as 
the "Harlem jigab oo" archetype.
 
Also a mused we re some o f the room's te n or twelve  Negroes. B ut the stony-faced res t of them 
looked as if they were re ady to sign u p to go o ff killing  somebody-they would h ave liked t o start 
with m e.
 
The line m oved a long. Pr etty soon, stripped to my shorts , I was ma king my  eager-to-join 
comments in the m edical exami nation ro oms-an d everybody  in the white c oats that I saw had 4-F 
in his eyes.
 
I stayed in t he line lo nger than I expec ted, before they siphoned me off. One of the white coats 
accompanied m e around a turning  hallwa y: I k new we we re on the wa y to a head-shrinker-th e 
Army  psychiatrist.
 
The receptionist there was  a Negro n urse. I remember she was in her e arly twenties , and not bad 
to look a t. She was  one of those Negro  "firsts. "
 
Negroes kn ow what I' m talking  about. Back th en, the white m an during the war was  so pressed 
for personnel t hat he began l etting so me Negroes pu t down their buckets a nd mops and dust 
rags and use a pencil, or sit at some desk, o r hold some twenty-five-ce nt tide. You couldn't read 
the Negro press for the big pictures of smug black " firsts."
 Somebody was  inside with the psychia trist. I d idn't even h ave to  put on any act for this black gir l; 
she was  already  sick of me.
 
When, finally, a buzz came at her d esk, she did n't send me , _she_ went i n. I knew  what she was 
doing, she was going to  make clear , in a dvance , what s he thought o f me. This is still one of the 
black man's big tro ubles today. So many of those s o-called " upper-class " Negroes ar e so busy 
trying to impress o n the wh ite ma n that they are "different from those others" t hat they can't see 
they are only  helping the white ma n to keep his low  opinion o f _all_ N egroes .
 
And then, with  her p restige in t he clear , she came out and nodded to me to go in.
 
I must say this for that psychiatrist. He trie d to be objective  and professio nal in his m anner. He s at 
there a nd doodled with  his bl ue pencil on a tablet, liste ning to me spiel t o him for three or four 
minutes be fore he got a word in.
 
His tack was quiet qu estio ns, to get a t why  I was so anxious. I didn't rush hi m; I circled a nd 
hedged, watching  him closely , to let him think h e was pulling  what he wanted out of me. I kept 
jerking  around, backward, a s though somebody might b e liste ning. I k new I was going to send 
him back to the books to figure what kind of a case I  was.
 
Suddenly, I sprang up  and peeped under bo th doors, th e one I'd entered and another that 
probably  was a close t. And then I bent and whispere d fast in his e ar. "Daddy-o, now you an d me, 
we're from up North h ere, so don't you t ell nobody. . . . I want to get se nt down So uth. Organize 
them nigger sol diers, you dig? S teal us some guns, and kill us crack ers!"
 
That psychiatrist's bl ue pencil dropped, and his pro fessio nal m anner fell off in all direc tions . He 
stare d at me as if I were a snake's egg ha tching, fumbling f orhis red p encil. I knew I had him. I 
was going ba ck out past Miss First when he said, "That will be all." 
A 4-F car d came to me in the m ail, a nd I never heard from the Army anymore, a nd never 
bothered t o ask wh y I was  reject ed.
 
 
 
CHAPT ER S EVEN
HUST LER
 
I can't r emember all t he hustles I h ad during the next two years  in Harle m, after the abrupt end of 
my riding the trains a nd peddling re efers to the touring ba nds.
 
Negro railroad m en waited f or their trains in their big locker ro om o n the lower level o f Grand 
Central Station . Big blackjack and poker ga mes went on in there around the clock. Sometimes 
five h undred doll ars would be on the table. One day, in a  blackjack ga me, a n old c ook who was 
dealing  the cards tried t o be slick, a nd I had to drop my pist ol in his f ace.
 
The next ti me I went in to one of those ga mes, intuition t old me to stick my gun u nder my  belt right 
down t he m iddle o f my ba ck. S ure e nough, s omeone had squeale d. Two big, b eefy-faced Irish 
cops ca me in. They fr isked me-a nd they missed my gun where t hey hadn't exp ected one.
 
The cops tol d me  never again to be caught in Gran d Ce ntral St ation unless I  had a ticke t to ride 
somewhere. And I knew that by t he next day , every railroad's p ersonnel o ffice would have a 
black ball on  me, so I never tried to get an other railroa d job .
 There I was ba ck in H arlem's stre ets a mong all t he res t of the hustlers. I couldn't sell re efers; t he 
dope squad detectives we re too familiar  with m e. I was a tr ue hustler-uneducated, unskilled a t 
anything h onorable , and I considere d mysel f nervy and cunning enough t o live  by my wits, 
exploiting  any prey  that presen ted itsel f. I would risk just about anythi ng.
 
Right now, in every big city ghett o, tens of thousa nds of yest erday 's and today's  school dropouts 
are k eeping body and soul t ogether by  some form of hustling in t he same way  I did.
 
And they inevitably move into mor e and more, worse an d worse, illegalit y and immoralit y. Full-
time hustlers n ever can relax to apprais e what t hey are doing an d where t hey are b ound. As is 
the cas e in any jungle, t he hustler's  every waking  hour is li ved with both the practical a nd the 
subconsci ous k nowledge that if he ever relaxes, if he ever slow s down, the other hungry, restless 
foxes, f errets, wolves,  and vultures o ut there with him  won't he sitate to make him their prey.
 
During  the next six  to eigh t months, I pulled my f irst ro bberies  and stick-up s. Only sm all ones. 
Always  in other, nearby cities. And I got away . As the pros did , I too would key  myself  to pull t hese 
jobs by my f irst u se of hard d ope. I began with Sa mmy's rec ommendation-sni ffing cocain e.
 
Norm ally now, for stree t wea r, I might c all it, I carried a  hardly noticea ble little flat, blue-ste el .25 
automatic. But for working,  I carried a .32, a .38 or a  .45. I saw  how when the eyes s tared at the 
big black h ole, the faces fell slack a nd the mouths sagged open. And when I  spoke, the people 
seemed to hear a s though they were far away , and they would do whatever  I asked .
 
Between jobs, st aying high on  narcotics k ept me from getting n ervous. S till, upon sudden 
impulses, just t o play safe, I would a bruptly move from one toanother fifteen-to twen ty-dollar- a-
week  room, alwa ys in my f avorit e 147th-150th Street area, just f lanking Sugar Hill.
 
Once on a job with Sammy, we had a pretty clos e call. S omeone must have seen us. We were 
making our get away, running, when we h eard the sirens. Instantly, we slowed t o walk ing. As a 
police car scre eche d to a stop, we ste pped out into the stre et, meeting it, hailing it t o ask for 
directio ns. They m ust have t hought we  were a bout to give  them some information. They just 
curse d us and rac ed on. Again , it di dn't cross th e white m en's minds t hat a trick like that migh t be pulle d on them by Negroes.
 
The suits t hat I wore, t he finest, I bought h ot for about thirty-five to fifty doll ars. I m ade it my rule 
never to  go a fter more than I needed to live  on. Any experienc ed hustler will tell you t hat getting 
greedy is the quickest ro ad to priso n. I kept "cased" in my he ad vulnerabl e plac es and situa tions 
and I would per form the next j ob only when my b ankroll in my  pock et began to get to o low .
 
Some weeks, I b et large  amounts o n the numbers. I  still played with th e same run ner wi th whom 
I'd started in Small's Para dise. Playing my  hunches, m any a day I'd have u p to forty dollars on 
two numbers, ho ping f or that fabulous six hundred-to-on e payoff. But I never did hit a big number 
full force. There's n o telling  what I would h ave do ne if ever I'd landed $10,000 or $12,000 at one 
time. Of course, o nce in a  while I'd hit a small combination f igure . Sometimes, flush like t hat, I'd 
telephone Sophia to come over f rom Boston for a couple o f days.
 
I went t o the movies a  lot again. And I never miss ed my musicia n friends wherever  they were 
playin g, either in Harle m, downtown a t the big theaters, or o n 52nd Street.
 Reginald a nd I got very close the next time his s hip c ame back int o New  York. W e discusse d our 
family, and what a-s hame it was that our b ook-loving oldest brother Wilfred had never had the 
chance to go to some of those big  universities where he  would h ave gone far. And we  exchange d 
thoughts we had never sh ared with a nyone.
 
Reginald, in his quie t way, was  a mad fan of musicia ns an d music. When his s hip saile d one 
morning without him, a princi pal re ason was that I had thoroughly  exposed him to the exciting 
musical wo rld. We had wild times backs tage with  the musicians when they were pl aying the Roxy, 
or the Paramount. After selling reefers with th e bands as they travele d, I was known to almost 
every popular Negro m usicia n aro und Ne w York in 1944-1945.
 
Reginald a nd I went to the Savoy  Ballroo m, the Apollo Theater, the Bra ddock Hot el bar, the 
nightclu bs an d speakeasi es, where ver Negroes played m usic. The grea t Lady Day, Billie H oliday , 
hugged h im and calle d him "baby bro ther." Reginald s hared tens of thousan ds of Negroes' 
feelings that the living end of the big bands was Lio nel Ha mpton's . I was ver y close t o many o f 
the men in Ha mp's b and; I introduc ed Reginald to them, and also to Hamp himsel f, and Ha mp's 
wife and business m anager, Gla dys Ha mpton. One of this world's s weetest people is Ha mp. 
Anyon e who kn ows hi m will tell you th at he'd often do the most gener ous t hings  for people h e 
barely knew . As m uch money as Hamp h as m ade, and still ma kes, he would b e broke t oday if his 
money an d his business weren't handled by Gla dys, who is o ne of the brai niest wom en I ever 
met. The Apollo Theater's owner, Frank Sc hifrman, c ould tell you. H e gen erally signe d bands to 
play for a set weekl y amount, but I know that once during  those d ays Gladys  Ham pton ins tead 
arrange d a d eal for Ha mp's band to play for a cut o f the gate. Then the usual number of shows 
was doubled up-i f I'm not mist aken, eight shows a day, instead of the usual four-an d Hamp's 
pulling power cle aned up. Gl adys  Hampton used to talk to me  a lot, and she trie d togive me good 
advice: " Calm down, Re d." Gla dys saw  how wild I was. Sh e saw me  headed toward a  bad end.
 
One of the things I like d about Reginald was that when I left him to go away "work ing," Reginald 
asked m e no questio ns. After he  came to Harlem, I went o n more jobs than usual. I gu ess th at 
what in fluenc ed m e to get my firs t actual a partment was my no t wanting Reginald to be knocking 
around Harlem without anywhere t o call " home." That first apartment was  three roo ms, f or a 
hundred dollars a m onth, I think , in the front basement of a house on 147th Stre et betwee n 
Convent and St. Nich olas Avenues . Living in t he rear b asement apartment, right b ehind Reginald 
and me, was one of Harlem's m ost succ essful narcotics dealers.
 
With the apartment a s our he adqu arters, I  gradually got Reginald in troduced around to Creole 
Bill's,  and other Harlem a fter-hours s pots. About two o 'clock every  morning, as the downtown 
white nightclu bs close d, Reginal d and I would st and aro und in f ront of this or t hat Harle m after-
hours plac e, and I'd school hi m to what was  happening.
 Especially  after the nightclubs d owntown close d, the taxis and black limo usines would be driving 
uptown, bringing  those white p eople who n ever could get e nough o f Negro _s oul_. The places 
popular with t hese wh ites range d all th e way  from the big loc ally famous ones such a s Jim my's 
Chicken Shack, a nd Dickie W ells', to the little h ere-to night- gone-to morrow -night private clubs, so-
called , where a dollar was collec ted at the door for "membership."
 
Inside every  after-ho urs sp ot, the smoke would hurt your eyes. Four white p eople to every  Negro 
would be  in there drinking wh isky from coffee cups a nd eating fried chicken . The gener ally flush-
faced white m en and their makeup-masked, glittery -eyed wom en would b e pounding each other's 
backs an d uproariousl y laughing a nd applauding the music. A lot of the whites, dr unk,would go 
staggerin g up to Negroes, the waiters, th e owners, or Negroes a t tables , wringing th eir hands, 
even try ing to hug t hem,
 
"You're just a s goo d as I am-I want you to know  that!" The most famous places drew  both Negro 
and white c elebrities who e njoyed e ach other. A jam-p acke d four-thirty A.M. crowd at  Jimmy's 
Chicken Shack or Dickie W ells' might have s uch ja m-sessio n entertainm ent as Hazel Sc ott 
playin g the piano for Billie  Holiday  singing th e blues. Jimmy's Chicke n Shack, i ncide ntally , was 
where on ce, later o n, I worked brie fly as a waite r. That's where Redd Fox x was the dishwasher 
who kept the kitc hen cre w in stitch es.
 
After a while, my br other Reginald h ad to have a  hustle, and I gave m uch thought to what would 
be, for him, a good, safe hustle . After he'd lear ned his own wa y around, it would b e up to him to 
take risks  for himsel f-if he want ed to make more a nd quicker mo ney.
 
The hustle I got Reginald into really  was very simple. I t utilized t he psychology of the ghet to 
jungle. D owntown, h e paid the two doll ars, or what ever it was, f or a regular city  peddler's lice nse. 
Then I took hi m to a manufacturers'  outlet where we b ought a supply of cheap imperfect 
"secon ds"-shirts, underwea r, cheap rings, watches , all kin ds of quick- sale ite ms.
 
Watching m e work  this h ustle back in Harle m, Reginal d quickl y caught on to how to go into 
barbersh ops, b eauty parlors, a nd bars acting ver y nervous a s he let the cus tomers p eep into his 
small valise o f "loot." With so m any t hieves around anxious t o get rid of stolen goo d-qualit y 
merc handise c heaply, many Haderoites, p urely  because of this c onditioning, ju mped to pay hot 
prices f or inferior go ods whose sale was perfectly legitimate. It never t ook l ong to get rid o f a 
valiseful for at least twice what it h ad cost. And if any cop stopped Reginald , he had in his p ocket 
both the peddler's license a nd the manufacturers' outlet bills o f sale. Reginald only had to be 
certai n that none of the customersto who m he  sold ever  saw that he was legitimate.
 
I assumed that Reginal d, like m ost of the Negroes I  knew, would go f or a white woma n. I'd point 
out Negro- happy white wom en to him, and explain that a Negro  with any brains c ould wrap these 
women around his ringers. Bu t I have t o say this for Reginald : he never like d wh ite wome n. I 
remember the one time he met Sophia; he was  so cool it u pset Sophia, a nd it tickle d me.
 
Reginald got hims elf a black woman. I'd guess s he was pu shing thirty;  an "old settler ," as we 
called them back in those days. S he was a waitress in an  exclusi ve res taurant d owntown. S he 
lavished on Reginal d ever ything sh e had, she was  so happy to get a  young ma n. I mean she 
bought hi m clo thes, co oked and wash ed for him, and everything, as though h e were a baby.
 
That was  just a nother example of why my res pect for my younger br other kept incre asing. 
Reginald s howed, i n often surprising  ways, more sense t han a lot of work ing h ustlers twice his 
age. R eginald then was  only sixtee n, but, a six-footer, he looke d and acted m uch older th an his 
years.
 
*     *     *
 
All thr ough t he war , the Harlem racial pict ure never was to o bright. Tension built to  a pretty high pitch. Old-ti mers t old m e that Harle m ha d never been the same si nce t he 1935 riot, when millions 
of dollars worth o f damage was  done by thousands o f Negroes, infuriated chiefly by the white 
merc hants in Harlem re fusing to  hire a  Negro even as their st ores rake d in Harlem's m oney.
 
During  World War II, Mayor  LaGuar dia o fficially closed the Savoy  Ballroo m. Harle m said th e real 
reason was to  stop Negroes f rom dancing  with white wom en. Harlem s aid that no one dragged 
the white wome n in t here. Adam Clayton Powell  made it a big fight. He had succ essfully fought 
Cons olidat edEdison and the New York Telephone Co mpany until they had hire d Negroes. Then 
he had helped to battle the U. S. Nav y and the U.S. Army  about their segre gating of uniformed 
Negroes. B ut Powell  couldn't win  this b attle. City  Hall k ept the Savoy  closed for a long ti me. It was 
just a nother one of the "liberal Nort h" actio ns that didn't help Harle m to love th e white m an any.
 
Finally , rumor flashed that in the Bra ddock Hot el, wh ite cops ha d shot a N egro soldier . I was 
walking down S t. Nichol as Avenue; I saw all o f these Negroes hollering  and running north from 
125th Str eet. Some of them were lo aded down with ar mfuls of stuff. I remember it was th e 
bandleader Fletch er Hen derso n's ne phew "Shorty" Henderson who told me what h ad happened. 
Negroes were  smashing st ore w indows, a nd taking everything  they could grab a nd carry-
furniture, f ood, jewelry, clothes, whisk y. Within an hour, every New York City cop seemed to be in 
Harlem . Mayor L aGuardia and the N AACP's t hen Secretary , the famed late Walter W hite, were in 
a red firecar, riding aro und pleading over a loudspeaker t o all o f those shouting, muling, angry 
Negroes to please go home and stay insi de.
 
Just recently I ra n into Shorty  Henderson on Seven th Avenu e. We were la ughing  about a fellow 
whom t he riot ha d left with th e nick name of "Left Feet." In a scra mble in a women's shoe store, 
somehow he'd grabbed five shoes, a ll of them for left feet! And we laughed about the scared littl e 
Chines e whose resta urant didn't have a hand laid on it, because the riot ers just a bout convulsed 
laughing when t hey saw the sign the Chin ese h ad hastily stuck o n his fr ont door: "Me C olored 
Too."
 
After the riot , things got very tight i n Harlem . It was terrible for the night-lif e people, a nd for those 
hustlers whose m ain income had been the white m an's mo ney. The 1935 riot had left only a 
relative  trickle o f the money which ha d poured into H arlem d uring  the 1920's. And now this new 
riot e nded eve n that trickle. 
Today the white people who visit Harlem , and this mo stly on weeke nd nights, ar e hardly mo re 
than a few doze n who do  the twist, th e frug, the Watusi, and all t he rest o f the current dance 
crazes in Sm all's Par adise , owned now by the great baske tball c hampion "Wilt the Stilt" 
Chamberlain, who dr aws cro wds with his big, clean, All-America n-athlete image. Most white 
people today are p hysically  afraid to come to Harlem-an d it's for goo d reasons , too. Even for 
Negroes, Harle m night life is a bout finished. Most of the Negroes who h ave mo ney to  spend are 
spending it d owntown so mewhere i n this hyp ocritical  "integration," in places where previously  the 
police would have b een called t o haul off any Negro insane enough to  try and get in. The already 
Croesus-rich white m an can't get a nother skyscrap er hotel finished and opened before all th ese 
integratio n-ma d Negroes , who th emselves d on't own a tool sh ed, are b ooking the swanky  new 
hotel for "cotillions" and "conven tions. " Those rich whites c ould afford it whe n they used to throw 
away their money in Harle m. But Negroes can't afford to be taking th eir money downt own to the 
white man.
 
*     *     *
 
Sammy an d I, on a robbery job, got a bad scare, a very  close call.
 
Things ha d gro wn so tight i n Harlem that some hustlers h ad been forced to go to  work. Eve n 
some pr ostitutes h ad gotten jobs a s domestics, a nd cleaning office buildi ngs at night . The 
pimping was so poor, Sammy h ad gone o n the job with m e. We had select ed one of those 
situations consi dered "impossi ble." But where ver p eople think t hat, the guards wi ll unconscio usly 
grow grad ually more relaxed , until sometimes t hose can be the easiest jo bs of all. 
But right in the m iddle o f the act, we h ad some bad luck. A bullet gra zed Sammy . We just b arely 
escaped.
 Sammy f ortunately  wasn't really  hurt. We split up, which  was alwa ys wi se to do.
 
Just before d aybreak, I went t o Sammy's apartment. His newest wom an, o ne of those beautiful 
but hot-he aded Spanish Negroes, was  in there crying and carrying on over S ammy. She went for 
me, scre aming a nd clawing; sh e knew I'd been in on it with hi m. I fended her off. Not able to 
figure ou t why  Sammy di dn't s hut her u p, I did . . . and from the corner of my eye, I saw  Sammy 
going  for his gu n.
 
Sammy's reac tion t hat way to my hi tting his wom an-close a s he and I were- was th e only weak 
spot I'd ever  glimpsed . The woma n screa med and dove f or him. She knew as I did that when your 
best friend dr aws a gun o n you, h e usually has lost all c ontrol of his em otions, and he intends t o 
shoot. She dis tracte d Sammy lo ng enough f or me to bolt through t he door. Sammy chas ed me, 
about a block.
 
We soon m ade up-on the surface. But things never ar e fully right again with anyone you have 
seen try ing to  kill you.
 
Intuitio n told us that we ha d better lay  low for a good wh ile. The worst thi ng was t hat we'd been 
seen. The police in that nearby town h ad surely  circulat ed our gen eral de scriptions .
 
I just couldn't forget t hat incid ent over Sammy's woman. I came to rely mo re and more upon my 
brother Reginal d as t he only  one in my world I c ould completely trust .
 
Reginald was laz y, I'd discovered that. H e had quit h is hu stle a ltoget her. But I didn't mi nd that, 
really , because one could be as lazy as he wanted, if he would o nly use his he ad, as Reginald 
was doing. He had left my ap artment by now.He was liv ing off his "o ld settler " woma n-when he 
was in town. I had als o taught R eginald h ow he could work  a little while for a railroad, then use 
his id entification card t o travel for nothing- and Reginald loved to travel. Several ti mes, he had 
gone visiting  all a round, among o ur bro thers and sisters. They had now beg un to scatter t o 
different cities. I n Boston, Reginald was  closer t o our sister Mary  man to Ella, who had been my 
favorite. B oth Reginald and Mary  were quiet types , and Ella an d I were extro verts. And Shorty  in 
Boston had given my brother a royal time.
 
Because of my reputation, it was  easy for me to get into the numbers rack et. That was pr obably 
Harlem's o nly hustle wh ich hadn't slum ped in b usiness. I n return for a favor to some white 
mobster, my n ew boss a nd his wif e had just b een given a  six-mo nths nu mbers b anking priv ilege 
for the Bronx railroad area calle d Mott haven Yards. The white mobsters had the numbers racket 
split in to specific ar eas. A designat ed ar ea would be assigned to someone for a specified period 
of time. My  boss's wife had been Dutc h Schultz's  secret ary in the 1930's, d uring  the time when 
Schultz had strong- armed his way into control o f the Harlem numbers business.
 
My job n ow was t o ride a  bus across th e George W ashington Bridge where a fellow was  waiting 
for me to hand him a bag of numbers betting slips. W e never spok e. I'd cross the stre et and catch 
the next bus back to Harlem. I never knew who t hat fellow was.  I never knew who p icked up the 
betting mo ney f or the slips t hat I handled. You di dn't ask qu estions in the rack ets.
 
My boss's wife and Gladys Ham pton were th e only two wome n I ever m et in Harle m whose 
business a bility I really respected. My  boss's wife , when s he had the time and the inclinatio n to 
talk, would tell m e many in teresting t hings. Sh e would t alk to me about the Dutc h Schultz  days-
about deals that she had known, ab out graf t paid to officials-rookie cops and shyster law yers right 
on up into the top levels o f police a nd politics. She knew from person al experie nceh ow crime 
existed o nly to the degree t hat the law coopera ted with it. She showed m e how, in the country 's 
entire social, political a nd economic str ucture , the crimin al, th e law , and the politicians were actually insepara ble p artners.
 
It was a t this time that I changed from my old numbers man, the one I'd used since I first worked 
in Small's P aradis e. He h ated to lose a  heavy playe r, but he readily understo od why  I would now 
want to  play  with a runner o f my own ou tfit. That was how I began pl acing  my bets with W est 
Indian Archie. I've m entioned him before-on e of Harle m's really  _bad_ N egroes; o ne of those 
former Dutc h Schultz  strong- arm men around Harlem .
 
West Indian Archie h ad finished time in Si ng Sing not long b efore I came to Harle m. But my 
boss's wife had hired him not just becaus e she knew him from the old d ays. W est Indian Archie 
had the kind o f photograp hic memory  that put him among th e elit e of numbers ru nners. He n ever 
wrote down your nu mber; eve n in t he case of combination plays,  he would just nod. He was  able 
to file all t he numbers in his head, and write them down f or the banker o nly when he turned in his 
money. This made him the ideal ru nner b ecause cops could never c atch him with any betting 
slips.
 
I've often reflected upon such b lack veter an numbers m en as West Indian Archie. If they had lived 
in another ki nd of society , their exceptio nal m athematical tal ents might h ave be en better u sed. 
But they were bl ack.
 
Anyway, it was  status jus t to be known a s a client o f West Indian Archie's, b ecause h e handled 
only sizable bettors. H e also required in tegrity and sound credit: it wasn't n ecess ary that you p ay 
as you p layed; you c ould pay W est Indian Archie by t he week. He alwa ys carried a  couple of 
thousand dollars o n him, his own m oney. If a clie nt came up to him and said h e'd hit for some 
moderate amount, say a fifty-cent or one-dollar c ombination, West Indian Archiewould p eel o ff the 
three or six  hundred dollars, an d later get his mo ney b ack f rom the banker.
 
Every week end, I'd pay my  bill-anywhere fr om fifty to  even o ne hundred dollars, i f I had really 
plunged o n some hunch. And when, once or twice, I  did hit, always  just so me combin ation, as I've 
described, West Indian Archie p aid me off from his own r oll.
 
The six mo nths finally ended for my boss and his wife. They had done well. Their ru nners got nice 
tips, and promptly were snatched up by ot her b ankers. I continued workin g for my boss and his 
wife in a gambling ho use they opened.
 
*     *     *
 
A Harlem madam I'd come to know-through h aving done a friend of hers a favor-intro duce d me to 
a special f acet of the Harle m night world, s omething which th e riot had only interrupt ed. It was th e 
world where, b ehind locke d doors, Negroes catered t o monied white people's weird sexual t astes.
 
The whites I'd known loved t o rub shoulders publicly with bl ack f olks in the after-ho urs clu bs an d 
speake asies. These, on the other ha nd, were whites who did n ot want it k nown  that they had 
been anywhere near Harlem . The riot ha d made these exclusive  white customers nervous. Their 
slipping int o and about Harlem h adn't been so notice able when other whites were als o aro und. 
But now th ey would b e cons picuo us; they also f eared the recently aro used anger o f Harle m 
Negroes. S o the madam was sa feguarding h er growin g operation by offering me  a steerer's job .
 
During  the war, it was  extremely  difficult t o get a telephone. One day the m adam told m e to stay 
at my apartment the next m orning. She talk ed to somebody. I don't know who it was, b ut before 
the next noon, I dialed the ma dam from my own telephone-unliste d.
 
This m adam was a specialist in h er field. If her own girls could not-or would n ot-acc ommodate a 
customer, she would send m e to another place, usually  an apartment somewher e else in Harle m, 
where th e reques ted "specialty" was  done.
 My post for picking  up the cus tomers was  right o utside the Astor Hot el, that always -busy 
northwest comer o f 45th Street and Broadwa y. Watching the moving tra ffic, I was so on able to 
spot the taxi, car, or limo usine-even before it slowed down-w ith the anxious white f aces peering 
out for the tall, reddish- brown-co mplexion ed Negro wearing  a dark suit , or rainc oat, with a white 
flower  in his la pel.
 
If they we re in a private car , unless it was ch auffeured I would tak e the whe el and drive  where we 
were going. B ut if they were in a  taxi, I would always  tell th e cabbie, "The Apollo Theater in 
Harlem , please," sinc e among New York City taxis a certain p ercen tage ar e driven by  cops . We 
would get a nother cab-driven by  a black m an-and I'd give him the right address.
 
As soon as I  got t hat party settled, I'd telephone the madam. She would generally  have me  rush 
by taxi right ba ck downtown to be on the 45th Street and Broadway comer at a specified time. 
Appointments were s trictly punctual; rarel y was  I on the corner a s mu ch as five mi nutes. And I 
knew how to keep moving a bout so as not to attract t he attention o f any vice squa d plai ncloth es-
men or uniformed cops.
 
With tips, which  were often heavy, sometimes I  would ma ke over a hundred dollars a  night 
steering  up to ten customers in a party- to see anything,  to do anything, t o have anything d one to 
them, that they wante d. I hardly ever knewthe i dentities o f my cus tomers, b ut the few I did 
recognize,  or whose n ames I happened to hear, remin d me  now of the Pr ofumo case in E ngland . 
The English ar e not far ahead of rich a nd influential Americans when it c omes to seeking  rarities 
and oddities.
 
Rich me n, middle-aged and beyond , men well  past their prime : these weren't college b oys, these 
were their Iv y League f athers. Eve n grandfathers, I guess. S ociety lea ders. Big p oliticians. 
Tycoons . Important friends from out of town. City government big sh ots. All kin ds of professio nal 
people. Star per forming artists. Theatrical a nd Hollywood celebrities. And, of course, racket eers.
 
Harlem was their sin-de n, their f leshpot. They stole off among t aboo bl ack p eople, a nd took off 
whatever  antiseptic, important, dignified m asks t hey wo re in their white world. These were m en 
who could a fford to spend large a mounts of money f or two, three, or four hours ind ulging th eir 
strange appetites.
 
But in this bl ack-white n ether wor ld, nobody judged t he customers. Anything  they could n ame, 
anything t hey could imagine , anythi ng they could describe, t hey could do , or could have d one to 
them, just as lo ng as they paid.
 
In the Pro fumo case i n Engla nd, C hristine K eeler's f riend testified that some o f her customers 
wante d to be whipped. One of my m ain steers to one specialt y address awa y from the madam's 
house was the apartment of a big, c oal-black gir l, strong as an ox, with m uscles like a 
dockworker's. A funny thing, it ge nerally  was the oldest o f these white me n-in t heir sixties, I know , 
some m aybe i n their seventies-t hey couldn't seem to recover  quickl y enough f rom their last 
whipping so they could have m e meet them ag ain a t 45th and Broadwa y to take them back t o that 
apartment, to cringe on  their knees a nd beg a nd cry out for mercy  under that black girl 's whip. 
Some of them would pay me  extra t o come and watch them b eing b eaten. That girl greased her 
big Amazon b ody all over to  look shinier a nd black er. She used small, p laited whips, s he would 
drawbloo d, and she was m aking h erself  a small fortune off those o ld white m en.
 
I would n't tell a ll the things I've seen. I used to wond er, later on , when I was in priso n, what a 
psychiatrist would m ake of it all. And so ma ny of these m en held res ponsi ble p ositions ; they 
exercised guid ance , influenc e, and authority over others.
 
In prison later, I'd think, too, about another thing. Jus t about all o f those wh ites sp ecific ally 
expresse d as their preference black, black , "the black er the better!" The madam, having  long 
since learn ed this, h ad in her ho use nothing b ut the black est a ccommodating  women she could find.
 
In all of my time in Harle m, I never saw  a white pr ostitu te touched by a white m an. White girls 
were in some o f the various Harlem speci alty plac es. They would p articipa te in customers' most 
freque nt exhibiti on requ ests- a sleek, bl ack Negro ma le having a white woma n. Was this th e white 
man wanti ng to witness his deepest s exual fear? A few times, I eve n had parties that incl uded 
white women whom t he men had brought wi th them to watch this. I never steered any white 
women other than in t hese inst ances, br ought by t heir own me n, or who h ad been put into contact 
with m e by a white Lesbian whom I knew, who was  another variety of specialty  madam.
 
This L esbia n, a beautiful white wom an, had a mate Negro stable. H er voca bulary  was all 
profanity. She supplied N egro males, o n order, to well-to-do white women.
 
I'd seen this Lesbian and her blonde girl friend around Harle m, drinki ng and talking a t bars , 
always  with young Negroes. No on e who d idn't know would ever guess t hat the Lesbian was 
recruiting. Bu t one night I gave her and her gir l friend some ree fers which th ey said we re the best 
they'd ever s moked. They lived in a  hotel downtown, a nd after that, now an d then, they would call 
me,and I would bring t hem so me reefers, and we'd t alk.
 
She told m e how she had acci dentally gotten started in h er specialty . As a Harlem habitu, she 
had known  Harlem N egroes who liked white wom en. Her role d evelop ed from a pattern o f talk 
she often heard from bored, well -to-do white wom en where s he worked , in a n East Side beauty 
salon. He aring  the women complain about sexually  inadequ ate mates, she would tell what she'd 
"heard" about Negro men. Observ ing how excited some o f the women seemed to become, she 
finally arranged s ome dates with some of the Harle m Negroes s he knew  at her own a partment.
 
Event ually, she rented three midtown ap artments where a woman customer could me et a Negro 
by appointment. Her customers recommended her s ervice t o their friends. S he quit the beauty 
salon, set up a messenger service as an operating front, and ran all o f her bu siness by t elephone.
 
She had also n oticed the color pr eference. I never could substitu te in an emergency , she would 
tell m e with a laugh, because I was to o light. S he told me  that nearly every white wom an in her 
client ele would s pecify "a black o ne"; sometimes t hey would say  "a _real_ on e," meaning black , 
no brown Negroes, n o red Negroes .
 
The Lesbian thought up her m essenger serv ice idea because s ome of her trade wante d the 
Negroes to come to their homes, at times care fully arrange d by telephone. These wome n lived in 
neigh borho ods of swank b rownstones and exclusive ap artment houses, wi th doormen dr esse d 
like ad mirals. B ut white society  never thi nks a bout challenging  any Negro in a servant role . 
Door men would telephone up and hear "Oh, yes, s end him  right up, James"; service elevat ors 
would sp eed those neatly dressed Negro messenger b oys right up-s o that they could "deliver" 
what ha d been ordered by some o f the most priv ileged white wom en in Man hattan. 
The irony is that those white women had no more respec t for those Negroes than white m en have 
had for the Negro wome n they have be en "using" sinc e slaver y times. And, in turn, Negroes h ave 
no resp ect for the whites t hey get into bed with. I know the wa y I felt about Sophia, who s till came 
to New York whenever  I calle d her.
 
The West Indian boy friend of the Profumo scandal's Christine K eeler , Lucky Gordon, and his 
friends mu st have f elt the same wa y. After Engla nd's le aders had been with those white gir ls, 
those girls,  for their sa tisfactio n, went to Negroes, to sm oke reefers and make fun of some of 
Englan d's great est p eers a s cuck olds a nd fools. I don't doubt that Lucky Gordon knows th e 
identity of "the ma n in the m ask" and much m ore. If Gord on told everything  those white gir ls told 
him, he would gi ve England a new scandal. 
 
It's n o different from what happens in so me of America's t opmost white circles. Twenty  years ag o, 
I saw them nightly , with my own eyes, I  heard them with my own ears . 
The hypocritical wh ite ma n will talk about the Negro's "l ow morals." But who ha s the wor ld's 
lowest morals if not whites ? And not only that, but the "upper-class " whites! Rec ently, details were 
publishe d about a group of suburban New York City white housew ives and mothers o perating  as 
a profession al call-girl ring.  In some c ases, these wi ves we re out pros tituting wi th the agree ment, 
even t he cooperation, of husbands, some o f who m even waite d at home, attending t he children. 
And the customers-to quot e a major New York City morning newspa per: " Some 16 ledgers a nd 
books with na mes of 200 Johns, m any important social, fi nancial a nd politic al figures, were 
seized in t he raid Friday  night. "
 
I have also read rece ntly about groups of young  white couples who get togeth er, the husbands 
throw  their house keys int o a hat, then, bli ndfolded, the husbands dr aw ou t a key and spend the 
night with th e wife that the house key matches. I have never h eard of anything like t hat being 
done by Negroes , even N egroes who li ve in t he worst gh ettoes and alleys and gutters.
 
Early  one morning in Harle m, a tall, light Negro wearing  a hat and with a woma n's st ocking  drawn 
down over his f ace held up a Negro bartender an d manager who were  counting u p the night's 
receip ts. Lik e mo st bars in Harlem, Negroes fronted, and a Jew really own ed the place. To get a 
license , one had to know somebody in t he State L iquor Authority , and Jews wo rking  with Jews 
seemed to have the best S .L.A. contacts. The black m anager hire d some Negro hoodlums to go 
hunting f or the hold-up man. And the ma n's d escripti on cause d them to inclu de m e among t heir 
suspects. About daybreak t hat same morning,  they kicke d in t he door of my apartment.
 
I told them I didn't know a thing about it, that I hadn't had a thing to do with what ever they were 
talking ab out. I told them I had been out on my h ustle , steering,  until maybe four in the morning, 
and then I had come straight t o my ap artment and gone to bed.
 
The strong-arm t hugs were blu ffing. They were tryin g to flush out the man who h ad done it. They 
still had other s uspects t o check o ut-that's a ll that saved me.
 
I put on my clothes an d took a taxi and I woke u p two p eople, the ma dam, then Sammy . I had 
some m oney, but the madam gave m e some mo re, and I told Sammy I was going  to see my 
brother P hilbert i n Michi gan. I gave Sammy the address, so that he could le t me know when 
things got straighte ned out.
 
This was  the trip t o Michigan in the wintertime when I put congolen e on my he ad, then discovered 
that the bathroom si nk's pip es were  frozen. To keep thelye fr om burning up  my scalp , I had to 
stick my he ad into the stool a nd flush and flush to rins e out the stuff.
 
A week pa ssed in frigid Michi gan before Sammy's  telegra m ca me. Another re d Negro h ad 
confessed, which e nabled me  to live in Harlem ag ain.
 
But I didn't go ba ck int o steering. I c an't remember wh y I didn't. I imagine I  must have f elt like 
stayin g away  from hustling f or a while, going  to some o f the clubs a t nigh t, and narco tizing with 
my friends . Anyway, I just never went b ack t o the m adam's job.
 
It was a t about this tim e, too, I remember, that I bega n to be sick. I had colds all t he time. It got t o 
be a steady irritatio n, alwa ys sni ffling an d wiping  my n ose, all d ay, all night. I stayed so high th at I 
was in a dream wor ld. Now, sometimes , I smoked opium with so me white f riends , actors who 
lived d owntown. And I smoked more ree fers th an ever before. I didn't smoke t he usual woode n-
match-sized sticks o f marijuan a. I was so far gone by now that I smoked it almost by t he ounce.
 
*     *     *
 
After awhile, I worked downtown f or a Jew. He liked me because o f something I had managed t o 
do for him. He b ought rundown resta urants and bars. Hymie was  his na me. He would rem odel these p laces , then stage a  big, gala r eopening, with ba nners an d a spotlight ou tside. The jam-
packed , busy place with th e big "U nder N ew Manageme nt" sign  in the window  would attract 
speculat ors, us ually other J ews who we re around looking f or something to invest money in. 
Sometimes even in the week o f the new opening, Hymie would re-sell, a t a good profit.
 
Hymie r eally liked m e, and I liked h im. He loved t o talk. I loved to liste n. Hal fhis talk was ab out 
Jews  and Negroes. J ews who ha d anglicized t heir na mes were Hymie's f avorite hate. Spitting 
and curling his m outh in scor n, he would re el off names of people he said had done this. S ome of 
them were famous names whom m ost people never t hought o f as Jews.
 
"Red, I'm a Jew and you're bl ack," he would say . "These G entiles don't like either one of us. If the 
Jew wasn't s marter than the Gentile, he'd get tr eated worse t han your  people."
 
Hymie p aid me good mo ney whi le I was with hi m, sometimes two hu ndred and three hundred 
dollars a  week. I  would have done anything f or Hymie. I  did do all kin ds of things. B ut my main job 
was transp orting  bootleg li quor that Hymie su pplie d, us ually to those spruc ed-up  bars which h e 
had sold to someone.
 
Another fellow  and I would drive out to Long Islan d where a  big bootleg whisk y outfit operated. 
We'd take with us cart ons o f empty bonded wh isky bottles th at were s aved illegally  by bars we 
supplied . We would b uy five-gallo n contain ers o f bootleg, f unnel it into the bottles, then delive r, 
according  to Hymie's instr uctions , this or that many crat es back t o the bars.
 
Many  people claiming th ey drank o nly such-an d-such a brand couldn' t tell t heir on ly bra nd from 
pure week- old Long Isla nd bootleg. Most ordin ary whisky drink ers are " brand" chumps like t his. 
On the sid e, with Hymie's a pproval, I  was mysel f at that time s upplying some less er quantiti es of 
bootleg t o rep utable H arlem bars, a s well as to some of the few speakeasi es still  in Harle m.
 
But one week end on Long Island, s omething happened invol ving the State Liquor Authority . One 
of New York State's b iggest rec ent scandals h as been the expos ure o f wholesale S.L.A. graft and 
corrup tion. In the bootleg rack et Iwas invol ved in, someone high u p must have been taken for a 
real pil e. A rumor about some "inside" tipster spread among Hymie a nd the others. On e day 
Hymie d idn't show up  where h e had told me to meet him. I never he ard from him again . . . but I 
did hear that he was pu t in the ocean and I knew he  couldn' t swim.
 
Up in the Bro nx, a Negro he ld up some Italian r acket eers in a  floating crap game. I heard a bout it 
on the wire. W hoever did it, asi de from being a  fool, was  said to be a "tall, light-skinn ed" Negro, 
masked with a woma n's st ocking.  It has always  made me wonder if that bar sticku p had really 
been solved, or if the wron g man had confessed under beatings. B ut, anyway, the past s uspicio n 
of me helped to revive suspicio n of me agai n.
 
Up in Fat Ma n's B ar on the hill overlooking t he Polo Grou nds, I had just go ne in to a telephone 
booth. Everyone in the bar-all over Harle m, in fact-was  drinking up , excite d about the news that 
Branch Rickey , the Br ooklyn  Dodgers' owner , had jus t signed Jackie R obins on to play in m ajor 
leagu e baseball, w ith the Dodgers' f arm team in Montre al-which would pl ace t he time in t he fall of 
1945.
 
Earlier in t he afternoon, I had collect ed from West Indian Archie f or a fifty-cent combinati on bet; 
he had paid me three hundred dollars right o ut of his pocket. I was tel ephoning J ean Parks. Jean 
was one of the most beautiful wome n who ever  lived i n Harlem . She once sang with Sar ah 
Vaughan in the Blu ebonnets, a quartet t hat sang with Earl Hines. F or a long time, Je an and I had 
enjoyed a s tanding, f riendly deal that we'd  go ou t and celebrate when either o f us hit t he 
numbers. Si nce my las t hit, Jean had treated me  twice, and we la ughed on the phone, glad that 
now I'd treat her to a night out. We arranged t o go t o a 52nd Str eet nightclub to hear Billie 
Holiday , who h ad been on the roa d and was jus t back in N ew York.
 As I hung up, I spotted the two le an, tough-looking  _paisan os_ gazing in at me cooped up in the booth.
 
I didn't need any intuiti on. And I had no gun. A cigarette case was  the only thing in my p ocket. I 
started easing my ha nd down in to my p ocke t, to try bluffing . .  . and one of them snatched open 
the door. They we re dark olive, swarth y-featured Italians. I had my hand down int o my po cket.
 
"Come on outside , we'll hold court," one said.
 
At that moment, a cop walked t hrough t he front door. The two thugs slipped out. I never in my life 
have b een so glad t o see a cop.
 
I was still  shaki ng when I got t o the apartment of my friend, Sammy t he Pimp, He t old me that not 
long be fore, West Indian Archie had been there looking f or me.
 
Sometimes , recalling all o f this, I don't know, to tell the truth, how I a m alive to tell it today. They 
say God takes car e of fools an d babies. I've s o often thought that Allah was watching over me . 
Through all of this ti me of my life, I really  _was_ d ead-me ntally dead. I just didn't know that I was.
 
Anyway, to kill time, Sammy an d I sniffed some of his c ocain e, until the time came to pick up Jean 
Parks, to go down a nd hear Lady Day . Sammy's having told m e about West Indian Archie lo oking 
for me didn't me an a thing . . . not right then.
 
 
 
CHAPT ER E IGHT
TRAPPED 
There was  the knocking  at the door. Sammy , lying on  his b ed in pajamas and a bathrobe, called 
"Who?"
 
When West Indian Archie answered, Sammy slid t he ro und, two- sided shaving mirror under the 
bed, with what little of the coc aine powder-or cr ystals, a ctually-was left, and I opened the door.
 
"Red-I want my m oney!"
 
A .32-20 is a funny kin d of gun. It's bigger  than a .32. But it's no t as big as a  .38. I had faced down 
some d anger ous Negroes . But no one who wasn't ready to die messed with W est Indian Archie.
 
I couldn't believe it. He tr uly scare d me . I was so incre dulous at what was ha ppening that it was 
hard to form wo rds with my br ain an d my m outh.
 
"Man-what's the beef?"
 
West Indian Archie s aid h e'd thought I  was trying something when I'd told him I'd hit, but he'd paid 
me the three hundred dollars un til he could do uble-check his w ritten betting slips; a nd, as he'd 
thought , I hadn't combinated the number I' d clai med, but another.
 
"Man, you're craz y!" I talked fast; I'd seen out of the corner of my eye S ammy's hand easing 
under his pillow where h e kept h is Army .45. "Arc hie, s mart a man as you're supposed to be, 
you'd p ay somebody who h adn't hi t?"
 
The .32-20 moved , and Sammy froze. West Indian Archie told him, "I ought to shoot you thr ough 
the ear." And he looked back at me. "You don't have my m oney?" 
I must have s haken my h ead. "I'll give you until twelve  o'clock t omorrow." And he put his ha nd 
behind him  and pulled open the door. He b acked out, and sla mmed it.
 
*     *     * 
It was a classic hu stler- code impass e. The money wasn't t he problem. I still ha d about two 
hundred dollars o f it. Ha d money been the iss ue, S ammy could have m ade up the difference; if it 
wasn't in his pocket, his wome n could quickly  have raised it . West Indian Archie hims elf, for that 
matter, would h ave lo aned me three hundred dollars if  I'd ever ask ed hi m, as m any th ousands of 
dollars o f mine as he'd gott en ten perce nt of. Once, in fact, when h e'd heard I was broke, he had 
looked m e up and handed me  some mo ney an d grun ted, "Stick this in your po cket."
 
The issue was the positio n which his a ction had put us both into. For a hustler in our sidewalk 
jungle wor ld, "face" and "honor" were im porta nt. No hu stler c ould h ave it k nown  that he'd been 
"hype d," meaning outsmarted or ma de a fool of. And worse, a hustler could never a fford to have it 
demonstra ted that he could be bluffed, that he could be frightened by a threat, that he lacked 
nerve.
 
West Indian Archie k new that some young  hustlers rose i n stature in our world when they 
somehow hoodwinke d older hu stlers, t hen put it on the wire for everyone to hear. He be lieved I 
was trying that.
 
In turn, I knew he would be protecting his s tature by  broadcas ting all over the wire his t hreat to 
me.
 
Because of this code, in my time in Harle m I'd pers onally known a d ozen h ustlers who, 
threatened, left town, disgraced. 
Once the wi re had it, any retrea t by either of us was un think able. The wire would be  awaiting  the 
report of the showdown.
 
I'd also k nown o f at least another doze n showdowns in which o ne took the D ead On Arrival ride t o 
the morgue, a nd the other went to  priso n for manslaught er or t he electric ch air for murder.
 
Sammy let me hold his . 32. My guns were a t my ap artment. I put the .32 in my po cket, with my 
hand on it, and walked out.
 
I couldn't st ay out of sight. I had to show up at all of my usual haunts. I was glad t hat Reginald 
was out of town. He m ight h ave tried p rotecting  me, and I didn't want him sh ot in the head by 
West Indian Archie.
 
I stood awhile on  the corner , with my m ind confused-th e muddled thinking  that's ch aracteristic o f 
the addict . Was West Indian Archie , I began to wonder, bluffing a hype on me? To make fun of 
me? Some old hustlers d id love t o hype younger ones. I knew he  wouldn't do it as some would, 
just t o pick up three hundred dollars. But ever yone was  so slick. I n this Harlem jungle pe ople 
would hype t heir br others. Nu mbers ru nners often had hype d addicts who had hit, who we re so 
drugged t hat, when c halle nged, they really  couldn't be sure if they had played a  certain n umber.
 
I began to won der wheth er West Indian Archie m ight n ot be right. H ad I really  gotten my 
combin ation confused? I certainly  knew the two n umbers I'd played; I knew I'd told him to com-
binate only one of them. Had I got ten mixed u p about which n umber?
 
Have you ever been so sure you di d something that you n ever would have t hought o f it ag ain-
unless it was bro ught u p agai n? Then you start tryin g tomentally confirm-and you're on ly about 
half-sure?
 
It was just about tune for me to go a nd pick u p Jean Parks , to go downt own to see Billie a t the 
Onyx Club. So much was s wirling in my h ead. I thought about telephoning h er an d calling it o ff, 
making some excus e. But I knew that running now was th e worst  thing I could do. So I went on 
and pick ed up Jean at her place. We took a taxi on down to 52nd Street. "_Billie Holid ay_" and 
those b ig photo blow-ups of her were u nder the lights ou tside . Inside, the tables were ja mmed against the wal l, tables ab out big en ough to ge t two drinks a nd four elbows on ; the O nyx was one 
of those very  little pl aces.
 
Billie, at  the microph one, had just f inished a number when s he saw Jean and me. Her white gown 
glittered u nder the spotlight, h er face had that coppery, Indianis h look , and her hair was in that 
trademark po nytail.  For her next n umber s he did the one she knew I always  liked so: "You Do n't 
Know What Love Is"-"until you f ace each dawn with sle epless eyes . .  . until you've  lost a  love you 
hate to lose-"
 
When her set was done, Billie c ame over to our table. She and Jean, who ha dn't seen each other 
in a long ti me, hugged e ach other. Billie se nsed something w rong w ith m e. She knew that I was 
always  high, bu t she knew me well enough t o see that something els e was  wrong,  and asked in 
her c ustomary profane langu age what was  the matter with m e. And in my own f oul vocab ulary of 
those d ays, I pr etended to be witho ut a care, so she let it dr op.
 
We had a picture taken by the clu b photographer t hat night. The three of us were sitti ng close 
toget her. That was  the last time I ever s aw La dy Day. She's dead; dope and heartbreak stopped 
that heart as big as a barn and that sound and style th at no one succ essfully copies . Lady Day 
sang with th e _soul_ of Negroes from the centuries o f sorrow  and oppressio n. W hat a shame that 
proud,fine, black wom an never lived where t he true greatness o f the black rac e was  appreciat ed!
 
In the Onyx  Club men's ro om, I sniffed the little pack et of cocain e I had gotten from Sammy . Jean 
and I, riding  back up to Harlem in a cab, decided to have another drink. She had no idea what 
was happening when she suggeste d one of my main hangou ts, the bar of the La Marr-Cheri on 
the cor ner o f 147th Str eet and St. Nichol as Avenue. I had my gun, a nd the cocain e courage, a nd I 
said okay. And by th e time we'd h ad the drink , I was so high th at I ask ed Jean to take a cab on 
home, and she did. I never have se en Jean again , either.
 
Like a fool, I didn't l eave th e bar. I stayed there, sitting, like a bigger fool, with my ba ck to  the 
door, thinki ng about West Indian Archie. Si nce that day, I have never s at with  my back to a door-
and I never w ill again. B ut it's a good thing I was th en. I'm po sitive if I'd seen West Indian Archie 
come in, I'd have s hot to kill.
 
The next t hing I knew West Indian Archi e was  standing be fore me, cursing m e, loud, his gu n on 
me. He was re ally making his public point, floor-showin g for the people. H e calle d me  foul names, 
threatened me.
 
Everyone , bartenders a nd cust omers, sa t or s tood as though c arved, drinks in mid-air . The 
jukebox, in t he rear, was going. I had never seen West Indian Archie high be fore. Not a whisk y 
high, I could tell it was something els e. I knew the hustlers' c haract eristic  of keying up on dope to 
do a job.
 
I was thi nking,  "I'm going to  kill Archie . . . I'm jus t going  to wait un til he  turns aro und-to get the 
drop on him." I could f eel my own . 32 resting agains t my ribs where it was  tucked under my bel t, 
beneath my coat.
 West Indian Archie, seeming to  read my mi nd, quit cursing.  And his words  jarred m e.
 
"You're thinking  you're going t o kill me first, Re d. But I'm going to give you s omething t o think 
about. I'm sixt y. I'm an old man. I've be en to Sing Sing. My  life is over. You're a you ng man. Kill 
me, you're los t anywa y. All you can do is go to  priso n." 
 
I've since t hought t hat West Indian Archie may have b een trying to scare me into running, t o save 
both his face and his life. It may be  that's why  he was high. No one knew that I hadn't killed 
anyon e, but no one who k new me, includi ng mysel f, would do ubt that I'd kill.
 
I can't gu ess what m ight have h appened. But under the code, if West Indian Archie h ad gone out of the door, after having hu miliat ed m e as he had, I'd have h ad to follow  him out. We'd have s hot 
it out in the stre et.
 
But some friends of West Indian Archie m oved up alongside him, quietly  calling his name, "Arc hie 
. . . Archie ."
 
And he let them put their ha nds on him-and they drew him  asid e. I watche d them move him past 
where I was sitting, glaring  at me. They were work ing hi m back t oward t he rear.
 
Then, taking my  time, I got d own o ff the stool. I dropped a bill on the bar for the bartender. 
Without looking  back , I went out.
 
I stood outside, in full view of the bar, with  my hand in my  pocket, for perhaps f ive mi nutes. W hen 
West Indian Archie d idn't come o ut, I left.
 
*     *     * 
It must have been five in the mo rning when, downtown, I woke  up a white a ctor I knew who li ved 
in the H oward Ho tel on 45th Str eet, off Sixth Avenue.
 
I knew I had to stay high.
 
The amount of dope I put into mysel f within t he next several h ours s ounds inc onceivable . I got 
some o pium from that fellow. I took a cab back u p to my ap artment and I smoke d it. My gun was 
ready if I heard a  mosquito c ough.
 
My telephone rang. I t was  the wh ite Lesbian who li ved downtown. S he wante d me  to bring her 
and her girl friend fifty dollars worth o f reefers.
 
I felt that if I had alwa ys done it, I had to do it n ow. Opium  had me drow sy. I had a bottle o f 
benzedrine t ablets in my b athroom; I swallowed s ome of them to perk u p. The two dr ugs working 
in me had my head going  in opposit e direc tions a t the same ti me. 
 
I knocke d at the apartment right b ehind m ine. The dealer le t me have loose ma rijuan a on credit. 
He saw I was so h igh that he eve n helped me roll it-a h undred sticks. And while we  were rolling  it, 
we both smoke d some.
 
Now opium, benzedrine , reefers.
 
I stopped by Sammy's on the wa y downtown. His fl ashing- eyed Spanish Negro wom an opened 
the door. Sammy h ad gotte n weak f or that wom an. H e had never let any other of his wome n hang 
around so m uch; now she was even answerin g his doorbell. S ammy was by this ti me very badly 
addicte d. He seemed hardly  to rec ognize me . Lying in bed, he reach ed under a nd again br ought 
out that inevitable shaving  mirror on which, f or some reason, h e always  kept his coc aine crystals. 
He m otioned for me to sniff some. I didn't re fuse. 
Going downtown  to deliver  the reefers, I felt sensations I cannot describe , in a ll those di fferent 
grooves a t the same ti me. The only word t o describe it was a _timeless ness _. A day might have 
seemed to me five mi nutes. Or a half-hour might have s eemed a week.
 
I can't i magine h ow I looked when I got to  the hotel. W hen the Lesbian a nd her girl friend saw me, 
they helped me to a bed; I fell across it and passe d out.
 
That night, when t hey woke m e up, it was hal f a day beyon d West Indian Archie's deadlin e. Late, I 
went ba ck uptown. I t was  on the wire. I could s ee people who k new me finding business 
elsewhere. I knew nobody want ed to be caught in a cross fire.
 
But nothing happened. The next d ay, either. I just s tayed high. 
Some raw kid h ustler in a bar, I had to bust in his m outh. He c ame back, p ulling  a blade; I would 
have s hot him, but somebody grabb ed him. They put him ou t, cursing  that he was  going  to kill 
me.
 
Intuitio n told me  to get rid of my gu n. I gave a hustler th e eye a cross t he bar. I'd no more than 
slippe d him the gu n from my be lt when a  cop I'd seen about came in the other door. He had his 
hand on his gun butt. He knew what was  all over  the wire; he was cert ain I' d be armed. He c ame 
slowly over  toward me , and I knew if I sneezed , he'd blast m e down.
 
He said, " Take your  hand out of your pocket, R ed-_re al_ car efully."
 
I did. Once he saw me empty handed, we b oth could relax  a little. He m otioned for me to walk 
outside , ahead of him, and I did. His p artner was waiting  on the sidewalk, o pposite t heir p atrol 
car, double-parked with its radiogoing. W ith people stopping, lo oking, th ey patted me down t here 
on the sid ewalk.
 
"What are you lo oking  for?" I asked them when t hey didn't find anything.
 
"Red, there's a report you're c arrying a gun."
 
"I had one," I said. "But I threw  it in the rive r."
 
The one who h ad come into the bar said, "I think I'd leave town i f I were you, Red ."
 
I went b ack into the bar . Saying that I had thrown my gun away  had kept them from taking  me to 
my apartment. Things I h ad there c ould have gott en me more time than ten gu ns, a nd could have 
gotte n them a promotion.
 
Everything  was building up , closi ng in on me. I was trapped in so many cross turns . West Indian 
Archie gunning f or me. The Italians who t hought I' d stuck u p their crap game after me . The 
scare d kid h ustler I'd hit. The cops.
 
For four years, up  to that point, I'd been lucky  enough, o r slick  enough, to escape jail, or even 
getting arrest ed. Or any _s erious_ trouble. B ut I knew that any mi nute now so mething ha d to 
give.
 
*     *     *
 
Sammy ha d done something that I've  often wished I could have t hanked him  for.
 
When I heard the car's horn, I was walk ing on  St. Nichol as Avenue. But my ears were h earing a 
gun. I  didn't dr eam the horn could possibly be for me. 
"_Homeboy!_"
 
I jerke d around; I came close t o shooting.
 
_Shorty_- from Boston!
 
I'd scared him nearly to death.
 
"_Daddy-o!_"
 
I couldn't have been happier .
 
Inside the car, he told me  Sammy had telephoned about how I was jammed up tight a nd told him he'd better co me a nd get m e. And Shorty did his b and's d ate, then borrowed h is pia no man's car, 
and burned up the miles t o New  York.
 
I didn't put up any objecti ons t o leaving. Sh orty stood watch o utsid e my ap artment. I brought o ut 
and stuffed into the car's tru nk what little stuff I cared to hang o n to. Then we hit the highway. 
Shorty had been witho ut sle ep for about thirty-six hours. He told m e afterward t hat through just 
about the whole rid e back, I talked out of my h ead.
 
 
 
CHAPT ER NINE
CAUGHT
 
Ella c ouldn't believe how atheist, how uncouth I had become. I believed t hat a man should do 
anything t hat he was slick e nough, or b ad and bold enough, to do and that a wom an was no thing 
but another c ommodity. Every word I spok ewas h ip or profane. I would bet that my working 
vocabul ary wasn't two hundred wo rds.
 
Even S horty , whose apartment I now agai n shared, wasn't pre pared for how I lived  and thought-
like a predatory animal. S ometimes I  would ca tch hi m watching m e.
 
At first, I slept a lot-even at night. I had slept mostly in t he daytime during t he pr eceding two 
years.  When awake, I smoke d reefers. S horty had originally  intro duced m e to marijua na, and my 
consum ption of it now astounded him.
 
I didn't want to talk m uch, at first. When awake, I'd play rec ords co ntinuously. The reefers gave 
me a feeling of contentment. I would e njoy hours of floating, day dre aming, i maginary 
conversati ons with my  New York musician f riends.
 
Within two weeks, I' d had more sle ep than duri ng any two m onths when I had been in Harle m 
hustling  day and night. When I finally went o ut in the Roxbury  streets , it took m e only a little while 
to locat e a peddler of "snow"-coc aine. It was when I got b ack into that familiar sn ow feeling  that I 
bega n to want t o talk.
 
Cocain e produc es, for those who sniff its powdery  white cry stals, an  illusion o f supreme well -
being, and a soaring over- confidenc e in both physical a nd mental ability . You think you could wh ip 
the heavyweight champion, and that you are smarter th an anybo dy. There was als o that feeling of 
timelessn ess. And there were in terva ls of ability to recall an d revie w things that had happened 
years  back with an astonishing  clarit y.
 
Shorty's ba nd played at spots aro und Boston three or four nights a  week. After he left for work, 
Sophia would co me over and I'd talk a bout my plans. Shewould b e gone back t o her hu sband by 
the time S horty  return ed from work, and I'd bend his ear until daybreak.
 
Sophia's husband had gotten out of the military , and he was some sort o f salesm an. He was 
suppos ed to have a big deal going  which s oon would require his tr aveling  a lot to the West Coast . 
I didn't ask qu estions , but Sophia o ften indicat ed they weren' t doing too we ll. I know _I_ had 
nothing t o do with that. H e never dr eamed I existe d. A white woman might b low up at her 
husband and screa m and yell and call him every name she can think of, and say the m ost vicious 
things in an effort to hur t him, and talk a bout his mo ther an d his grandmother, too, but one thing 
she never wi ll tell him hers elf is that she is going  with a black m an. That's o ne automatic red 
murder flag to the white m an, and his wom an knows  it.
 
Sophia always  had given m e money. Eve n when I had hundreds of dollars in my pocket, whe n 
she came to Harlem I would ta ke everything  she had short of her train f are back t o Boston. It 
seems t hat some women love to be exploite d. W hen they are n ot exploite d, they expl oit th e man. Anyway, it was  his mo ney t hat she gave m e, I guess, b ecause s he never had worked. But now 
my demands o n her incr ease d, and she came up with m ore; again, I don't know where sh e got it . 
Always,  every now and then, I had given h er a hard tim e, just to keep her in line. Every  once in a 
while a woma n seems to need, in fact _wan ts_ this, t oo. But now, I would f eel evil and sla p her 
around worse than ever , some o f the nights when Shorty was  away . She would cry, curse m e, 
and swear th at she would never be  back. B ut I knew she wasn't eve n thinking  about not coming 
back.
 
Sophia's being around was on e of Shorty's  greatest pleasures a bout my homecoming. I  have s aid 
it before, I never in my li fe have se en a black m an that desired white women as sinc erely as 
Shorty did. Since I  had known  him, he had had several. He had never been able to keep a white 
woman any length oftime, though, becaus e he was  too goo d to them, and, as I  have said, any 
woman , white or bl ack, s eems to get b ored with that.
 
It happened that Shorty was  between white wome n when o ne night S ophia b rought to the house 
her s eventeen-year- old sister . I never saw  anything  like th e way  that she and Shorty nearly 
jumped for each other. For him, she wasn't on ly a white girl,  but a _young_ white gir l. For her, he 
wasn't only  a Negro, but a Negro _musician _. In looks, s he was a you nger version o f Sophia, who 
still turned heads. S ometimes I 'd take the two g irls to Negro places where Sh orty played. Negroes 
showed thirty -two teeth apiece as soon as they saw the white gi rls. They would c ome over  to your 
booth, or your t able; they would s tand there and drool. And Shorty  was no better. He'd s tand up 
there pl aying and watching th at you ng girl waiting  for him, and waving at him, and winking. As 
soon as the set was  over, he'd practic ally run over pe ople getti ng down to our table.
 
I didn't lindy-hop any more now, I wouldn't even h ave thought of it now, just a s I would n't have 
been caugh t in a  zoot s uit now . All of my suits were c onservative.  A banker might have worn my 
shoes.
 
I met Laura ag ain. W e were re ally glad to see each other. She was a lot more like m e now, a 
good-ti me gir l. We talke d and laughe d. She looked a lot older than she really was. She had no 
one man, she free-lanc ed ar ound. She had long since moved away from her grandmother. Laura 
told me  she had finished sc hool, bu t then she gave up the college i dea. Laura was high when ever 
I saw her , now, too; we smoked some ree fers togeth er.
 
*     *     *
 
After ab out a month of "laying dead," as inac tivity was called, I knew I had to get s ome kin d of 
hustle going. 
A hustler, broke, needs a stake. Some nigh ts when S horty  was pl aying, I would t ake whatever 
Sophia had been able to get for me, and I'd try to run it u p into something, playing st ud poker a t 
John Hugh es' gam bling house.
 
When I had lived in Roxbury  before, John Hughes h ad been a big gambler who wouldn' t have 
spoken to me. But during  the wa r the Roxbury "wire" had carried a lot about things  I was doi ng in 
Harlem , and now the New York name magic was  on me. That was th e feeling th at hustlers 
everywhere e lse h ad: if you c ould hustle and make it i n New  York, t hey were wel l off to know you; 
it gave them p restige. Anyway, through t he same flush war  years, J ohn Hughes had hustle d 
profitably enough t o be able to open a pretty goo d gam bling  house.
 
John, o ne night, was playing in a gam e I was in. After the first two cards were d ealt around the 
table, I  had an ace showin g. I looked beneath it at my hole card ; another a ce-a p air, back-t o-back.
 
My ace showing made it my turn to bet.
 
But I didn't rush . I sat there and studied.
 Finally , I knocke d my kn uckles o n the table, p assing, le aving the betting to the next ma n. My 
action implied that beneath my ac e was  some "nothing" card t hat I didn't care to risk my m oney 
on.
 
The player  sitting  next t o me took the bait. H e bet pretty heavily. And the next ma n raised h im. 
Possi bly each of them ha d small p airs. Maybe t hey just want ed to scare me  out before I drew 
another ac e. Fin ally, the bet reac hed John, who had a quee n showing; he  raise d ever ybody.
 
Now, there was no  telling what J ohn had. John truly  was a cl ever gam bler. Heco uld ga mble a s 
well as a nybo dy I had gam bled with in N ew York.
 
So the bet came back t o me. It was going  to cost m e a lot of money to  call all t he raises. S ome of 
them obviously  had good cards b ut I knew I had every  one of them beat. But again I studied, and 
studied; I pretended perplexity. And finally I put in my m oney, calling  the bets.
 
The same b etting pattern went on, with ea ch new card, right ar ound to the las t card . And when 
that las t card went aro und, I hit another ace in sight. Three aces. And John hit another que en in 
sight.
 
He b et a pile. Now , everyone els e studied a long tim e-and, one by one, all f olded their ha nds. 
Except me. All I could d o was p ut what I had left on the table.
 
If I'd had the money, I could have raise d five hu ndred dollars or m ore, and he'd have h ad to call 
me. John couldn't have gon e the res t of his li fe wondering if  I had bluffed him out of a pot that big.
 
I showed my hol e card ac e; John had three quee ns. As I hauled in t he pot, something over five 
hundred dollars- my first re al stake in B oston-Jo hn go t up from the table. He' d quit. He told his 
house man, "Anytime Re d comes in her e and wants anythi ng, let him have it." He said, " I've 
never se en a young m an play his ho le card like h e played."
 
John said "you ng man," being hims elf about fifty, I guess , although you can never be  certain 
about a Negro's ag e. He thought, as m ost people would h ave, that I was about thirty . No o ne in 
Roxbur y except my sisters Ella a nd Mary sus pected my re al age.
 
The story  of that poker gam e helped my on-sc ene rep utation among t he othergambl ers and 
hustlers aro und Roxbury . Another t hing th at happened in J ohn's gam bling house contribu ted: the 
incide nt that made it known  that I carried n ot a gun, but some guns .
 
John had a standing rule t hat anyon e who c ame into the place t o gamble had to check his guns i f 
he had any. I always  check ed two guns . Then, one night, when a gambl er tried t o pull so mething 
slick,  I drew a third gu n, from its s houlder h olster . This a dded to the rest o f my re putation the word 
that I was "trigger- happy" and "crazy."
 
Looking ba ck, I think I really was a t least slightl y out of my mind. I viewed n arcotics a s mo st 
people regard f ood. I wore my guns as today I wear my ne ckties. Deep down, I actually believed 
that after living as fully as humanly possible, one should then die violently . I expect ed then, as I 
still expect today, to die at any time. But then, I think I d eliberately  invited death in m any, 
sometimes i nsan e, way s.
 
For inst ance, a merc hant marine sailor who kn ew me  and my reputation came into a bar c arrying 
a package. He m otioned m e to follow him downstairs into the men's room. He unwrapp ed a 
stolen m achine gu n; he want ed to sell it. I said, "How  do I know it works?" H e loa ded it with  a 
cartridge clip, a nd told me  that all I would have t o do then was  squeeze th e trig ger rele ase. I took 
the gun , exami ned it, and the first thing he knew I had it jammed right u p in his b elly. I told him I 
would blow  him wide o pen. He went b ackwards  out of the res t room and up the stairs the way Bill 
"Bojangles" Robi nson used to dance going  backwards. H e knew I was craz y enough t o kill him. I was insane enough not to consider t hat he might just wait his c hance t o kill me. For p erhaps a 
month I kept the machine gu n at Shorty's before I was br oke a nd sold it.
 
When Reginald c ame to Roxbury  visiting, h e was  shocked at what he'd found out upon returni ng 
to Harlem. I spent some time with him. He still was  the kidbro ther who m I still felt more "family" 
toward t han I felt now eve n for our sist er Ella. Ella still liked me. I would go t o see her once in a 
while. B ut Ella h ad never be en able to rec oncile h ersel f to the way I had change d. She has since 
told me  that she had a steady  foreboding that I was on my wa y into big trouble. B ut I alwa ys ha d 
the feeling  that Ell a somehow admire d my reb ellion agai nst the world, b ecause s he, who ha d so 
much m ore drive and guts t han mo st men, often felt stymie d by having  been born female.
 
Had I been thinking  only in terms o f myself , maybe I would h ave ch osen steady gambling as a 
hustle. There were e nough ch ump gam blers th at hung ar ound John Hughes' f or a good gambl er 
to make a living off them; chumps that worked, usually. One would just h ave to  never miss the 
games on  their paydays. Be sides, John Hugh es ha d offered m e a job dealing f or ga mes; I didn't 
want th at.
 
But I had come around to thinki ng not only of mysel f. I want ed to get something going that could 
help Shorty, too. We had been talking;  I really felt sorry for Shorty. The same o ld musicia n story . 
The so-calle d glamor o f being a musician, e arning jus t about enough money so t hat after he paid 
rent and bough t his re efers a nd food and other routin e things, he  had nothing left. Plus debts. 
How could S horty  have a nything? I' d spent years in Harlem and on the road around the mo st 
popular musicia ns, the "names," even , who really  were  making big money for musicians-a nd they 
had nothing.
 
For th at matter, all t he thousands of dollars I' d handled, and _I_ had nothing.  Just satisfying my 
cocaine h abit alone cost m e about twenty  dollars a day. I guess a nother five d ollars a  day co uld 
have b een added for reefers a nd plain tobacc o cigarettes that I smoked; besides getting high o n 
drugs, I chain-smoked as many as four packs a  day. And, if you a sk m e today, I'll tell you t hat 
tobacc o, in all its forms, is j ust as much an addiction as any narcotic.
 When I opened the subjec t of a hustle wi th Shorty, I started by first bringin g him to agree with my 
concep t-of which he  was a living proof-that only squares kept on believing they could ever get 
anything by  slaving.
 
And when I mentioned what I had in mi nd-ho use burglar y Shorty, who al ways  had been so 
relativel y conservative, really  surprised m e by h ow quickl y he agreed . He d idn't even k now 
anything a bout burglarizing.
 
When I began to explain h ow it was d one, Shorty  wanted to bring  in this friend of his, who m I h ad 
met, and liked , calle d Rudy .
 
Rudy's  mother was I talian , his f ather was  a Negro. He was born right t here in Boston, a short, 
light fellow , a pretty boy type. Rudy  worked regularl y for an employment ag ency  that sent him to 
wait on tables at  exclusi ve parties. H e had a side deal going, a hustle t hat took m e right b ack t o 
the old steering  days in Harle m. O nce a  week, Ru dy went t o the home of this ol d, rich B oston 
blueblood, pillar- of-society  aristocrat . He p aid R udy to undress th em both, then pick up  the old 
man like a baby, lay him  on his b ed, then sta nd over him and sprinkle him all over with _talcu m 
powder_ , Rudy  said the old man would actually reac h his clim ax from that.
 
I told hi m and Shorty about some of the things  I'd seen. Ru dy said th at as far as h e knew , Boston 
had no orga nized s pecialty  sex houses, just individual rich wh ites who ha d their private s pecialty 
desires catered t o by Negroes who c ame to their homes camouflaged as chauffeurs, maids, 
waiters, or so me other acc epted image. Just as in New York, th ese were the rich, th e high est 
socie ty-the predominantly old men, past the age of ability  to conduct a ny kind of ordinary  sex, 
always  hunting f or new ways to be "sensitive."
 Rudy , I remember, spoke o f one old white man who p aid a black co uple to let hi m watch them 
have in terco urse on  his b ed. Another was  so "sensitive" t hathe pai d to sit o n a chair outside a 
room where a  couple was- he got his s atisfaction j ust from imagining  what was going on  insid e.
 
A good burglar y team includ es, I knew, what is calle d a "finder." A finder is o ne who locat es 
lucrative  places to  rob. Another principal n eed is s omeone able to "case" these pl aces' p hysical 
layouts-to determin e means of entry, the best ge taway routes, a nd so forth. Rudy  qualifi ed on 
both counts. B eing se nt to work  in rich h omes, h e would n't be suspected when h e sized u p their 
loot and cased the join t, jus t running around looking b usy with  a white c oat on.
 
Rudy's  reactio n, when he was told what we had in m ind, was  something,  I remember, like " Man, 
when d o we start ?"
 
But I wasn't rushing o ff half-cocke d. I had learned from some of the pros, a nd from my own 
experienc e, how import ant it was  to be careful and plan. Burglar y, properly exec uted, though it 
had its d angers, offered the maxim um chances of success with the minimum risk. I f you did your 
job so that you never m et any of your victims, it first lesse ned your  chances o f having to attack or 
perhaps kill someone. And if through so me slip-u p you were ca ught, la ter, by the polic e, there 
was never a positive  eyewitness. 
 
It is a lso import ant to select an area of burglary  and stick to that. There ar e specific specialties 
among b urglars. S ome work  apartments only , others houses only, others stores only, or 
warehous es; s till others will go a fter only safes or strongb oxes.
 
Within the reside nce b urglary category , there ar e further s pecialty  distincti ons. There ar e the day 
burglars, th e dinner-and theater-time b urglars, the night b urglars.  I think t hat any cit y's police wi ll 
tell you t hat very rarely  do they fi nd one type who will work  at another time. For ins tance 
Jumpst eady, in Harle m, was  a nigh ttime apartment specialist. I t would h ave been hard to 
persuadeJumpsteady to wo rk in the daytim e if a million aire ha d gone out for lunch a nd left his 
front door wide op en.
 
I had one ver y practic al reaso n never to work  in the daytime, aside from my inclina tions. With my 
high v isibilit y, I'd have be en sunk in t he daytime . I could just h ear p eople: "A reddish-br own Negro 
over six feet tall." O ne glance would be enough.
 
*     *     *
 
Setting up  what I wanted to be the perfect operatio n, I thought about pulling t he white gir ls into it 
for two re asons . One was th at I realized we'd be  too limit ed relying only upon places where Ru dy 
worked as a  waiter . He di dn't get to work in t oo many places ; it wouldn' t be very long before we 
ran o ut of sources. And when o ther plac es had to be found and cased in t he rich, white resid ential 
areas, Negroes h anging aro und would stick o ut like sore thumbs, b ut these white gir ls could get 
invited into the right pl aces.
 
I dislike d the idea of having too many people involved, all a t the same time. But with Shorty and 
Sophia's sister so close n ow, and Sophia and me as though we had been toget her for fifty years, 
and Ru dy as eager a nd cool as he was, n obody would be apt to spill, everybody  would b e under 
the same risk; we would b e like a family unit.
 
I never doubted that Sophia would go al ong. S ophia would d o anything I s aid. And her sister 
would do  anythi ng that Sophia said . They bo th went for it. Sophia's hu sband was awa y on one of 
his trips t o the coast when I  told her an d her sister .
 
Most b urglars, I knew, were caught not on the job, b ut trying to dispos e of the loot. Finding t he 
fence we us ed was a rare pi ece o f luck. W e agre ed upon theplan f or operations. The fence di dn't 
work with us direc tly. He had a represen tative, a n ex- con, who dealt with me , and no one else in my gang.  Aside f rom his regular bu siness , he owne d aro und Boston several garages an d small 
warehous es. The arrangem ent was t hat before a  job, I would alert the repr esen tative, a nd give 
him a general id ea of what we exp ected to get, a nd he'd tell me at which garage or wa rehouse we 
should m ake the dr op. After we h ad made our dr op, the represe ntative would exa mine the stolen 
articles. H e would re move all id entifying marks f rom everything.  Then he would call t he fence, 
who would co me and make a personal a pprais al. The next d ay the repres entative would meet me 
at a prearrange d plac e and would ma ke the paym ent for what we ha d stolen-in cas h.
 
One thing I remember. This fence alwa ys se nt your mo ney in crisp , brand-new bills. He was  
smart. S omehow that had a very definite psychological e ffect upon all of us, after we  had pulled a 
job, walking around with that crisp green money in our po ckets . He m ay have h ad other reas ons.
 
We needed a base of operatio ns-no t in Roxbury . The girls rented an apartment in Harvard 
Square . Unlike Negroes , these white girls could go shopping for the loc ale a nd physical  situa tion 
we want ed. It was on  the grou nd floor, where, m oving late at night , all o f us could come and go 
without attracting notice.
 
*     *     *
 
In any organization, someone m ust be the boss. If it's even jus t one person, you've  got to be the 
boss of yourself .
 
At our ga ng's first m eeting in t he apartment, we discusse d how we  were going t o wo rk. The girls 
would get in to houses t o case t hem by ring ing bells a nd sayin g they were s aleswomen, poll-
takers, college gir ls making a surve y, or anything else suitable. Once in t he houses , they would 
get ar ound as much as theycould witho ut attracting a ttention. Then, back, they would report what 
special valuables they had seen, and where. They would dr aw the layout for Shorty , Rudy, and 
me. We agre ed that the girls would a ctually burglari ze only in sp ecial cas es where t here would be 
some a dvant age. B ut ge nerally  the three men would go , two of us to do the job while th e third 
kept watch in the get away car, with th e motor running.
 
Talking  to them, laying down t he plans, I had delibera tely sat on a bed awa y from them. All of a 
sudden, I pulled out my gun, shook out all f ive bull ets, a nd then let them see m e put back on ly 
one bullet. I twirled the cylinder, and put the muzz le to my head. "Now, I'm going t o see how much 
guts all o f you h ave," I said.
 
I grinne d at them. All of their mouths had flapped open. I pulled the trigger- we all he ard it _click_. 
"I'm going to  do it agai n, now."
 
They begged m e to stop. I could se e in S horty's and Ru dy's eyes so me idea of rushi ng me.
 
We all h eard the hammer _click_ on  another e mpty cylinder. The wom en were in hyst erics. R udy 
and Shorty  were b egging, _" Man. . . Red . . . cut it out, man!. . . Freeze!" _ I pulled the trig ger o nce 
more.
 
"I'm doing this , showing you I 'm not afraid to  die," I told them. "N ever cross a man not afraid t o 
die. . . now, let's get t o work!"
 
I never had one moment's tr ouble with any of them after that. Sophia a cted awed , her sister all 
but calle d me "Mr . Red." Shorty and Rudy  were n ever ag ain quite t he same with m e. Neith er of 
them ever mentioned it. They t hought I was craz y. They we re afraid of me.
 We pulled the first job that night-t he place of the old ma n who h ired R udy to sprinkle him  with 
talcum p owder . A cleaner job c ouldn't have be en asked for. Everything  went like clockwork.  The 
fence was f ull of praise; he proved h e meant it with his crisp, n ew money. The old man later t old 
Rudy  how a small ar my of detectives h ad been there-and they decided that the job had the 
earmarks o f some gang  which h ad been operating around Boston for about a year. 
We quickl y got it down to a science. The girls would sc out and case in wealth y neighborh oods. 
The burglar y would be  pulled; sometimes it took no  more than ten m inutes. Shorty and I did mo st 
of the actual b urglar y. Rudy gen erally had the get away car.
 
If the people we ren't at home, we'd u se a passkey  on a common door lock . On a patent lock, we'd 
use a ji mmy , as it's calle d, or a  lockpick. Or , sometimes , we would enter by  windows from a fire-
escape, or a  roof. Gullible wome n often took the girls all over their h ouses, jus t to hear them 
exclaiming  over the finery. With the hel p of the gir ls' drawings  and a finger- beam searchlight, we 
went straight t o the things we  wante d.
 
Sometimes the victims were in their beds asl eep. That may sound ver y daring. Actually, it was 
almost e asy. The first thing we had to do when p eople were in t he house was to wait, ver y still, 
and pick up the sounds of breathing. Snorers  we loved ; they made it real e asy. In stocki nged feet, 
we'd go right into the bedrooms. Moving swiftly, like shadows, we  would lift clot hes, watches, 
wallets, handbags, a nd jewelry  boxes.
 
The Christm as se ason was Santa Cla us for us; p eople had expe nsive pr esents ly ing all over th eir 
houses . And they had taken m ore cash than usual ou t of their ba nks. Sometimes , working  earlier 
than we us ually did, we  even worked h ouses t hat we hadn't case d. If the shades were drawn f ull, 
and no lights wereon , and there was  no answer  when one of the girls rang the bell, we  would take 
the chance and go in.
 
I can gi ve you a  very good tip if you want to keep burglars ou t of your ho use. A light on for the 
burglar  to see is the ver y best single me ans of protectio n. One of the ide al thi ngs is to leave a 
bathroom light o n all night. The bathroom is o ne place where so mebody could b e, for any le ngth 
of time, at any time o f the night, a nd he would b e likely  to hear the slightest stra nge so und. The 
burgla r, knowing this, won't try  to enter. 'It's als o the cheapest possible pr otection. The kilowatts 
are a  lot cheaper than your valua bles.
 
We became e fficient. The fence sometimes r elayed tips a s to where we  could fi nd good loot. It 
was in this way  that for one perio d, one of our b est perio ds, I remember, we speci alized in 
Orient al rugs. I h ave alwa ys suspected that the fence himsel f sold the rugs to the people we stole 
them from. But, anyway, you wouldn't i magine t he value o f those things. I remember one small 
one that brought us a thousand dollars. There's n o telling what t he fence got for it. Ever y burglar 
knew that fences ro bbed the burglars  worse t han the burglars h ad robbed the victims .
 
Our o nly clos e brus h with  the law  came once when we  were m aking o ur getaway , three of us in 
the front seat of the car , and the back se at loaded with st uff. Suddenly we saw a police car rou nd 
the cor ner, coming  toward us, and it went on past us. They we re just cruising. B ut then in the 
rear-v iew mirror , we saw them make a U-turn , and we kn ew they were going  to flash us to stop. 
They had spotted us, in pa ssing, as Negroes, a nd they knew that Negroes ha d no business in the 
area at that hour. It was  a clos e situatio n. There was a l ot of robbery  going on ; we we ren't the 
only gang  working,  we knew, not by any me ans. But I knew that the white ma n is rare who wi ll 
ever consi der th at a Negro ca n outsmart h im. Before their light beg an flashing, I told Rudy  to 
stop. I did what I'd done once before-got out and flagged them, walk ing toward t hem. W henthey 
stopped, I was  at their car. I asked them, bumbling my wo rds like a confused Negro, i f they could 
tell m e how to get to a Roxbury  address. They tol d me, and we, an d they, went on about our 
respective businesses.
 
We were going along fi ne. We'd make a good pile and then lay low  awhile, living it u p. Shorty still 
played with his b and, Rudy  never misse d attending his s ensitive old man, or the table-waiting  at 
his exclusi ve parties , and the girls maintain ed their routine home schedules.
 
Sometimes , I still took the girls out to places where S horty  played, and to other p laces , spending 
money as t hough it were going  out of style, the girls dress ed in jewel ry and furs they had sel ected from our hauls. No one knew our hu stle, but it was  clear t hat we were d oing fine. And sometimes , 
the girls would co me over and we'd me et them either at  Shorty's in Roxbury or in o ur Harvard 
Square place, and just s moke ree fers, a nd play  music. It's a shame to tell on a man, but Shorty 
was so obsessed with th e white gir l that even i f the lights were o ut, he would p ull up the shade to 
be able to see that white flesh by the stree t lamp from outside.
 
*     *     *
 
Early  eveni ngs when we were lay ing low  betwee n jobs , I often went to a Mass achusetts Avenue 
nightclu b calle d the Savoy. And Sophia would t elephone me there p unctually. Even whe n we 
pulle d jobs, I would leave f rom this clu b, then rush back there a fter the job. The reason was so 
that if it was  ever n ecess ary, people could tes tify th at they had seen me  at just about the time the 
job was pulled . Negroes b eing questio ned by police men would b e ver y hard to pin down o n any 
exact ti me.
 
Boston at this ti me had two Negro de tectives. Ever sinc e I had come back on the Roxbury  scene, 
one of these detectives, a  dark brown f ellow  named Turner,had never been able to stand me, and 
it was  mutual. He t alked about what h e would d o to me, and I had promptly put an answer  back 
on the wire. I knew from the way  he began t o act that he had heard it. Everyone k new that I 
carried gu ns. And he did have s ense enough to know  that I wouldn't h esitate to use them-an d on 
him, detective or not.
 
This e arly evening  I was in t his plac e when at the usual ti me, the phone in the booth rang. It rang 
just a s this detective Turner h appened to walk in through th e front door. He saw me start t o get 
up, he knew the call was for me, but stepped insi de the booth, and answered.
 
I heard him  saying, lo oking  straight a t me, "Hello, hello , hell o-" And I knew that Sophia, t aking no 
chances with the strange voice, had hung up .
 
"Wasn't that call for me?" I asked Turner.
 
He said th at it was.
 
I said, " Well, why didn't you say  so?"
 
He gave  me a rude answer. I knew he want ed m e to make a move , first. We both were bei ng 
cagey . We both knew that we wante d to kill each other. Neit her wante d to say  the wron g thing. 
Turner di dn't want to say anything th at, repeated, would make him sound bad. I didn't want t o say 
anything t hat could be interpret ed as a threat to a cop.
 
But I remember exactly  what I  said to him anyway, purposely  loud enough f or some people at the 
bar to hear me. I said, "You know , Turner-you're try ing to  make history . Don't you kn ow that if you 
play with m e, you certai nly will go d own in hist ory becaus e you' ve got to  kill me?"
 Turner lo oked at me. Then he back ed down. He walked on by me. I guess h e wasn't re ady to 
make history .
 
I had gotte n to the point where I was walk ing on  my own co ffin.
 
It's a  law of the rackets that every  crimin al expects to ge t caught. He tries to  stave off the 
inevitable for as long a s he can.
 
Drugs helped m e push the thought t o the back of my m ind. They we re the center o f my lif e. I had 
gotte n to the stage where every  day I used enough drugs- reefers, coc aine, or both-so that I felt 
above any wo rries, a ny strains. I f any wor ries di d ma nage to push their wa y through to  the 
surface of my co nscious ness, I could f loat them back where th ey came from until tomorrow , and 
then until the next d ay. 
But where, alwa ys before, I had been able to smoke the reefers a nd to sniff the snow an d rarely 
show it ver y much, by now it was no t that easy.
 
One week when we weren't workin g-after a b ig haul-I was just stayin g high, and I was out 
nightclu bbing. I came into this clu b, and from the bartender's f ace when he spoke , "Hello, Re d," I 
knew that something was w rong. B ut I didn't ask him anythi ng. I've always had this rul e-never ask 
anybo dy in t hat kind of situation ; they will tell you what t hey want you t o know. But the bartender 
didn't get a  chanc e to tell m e, if he had meant to. W hen I sat down o n a stool a nd order ed a drink, 
I saw them.
 
Sophia and her sister s at at a table insi de, near the dance floor, with a white man.
 
I don't know how I ever m ade such a  mistake as I next d id. I could h ave talk edto her later. I didn't 
know, or care , who th e white f ellow was.  My cocai ne told m e to get up .
 
It wasn't Sophia's husband. It was his clos est friend. They had served i n the war  together. With 
her h usband out of town, he  had aske d Sophia a nd her sist er out to dinner, and they went. B ut 
then, later, after dinner, driving around, he had suddenly suggested going over  to the black 
ghett o.
 
Every Negro who lives  in a city has seen the type a  thousand tim es, the North ern cracker who wi ll 
go to visit "niggertown," t o be amused at "the coons."
 
The girls, so well  known in t he Negro places in Roxbury , had tried t o change his mi nd, but he had 
insiste d. So they had just held their breaths comi ng into this clu b where t hey had been a hundred 
times. They walked in stiff-eyeing  the bartenders an d waiters who c aught t heir m essage and 
acted as though they never h ad seen them before. And they were sitti ng there with dri nks be fore 
them, prayin g that no Negro who kn ew them would barge u p to their t able.
 
Then up I came. I know I called them "Baby." They were c halky-white, he was beet-red.
 
That same night, b ack a t the Harvard Sq uare pl ace, I really got sick. I t was  less o f a physical 
sickness than it was all o f the last f ive years  catching up. I was in my p ajamas in be d, half asle ep, 
when I heard s omeone knock.
 
I knew that something was wrong.  We all ha d keys. N o one ever k nocke d at the door. I rolled o ft 
and under the bed; I was so groggy it didn't cross my mi nd to grab for my gun o n the dress er.
 
Under the bed, I heard the key turn, and I saw  the shoes a nd pants cuffs walk in. I watch ed them 
walk around. I saw them stop. Ever y time they stopped, Iknew what the eyes we re looking a t. And 
I knew, before he did, that he was going to  get d own and look un der the bed. He di d. It was 
Sophia's husband's f riend. His face was about two feet from mine. It looked congeale d.
 
"Ha, ha, ha, I fooled you, di dn't I?" I said. It wasn't at all funny. I got ou t from under the bed, still 
fake-laughing. He d idn't run, I'll say that for him. He st ood back; h e watch ed m e as though I were 
a snake.
 
I didn't try to hide what h e already  knew . The girls had some things  in the cl osets , and around; he 
had seen all of that. We even t alked some. I told h im the girls weren' t there, a nd he left. What 
shook m e the most was realiz ing that I had trapped myself  under the bed withou t a gun. I  really 
was slipping.
 
*     *     *
 
I had put a stolen watch i nto a jewelr y shop to replac e a brok en crystal. It was about two d ays later, when I went t o pick up the watch, that things  fell apart.
 
As I have s aid, a  gun was as mu ch a part of my dress as a necktie . I had my gun in a shoulder 
holster, under my co at.
 
The loser o f the watch , the person from whom it had been stolen by us, I later found, had 
described the repair that it needed. It was  a ver y expensive watch, t hat's wh y I had kept it for 
myself . And all o f the jewelers in Boston had been alerted .
 
The Jew waited until I had paid him  before he laid t he watch on the counter. He gave his signal-
and this ot her fellow suddenly appeared, from the back, walk ing toward m e.
 
One hand was  in his p ocket. I knew he  was a cop. 
He said, quietly , "Step in to the back."
 
Just as I start ed back there, a n innocent Negro walked into the shop. I remember lat er hearing 
that he had just that day got ten out of the military. The detective, thinki ng he was w ith me, turned 
to him.
 
There I was, wearing  my gun , and the detective talking  to that Negro  with his back to me. Today I 
believe t hat Allah was w ith m e even t hen. I didn't try  to shoot him. And that saved my li fe.
 
I remember that his name was Detective Slack .
 
I raise d my ar m, and motioned to him, "Here , take my gun ."
 
I saw his f ace when he took it . He was sh ocke d. Because o f the sudden appearanc e of the other 
Negro, he had never thought about a gun. It really  moved hi m that I hadn't tri ed to kill him.
 
Then, holding my gun in his h and, he signaled. And out from where t hey had been concealed 
walked two  other d etectives. They'd ha d me covered. O ne false move , I'd have b een dead.
 
I was going  to have a long tim e in prison t o think a bout that.
 
If I hadn't been arrest ed right when I was, I c ould have b een dead another way . Sophia's 
husband's f riend had told h er hu sband about me. And the husband had arrived t hat morning, a nd 
had gon e to the apartment with a gun, l ooking f or me. He was at  the apartment jus t about when 
they took m e to the preci nct.
 
The detectives gr illed m e. They didn't beat me. They didn't even p ut a finger on m e. And I knew it 
was because I hadn't trie d to kill the detective.
 
They got my ad dress f rom some p apers th ey found on me. The girls soon were picke d up. Shorty 
was pulled right o ff the bandstand that night. The girls als o had implicat ed Rudy . To this d ay, I 
have alwa ys m arveled at how Ru dy, somehow, got th e word, a nd I know he must have c aught the 
first thing smoki ng out of Boston, and he got away. They never got him .
 
I have th ought a thousand times, I gu ess, a bout how I so narrowly escaped death twice th at day. 
That's wh y I believe that every thing is wr itten.
 
The cops found the apartment loaded with evide nce-f ur coats, some jewelry, other small stuff-plus 
the tools o f our tra de. A jimmy, a lock pick, glass cu tters, scr ewdrivers, pe ncil-beam flashlights, 
false keys.  . . and my s mall arse nal o f guns . The girls got low bail. They we re still white-burglars 
or not. Their wo rst crim e was  their involveme nt with Negroes. B ut Shorty and I had bail se t at 
$10, 000 each, which they kn ew we  were n owhere ne ar able to rais e.
 The social workers  worked on us. White wom en in leagu e with Negroes was  their m ain 
obsessio n. The girls weren't so-calle d "tramps," or " trash ," they we re well -to-do upper-middle-
class whites. That bothered the social workers  and the forces o f the law mor e than anythi ng els e.
 
How, where, when , had I met them? Did we  sleep toget her? Nobody want ed to know anything  at 
all ab out the ro bberies. All they could s ee was th at we h ad taken the white man's wom en.
 
I just look ed at the social workers: "N ow, what do you thi nk?"
 
Even t he court clerks  and the bailiffs: "Nice white gi rls . .  . goddam niggers- " It was the same even 
from our court-a ppointed law yers as we sa t down, u nderguard, at a table, as our h earing 
assembled. Before the judge e ntered, I said to one lawyer, "We seem to be getti ng sentenced 
becaus e of those girls." He got re d from the neck u p and shuffled his p apers: "Y ou had no 
business with white gi rls!"
 
Later, when I  had learned the full trut h about the white man, I reflected ma ny times that the 
average burglar y sentence f or a first offender, as we all were, was ab out two years. Bu t we 
weren't going  to get th e average-no t for _our_ crim e.
 
*     *     *
 
I want t o say before I go o n that I have n ever previously told anyon e my sordi d past in detail. I 
haven' t done it now to sound as though I might b e proud of how ba d, how evil, I was.
 
But people are always  spec ulating- why am I as I am? To understa nd that of any pers on, his 
whole lif e, from birth, must be revie wed. All of our exp eriences f use into our personality . 
Everything  that ever h appened to us is a n ingredi ent.
 
Today, when everything  that I do has an urgency , I would not spend one hour in the preparatio n of 
a book which had the ambition to perhaps titillate s ome readers. But I am spending m any ho urs 
becaus e the full story  is the best wa y that I know to have it s een, and underst ood, that I had sunk 
to the ver y bottom of the American white man's societ y when-so on now, in prison-I found Allah 
and the religion o f Islam and it c ompletely trans formed my li fe.
 
 
 
CHAPT ER TEN
SATAN
 Shorty didn't k now what the word  "concurre ntly" meant.
 
Somehow, Lansing-to-B oston bus fare had been scrap ed up by Sh orty's old mother. "Son, read 
me Book of Revelati ons a nd pray to God!" she had kept telling  Shorty , visiting hi m, and once m e, 
while we awaited our s entencing. S horty  had read the Bible's Revelation p ages; he had actually 
gotte n down on his kn ees, prayin g like s ome Negro Ba ptist deacon.
 
Then we  were looking up  at the judge in Middl esex  County Court. (Our , I think, fourteen counts o f 
crime were co mmitted in t hat county. ) Shorty's  mother was sitti ng, sobbing with her he ad bowing 
up and down to her J esus, over near Ella a nd Reginald. Shorty was  the first of us called to stand 
up.
 
"Count one, eight to  ten years-
 
"Count two, eight t o ten years-
 
"Count three. . ."
 And, finally, "The sentences to run c oncurrently."
 
Shorty, sweating so hard that his b lack f ace looked as though it had been grease d, and not 
underst anding the word "concurren tly," had counted in his head to probably over a hundred years; 
he cried o ut, he began slu mping. The bailiffs had to catch and support hi m.
 
In eight t o ten seconds, Shorty had turned as atheist as I had been to start w ith.
 
I got ten years.
 The girls got on e to five years, in t he Women's Re formatory  at Framingha m, Mass achusetts.
 
This was  in Fe bruary , 1946. I wasn't quite twenty- one. I had not eve n start ed shavin g.
 
They took Shorty  and me, handcuffed toge ther, to the C harlestown S tate Priso n.
 
I can't r emember any o f my prison numbers. That seems surprising, even a fter the doze n years 
since I have been out of prison . Because your nu mber in prison b ecame par t of you. You never 
heard your n ame, only your nu mber. On all o f your  clothi ng, every item, was  your n umber, 
stenciled. It gre w stenciled on your  brain.
 
Any person who clai ms to have deep feeling f or other h uman beings should thi nk a long, lo ng 
time before he votes t o have ot her m en kept behind bars-caged. I am not saying th ere s houldn't 
be prisons , but there shouldn't be  bars. B ehind bars, a man never reforms. He will never f orget. 
He n ever will get c ompletely  over t he memory  of the bars.
 
After he  gets o ut, his m ind tries t o eras e the exp erienc e, but he can't. I've talk ed with nu merous 
former co nvicts. I t has been ver y interes ting to me to find that all o f our mi nds had blotted away 
many details of years in prison . But in every case, he will tell you that he can't forget t hose bars.
 
As a "fish" (prison sla ng for a new inmate) at Charlestown, I  was physically  miserabl e and as evil-
tempered as a snake, being suddenly  witho ut drugs. The cells didn't have r unning water . The 
prison had been built in 1 805-in Na poleon's d ay-and was even s tyled a fter the Bastille. I n the 
dirty, cram ped cell, I  could lie o n my c ot and touch b oth wal ls. The toilet was a covered p ail; I 
don'tcare how stro ng you ar e, you c an't stand having to smell a whole cell ro w of defecatio n.
 
The prison psychologist  interviewed m e and he got called every filthy name I could thi nk of, and 
the priso n chaplai n got c alled worse. My  first le tter, I remember, was from my relig ious bro ther 
Philb ert in D etroit, t elling  me his "holin ess" c hurch was going to  pray  for me. I scraw led him a 
reply  I'm ashamed to think o f today.
 
Ella was my  first visitor. I remember seeing her ca tch h ersel f, then try to smile a t me, now in t he 
faded dungarees stenciled with my nu mber. Neith er of us could f ind much to say, until I wished 
she hadn't come at all. The guards with guns watch ed about fifty convicts  and visitors. I  have 
heard sc ores o f new priso ners s wearing back in their cells that when free their first act would be 
to waylay those visiting- room guards. H atred often focused on them.
 
I first got high in C harlestown o n nutmeg. My  cellmate was  among at  leas t a hundred nutmeg 
men who, for money or cigarettes, bought f rom kitc hen-worker  inmates pe nny matchboxes f ull of 
stolen nutmeg. I grabbed a box as though it were a  pound of heavy drugs. S tirred into a glass o f 
cold water, a penny ma tchbox full of nutmeg ha d the kick of three or f our reefers.
 
With some money se nt by Ella, I was  finally able to buy stuff for better highs f rom gu ards in t he 
prison . I got reefers, Ne mbutal, and benzedrine . Smuggling to prison ers was the gu ards' sid eline; 
every prison's i nmates k now that's how guards make m ost of their living.
 
I served a  total o f seven years  in priso n. Now , whe n I try  to separate that first year-plus t hat I spent a t Charlestown, it runs all t ogether in a  memory of nutmeg and the other se mi-drugs, of 
cursing  guards, t hrow ing thi ngs out of my cell, ba lking in the lines , dropping my tray  in the dining 
hall, refusing t o answermy  number-claiming  I forgot it-and things like that.
 
I preferred the solitar y that this be havior  brought me . I would p ace for hours like a caged le opard, 
viciously  cursing al oud to myself . And my f avorite t argets were  the Bible an d God. But there was 
a legal limit to how much time one could b e kept in solitar y. Eve ntually, the m en in the cellblock 
had a name for me: "Satan." Because of my antirelig ious attitude.
 
The first man I met in priso n who ma de any p ositive impressio n on me what ever was a f ellow 
inmate, "Bimbi." I met him in 1947, at Charles town. He was a light, kind o f red-complexioned 
Negro, as I was; ab out my heigh t, and he had freckl es. Bi mbi, a n old-tim e burglar, had been in 
many prisons. In the licens e pla te shop where our gang  worked , he operated the ma chine that 
stamped out the numbers. I was  along the conveyor  belt where t he numbers we re painted.
 
Bimbi was  the first Negro co nvict I' d known who di dn't respond to "What'cha know, Daddy?" 
Often, after we  had done our day's licens e pla te qu ota, we would sit around, perhaps fifteen of us, 
and liste n to Bimbi. Nor mally , white prison ers wouldn't think o f listening to Negro prison ers' 
opinions on anything, b ut guards, eve n, would wan der over  close to hear Bimbi on any su bject.
 
He would h ave a cluster o f people riveted , often on odd subjec ts you never would t hink o f. He 
would prove t o us, dipping int o the scie nce o f human behavio r, that the only difference b etwee n 
us and outside people was  that we had been caught. H e liked t o talk a bout his torical events and 
figures. W hen he talked about the history  of Concord, where I was to be transferred later, you 
would have t hought h e was hire d by the Cha mber of Com merc e, and I wasn't t he first inmate who 
had never heard of Thoreau until Bimbi expou nded upon him. Bimbi was known  as the librar y's 
best cus tomer. What fascinated m e with hi m most of all was  that he was the first m an I had ever 
seen command total respect. .  . with his words. 
Bimbi seld om said m uch to me; he was gruf f to individuals, bu t I sensed he liked m e. What made 
me seek his f riends hip was when I heard hi m disc uss relig ion. I considere d myself  beyond 
atheism-I was Satan. But Bim bi pu t the atheist p hilosophy  in a framework, so to speak . That 
ended my v icious cursing  attacks. My  approach sounded so weak al ongside his , and he never 
used a foul word.
 
Out of the blue one day, Bimbi told me  flatly, as was  his wa y, that I had some brains, if I'd use 
them. I had wante d his f riendship, n ot that kin d of advice. I migh t have c ursed another co nvict, 
but nobody cursed Bimbi. He t old m e I should tak e advant age of the priso n corresp ondenc e 
courses an d the librar y.
 
When I had finished the eight h grade back in Maso n, Michigan, that was th e las t time I'd thought 
of studying anything th at didn't have s ome hustle purpose . And the stre ets h ad eras ed everything 
I'd ever learne d in scho ol; I didn't kn ow a verb from a house. My  sister Hilda had written a 
suggestion t hat, if possi ble in pris on, I should study English a nd penmanship; she had barely 
been able to read a couple o f picture p ostcards I had sent her when I was selling  reefers on the 
road.
 
So, feeling  I had time on my ha nds, I did begin a corresp ondence course in English. W hen the 
mimeograp hed listings  of availa ble b ooks pass ed from cell to cell, I would put my nu mber next to 
titles t hat appealed to me which we ren't alre ady taken.
 
Through the corres pondence exercises a nd lesso ns, s ome of the mechanics of grammar 
gradually  began to come back t o me.
 
After ab out a year, I guess, I  could wr ite a decent and legible let ter. About then, too, influenced by 
having  heard Bimbi o ften explain word derivations, Iq uietly started another corresp ondence 
course- in Latin. 
Under Bimbi's tutelage, t oo, I had gott en mysel f some littl e cellblock swindles going. F or packs of 
cigarettes, I beat just about anyo ne at dominoes. I always  had several cart ons o f cigarett es in my 
cell; t hey were, i n prison , nearly as valuable a  medium of exch ange a s money. I booked cigarette 
and money bets on fights a nd ball ga mes. I 'll never forget t he prison sens ation crea ted that day in 
April, 1 947, when Jackie Robins on was bro ught u p to play with the Bro oklyn Do dgers. Jackie 
Robins on had, then, his most fanatic fan in me. When he played, my e ar was  glued to the radio, 
and no game e nded without my re figuring  his average u p through h is last turn at bat.
 
*     *     *
 
One day in 1948, after I h ad been transferred to Conc ord Priso n, my bro ther P hilbert , who was 
forever joining so mething, wrote m e this time that he had discovered t he "natural religion for the 
black man." He b elonged n ow, he said, t o something calle d "the Natio n of Islam." He s aid I should 
"pray to Allah for deliveranc e." I wrote P hilbert a  letter which, alt hough in im proved E nglish, was 
worse than my earlier re ply to his n ews that I was bei ng prayed for by his "holiness " church.
 
When a letter from Reginald arrived, I never dre amed of associa ting the two  letters, alt hough I 
knew that Reginal d had been spending a l ot of time with W ilfred, Hilda , and Philbert in Detr oit. 
Reginald's le tter was newsy , and also it co ntained this i nstructio n: "M alcolm , don't eat any mo re 
pork, and don't smoke any more cigarett es. I'll sh ow you h ow to get o ut of prison. "
 
My automatic res ponse was to  think he  had come upon some wa y I could work  a hype on the 
penal a uthorities. I went t o sle ep-an d woke u p-trying to figure what kin d of a hyp e it c ould b e. 
Something psychological, s uch a s my act withthe N ew York draft board? Could I, after going 
without pork a nd smoking  no cigaret tes for a while, cl aim s ome physical tro uble t hat could bring 
about my releas e?
 
"Get out of prison ." The words hu ng in the air around me, I wanted out so badly.
 
I want ed, in the worst wa y, to consult with Bi mbi a bout it. But something big, insti nct s aid, you 
spilled t o nobody.
 
Quitting cigaret tes wasn't going t o be too difficult. I had been condition ed by d ays in solitary 
without cigaret tes. W hatever t his chance was, I wasn't going to fluff it. After I re ad that letter, I 
finished the pack I t hen had open. I haven't s moked another cigarette to this d ay, since 1948.
 
It was a bout three or four days lat er when p ork was  served for the noon meal.
 
I wasn't eve n thinking  about pork when I took my  seat at the long table. Sit-grab-gobbl e-stand-file 
out; that was  the Emily  Post in priso n eating. W hen the meat platter was  pass ed to me, I didn't 
even k now what the me at was;  usually, you c ouldn't tell, anywa y-but it was su ddenly as though 
_don't eat any more pork_ flashed on a scre en before m e.
 
I hesita ted, with the platter i n mid-air; then I passed it along to the inmate waitin g next to me. He 
bega n serv ing hi msel f; abruptly, he stopped. I remember him  turning,  looking sur prised at me.
 
I said to him, "I don't eat pork."
 
The platter then kept on down the table.
 It was t he funniest thing, t he reacti on, a nd the way  that it spread. In prison, where so littl e bre aks 
the monotonous ro utine , the smallest thing c auses a commotion o f talk. I t was  being mentioned 
all over  the cell bl ock by  night t hat Satan did n't eat pork.
 
It made me very proud, in s ome odd way. One of the universal  images o f the Negro, in pris on and 
out, was th at he couldn't d o witho ut pork. I t made me feel go od to see that my not eating it h ad especially  startled t he white convicts.
 
Later I would learn , when I  had read and studied Isla m a good deal, that, unconsciously , my fi rst 
pre-Isla mic su bmissio n had been manifested. I had experienc ed, for the first time, the Muslim 
teaching, " If you will take o ne step toward Allah-Allah wi ll take two st eps t oward you."
 
My brothers a nd sisters in D etroit a nd Chicago h ad all become converted to what they were  being 
taught was  the "natural relig ion for the black man" of which Philb ert ha d written to me. They all 
prayed f or me to become converte d wh ile I was in priso n. But after Philb ert rep orted my vicious 
reply , they disc usse d what was  the best thing to  do. They ha d decided that Reginald , the latest 
convert, t he one to who m I felt clos est, would best kn ow how to approach m e, since he knew me 
so well  in the street li fe.
 
Independently of all this, my sister Ella had been steadily workin g to get m e trans ferred t o the 
Norfolk, M assach usetts, Priso n Colo ny, which was a n exp erimental re habilita tion j ail. In other 
prisons , convicts o ften sai d that if you ha d the right m oney, or c onnecti ons, you could get 
trans ferred to this Colo ny whose penal p olicies so unded almost too good to be true. Somehow, 
Ella's e fforts i n my  behalf were s uccess ful in la te 1948, and I was tra nsferred to Norf olk.
 
The Colony  was, comparatively, a heaven , in m any res pects. It had flushing toilets ; there were n o 
bars, only walls-and within t he walls, you h ad far more freedom. There was  plenty of fresh air t o 
breathe; it was n ot in a city .
 
There we re twen ty-four "house" units, fifty men living in each unit, if memory serves  me correctly . 
This would m ean that the Col ony had a total of around 1200 inmates. Each "house" had three 
floors a nd, great est bl essing  of all, e ach inmate had his own room.
 
About fifteen per cent of the inmates were Negroes, d istribut ed about five t o nine Negroes in e ach 
house.
 
Norfolk Priso n Colo ny represen ted the most enlighte ned form of priso n that I have ever heard of. 
In place of the atmosphere o f malicious gossip, p erversion , grafting, ha teful guards , there was 
more rela tive "culture ," as "cultur e" is in terpre ted in priso ns. A high p ercen tage o f the N orfolk 
Prison Colony  inmates went in for "intellect ual" things, grou p disc ussions, debates, and suc h. 
Instructors f or the educational re habilita tion p rograms c ame from Harvard, B oston Univers ity, and 
other e ducational instit utions in t he area. The visiting  rules, f ar more lenient than other priso ns', 
permitte d visitors al most ever y day , and allowed t hem to stay two ho urs. You had your ch oice o f 
sitting alo ngside your v isitor, or facing each other.
 
Norfolk Priso n Colo ny's librar y was  one of its o utstanding features . A millionaire n amed Park hurst 
had willed h is librar y there; h e had probably been intereste d in t he rehabilitatio n program. History 
and relig ions were  his special in terests . Thousands o f his books were on  the shelves, an d in the 
back we re boxes a nd crates full, for which there wasn't s pace on the shelves. At Nor folk, we 
could ac tually  go in to the librar y, with per mission-walk  up and down t he shelves, pick books. 
There we re hundreds of old volumes, some o f them probably quite rare. I read aimlessl y, until I 
learn ed to read selectivel y, with a purpose.I hadn't heard from Reginald i n a good while a fter I got 
to Norfolk Priso n Colo ny. But I had come in there n ot smoking  cigaret tes, or ea ting pork when it 
was served. That caused a b it of eyebrow -raising. Then a letter from Reginald telling  me when h e 
was coming t o see me. By the time he came, I was really  keyed up to hear the hype he was going 
to explain.
 
Reginald k new how my stre et-hu stler mi nd operated. That's why  his a pproach was so effective.
 
He h ad always  dresse d wel l, and now, when he came to visit, was  carefully groo med. I was 
aching with wanting th e "no pork a nd cigarett es" rid dle an swere d. But he talked about the family, 
what was  happening in De troit, Harle m the last ti me h e was t here. I have never p ushed anyone to tell m e anything  before he is ready. The offhand way Reginald talked and acted ma de me know 
that something big was  coming.
 
He said, f inally, as though it had just h appened to come in to his mind, "Malcol m, if a man knew 
every imagina ble thing that there is to know , who would h e be?"
 
Back in Harle m, he had often liked t o get at something through this ki nd of indirection . It had often 
irritated me, because my way  had alwa ys been direct . I looke d at him. "Well, he would have to be 
some ki nd of a god-"
 
Reginald s aid, " There's a _man_ who kn ows every thing. "
 
I asked , "Who is that?"
 
"God is a man," Reginald s aid. " His real n ame is Allah ."
 
_Alla h_. That word came back t o me from Philb ert's letter; it was my  first hintof any connection. 
But Reginald went on. He said t hat God had 360 degrees o f knowledge. He s aid that 360 
degrees repres ented "the sum total of knowledge. "
 
To say I was confused is an underst atement. I don't have t o remind you o f the backgroun d 
against which I  sat hearing  my brother Reginald t alk like t his. I just list ened, knowing he  was 
taking his time in p utting me onto something.  And if somebody  is trying to put you on to 
something, you ne ed to listen .
 
"The devil has only thirty -three degrees o f knowledge-kn own a s Mas onry," Reginald said. I can so 
specific ally remember th e exact phrases sinc e, later, I was going  to teach t hem so ma ny times to 
others. " The devil  uses his Mas onry to rule o ther people."
 
He told m e that this God had come to America, a nd that he had made himsel f known to  a man 
named Elija h-"a black m an, just like us ." This God had let Elija h know, Reginald s aid, t hat the 
devil's  "time was  up."
 
I didn't know  what to think. I just liste ned.
 
"The devil is also a man," Reginald s aid.
 
"What do you m ean?"
 
With a slight move ment of his h ead, Reginald in dicate d some wh ite inm ates an d their vi sitors 
talking, a s we were, a cross t he room.
 
"Them," he said. "The white m an is th e devil."
 
He told m e that all whites k new they were d evils-"especially  Maso ns."
 I never will forget : my mind was  involuntarily flashing across t he entire sp ectru m of white people I 
had ever kn own; and for some reaso n it s topped upon Hymie , the Jew, who h ad been so good t o 
me.
 
Reginald, a couple of times, h ad gone out with me to that Long I sland bootleggin g operation to 
buy an d bottle up the bootleg li quor for Hymie.
 
I said, " Without any exce ption?"
 
"Without any excepti on."
 "What about Hymie? "
 
"What is it i f I let you ma ke five h undred doll ars to let me make ten thousand?"
 
After Reginald l eft, I thought. I thought . Thought.
 
I couldn't m ake of it head, or tail, or m iddle.
 
The white people I had known m arched before my mi nd's eye. From the start of my life. The state 
white people always  in our house after the other whites I didn't know  had killed my f ather. . . the 
white people who ke pt calling my  mother "craz y" to her face and before m e and my bro thers and 
sisters, u ntil she finally was  taken off by wh ite people to the Kalamazoo a sylum . . . the white 
judge a nd others who h ad split u p the children . . . the Swerlins, t he other whites ar ound Mas on. . 
. white youngst ers I was in sch ool there with, a nd the teachers-th e one who t old m e in the eighth 
grade to "be a carpenter" because t hinking o f being a lawyer was foolish f or a Negro. . . .
 
My head swam with the parading f aces of white p eople. The ones in Boston, inthe white- only 
dances at the Rosel and Ballroo m where I  shin ed their shoes. . . at the Parker Ho use where I  took 
their dirty pla tes b ack t o the kitche n. . . the railroad cr ewme n and pass engers . . . Sophia . . . .
 
The whites in New  York City -the cops, the white crimi nals I' d dealt with. . . the whites who piled 
into the Negro sp eakeasies for a taste of Negro _ soul_ . . . the white women who wante d Negro 
men. . . the me n I'd steered t o the black " specialt y sex" they wante d . . . .
 
The fence back in Bo ston, and his ex- con repres entative. . . Boston cops . .  . Sophia's h usband's 
friend, and her h usband, who m I'd never se en, but knew so mu ch about . . . Sophia's sister .  . . 
the Jew  jeweler who'd helped trap me . . . the social workers  . . . the Mid dlesex  County Court 
people . . . the judge who gave me  ten years . . . the priso ners I' d known, the guards a nd the 
officials .  . . .
 
A cele brity among t he Norfolk Priso n Colo ny inmates was  a rich, older fellow, a paralytic, calle d 
John. H e had killed his b aby, one of those " mercy" killings.  He was  a proud, big- shot type, a lways 
reminding ever yone that he was a 33rd-degree Mas on, and what powers  Maso ns ha d-that only 
Maso ns ever  had been U. S . Preside nts, t hat Maso ns in distress c ould secretly  signal t o judges 
and other Maso ns in p owerful positions.
 
I kept thinki ng about what Reginald h ad said. I want ed to test it with John. He worked in a soft job 
in the prison's sc hool. I went over there.
 
"John," I said, "how many degrees in a circle? "
 
He said, " Three hundred and sixty."
 
I drew a square. " How many degre es in t hat?" He s aid three h undred and sixt y.
 I asked him was three hundred and sixty degrees, then, the maxim um o f degrees in anything?
 
He said "Y es."
 
I said, " Well, why is it that Mas ons go o nly to thirty-three degrees ?"
 
He h ad no satisfactory  answe r. But for me, the answer was  that Mas onry, actually, is only thirty-
three degrees o f the religion o f Islam, which is t he full pr ojectio n, forever d enied to Mas ons, 
although t hey kn ow it exists.
 
Reginald, when he came to visit me again in a few days, co uld gauge f rom my attitude the effect 
that his talking ha d had upon me. He seemed ver y pleased. Then, very serio usly, he talked for two solid h ours a bout "the devil white ma n" and "the brainwashe d black ma n."
 
When Reginald l eft, he left me rocking w ith some of the first s erious t houghts I had ever h ad in 
my life: that the white m an was fast losing  his power t o oppress and exploit t he dark world; t hat 
the dark wo rld was starti ng to rise t o rule the wo rld ag ain, a s it h ad before; that the white man's 
world was  on the wa y down, it was on the way out.
 
"You don't eve n know who you ar e," Reginald h ad said. "You don't eve n know, the white d evil has 
hidden it from you, that you ar e of a race o f people o f ancient civ ilizations , and rich es in gold and 
kings. You don't even k now your tru e family name, you wouldn't rec ognize your tru e langu age if 
you he ard it . You have be en cut off by the devil white m an from all tr ue knowledge of your own 
kind. You have been a victim o f the evil  of the devil white m an ever since he murdered and raped 
and stole you f rom your n ative lan d in the seeds o f your f orefathers. . . ."
 I began to receive at least two le tters every  day from my br others and sist ers in Detroit . My 
oldest br other, Wilfred, wrote, and his first wife , Ber tha, the mother o f his two children (since her 
death, W ilfred has m et and married his pres ent wife, Ruth). Philb ert w rote, and my sister Hilda. 
And Reginald visited , staying in Boston awhile be fore he went ba ck to Detroit , where h e had been 
the most recen t of them to be converte d. They were all Muslims, followers  of a man they 
described to me as "The Hon orable Elijah Mu hammad," a small, gentl e ma n, whom t hey 
sometimes re ferred to as "The Messe nger o f Allah ." He was,  they said, "a black m an, like u s." He 
had been born in America on a farm in Ge orgia. He h ad move d with his family to Detroit , and 
there h ad met a Mr. Wallace D. Fard who h e claime d was  "God in pers on." Mr. Wallace D. F ard 
had given to Elijah Mu hammad Allah's message f or the black pe ople who we re "the Lost-Found 
Natio n of Islam here in this wi lderness o f Nort h America."
 
All of them urged m e to "accept the teachings of The Honorable Elijah Muhammad." Reginald 
explaine d that pork was n ot eaten by those who wo rshiped in the religion o f Islam, and not 
smoking  cigaret tes was a rule o f the followers o f The Honorabl e Elijah Muha mmad, because t hey 
did not take inj urious things  such as narcotics, tobacc o, or liquor in to their bo dies. Over  and over , 
I read, and heard, "The key to a Muslim is s ubmissio n, the attunement of one toward Allah."
 
And what t hey termed "the true knowledge o f the black m an" that was  possessed by the followers 
of The Honorable Elija h Mu hammad was g iven s hape for me in their le ngthy letters, s ometimes 
containi ng prin ted literat ure.
 
*     *     *
 
"The true knowledge," rec onstructe d mu ch more brie fly than I received it, was that hist ory had 
been "whiten ed" in the white man's his tory books, and thatthe black man had been "brainwashed 
for hundreds of years." Orig inal Man was bl ack, in the continent called Africa where th e human 
race h ad emerged on the planet Ear th.
 
The black man, original m an, built great e mpires an d civi lizations and cultures while the white 
man was still  living on all f ours in caves. " The devil white m an," down t hrough h istory , out of his 
devilish nature, had pillaged , murdered, raped, and exploite d every  race of man not white.
 
Hum an history 's great est crim e was  the traffic in black fl esh when t he devil white m an went in to 
Africa a nd murdere d and kidnapped to bring to the West in chains , in sl ave ships, m illions of 
black men, wom en, and children, who were worked a nd beaten and tortured as slaves.
 
The devil white m an cut these black people off from all kn owledge o f their own kin d, and cut them 
off from any kn owledge o f their own la nguage, relig ion, and past culture, until the black man in 
America was  the earth's o nly rac e of people who ha d absolutely no knowledge o f his tr ue identity.
 
In one gen eratio n, the black sl ave wom en in America had been raped by the slavemaster wh ite 
man until there had begun t o emerge a homemade, handmade, brainwashe d race that was no longer even of its tru e color , that no longer even knew  its tru e family names. The slavem aster 
forced his family name upon this ra pe-mixed rac e, which t he sl avemast er bega n to call " the 
Negro."
 
This "N egro" was  taught o f his n ative Africa t hat it was  peopled by heathen, black savages, 
swinging like m onkeys from trees. This "Negro" acc epted this al ong with every  other teaching o f 
the slavem aster t hat was  designe d to make him acce pt and obey and worship the white ma n.
 
And where t he religion o f every  other people on earth taught its beli evers o f aGod with who m they 
could id entify, a God who a t least lo oked like on e of their own kin d, the slavemast er inject ed his 
Christian religion in to this "N egro." This "Negro" was ta ught t o worship an  alien God having the 
same b lond hair, pale skin, a nd blue eyes as the slavem aster .
 
This relig ion taught t he "Negro" that black was  a curse. I t taught h im to hate every thing bl ack, 
includi ng himsel f. It taught hi m that everything wh ite was  good, to be admired, respected, and 
loved. It brainwash ed this "N egro" to think h e was su perior if  his c omplexion showed mo re of the 
white pollu tion of the slavemas ter. This white ma n's Christian relig ion further d eceived and 
brainwash ed this "N egro" to always  turn the other c heek , and grin, a nd scrap e, and bow, and be 
humble, and to sing,  and to pray, and to take what ever was  dished out by the devilish white man; 
and to look for his pi e in t he sky, and for his he aven i n the hereafter, while right h ere o n earth the 
slave-m aster white man enjoyed _ his_ heaven.
 
Many  a time, I have looked back, trying to assess, just f or myself , my f irst reactio ns to all t his. 
Every instinct of the ghet to jungle stree ts, every  hustling  fox and crimin al wo lf instinct i n me , 
which would have sc offed at and rejecte d anything else, was struck numb. It was as though all of 
that life merely was  back t here, withou t any rem aining e ffect, or in fluence. I remember how, some 
time later, reading the Bible i n the Nor folk Prison Colony  librar y, I came u pon, then I read, over 
and over , how Pa ul on  the ro ad to Damascus, upon hearing the voice o f Christ, was so smi tten 
that he was kn ocke d off his h orse, in a daze. I do not now, and I did not then, like n myself  to Paul. 
But I do underst and his experie nce.
 
I have since learn ed-hel ping me to underst and what t hen beg an to happen within me-that the 
truth can be quickl y received, or received a t all, o nly by th e sin ner who k nows and admits t hat he 
is guilty of having sin ned mu ch. Stated another way : only guilt ad mitted acce pts tr uth. The Bible 
again: the one people whom Jesus c ould n ot help were  the Pharisees ; they didn't feel they 
needed any help.
 
The very enormity of my previous life's guilt pr epared m e to accept the truth.
 
Not f or weeks yet would I deal with the direct, personal a pplication to myself , as a b lack m an, of 
the truth. It still was  like a b linding light.
 
Reginald le ft Boston and went b ack t o Detr oit. I would sit in my ro om and stare. At the dining-
room table, I would h ardly  eat, only drink t he water. I nearly starved. F ellow inmates, c oncer ned, 
and guar ds, a pprehensive, a sked what was  wrong w ith m e. It was suggested that I vis it the 
doctor, and I didn't. The doctor, advised, visited m e. I don't know what h is diagn osis was, p robably 
that I was workin g on some act.
 
I was going  through the hardes t thing, also t he greatest thing, for any human being to do; to 
accept that which is alrea dy within you, a nd around you.
 
I learned later that my br others and sist ers in Detroit put toge ther the money f or my sist er Hilda to 
come a nd visit me . She told me  that when The Honorable Elijah Muhammad was  in Detroit , he 
would st ay as a  gues t at my brother W ilfred's h ome, which was on  McKay  Street. Hild a kept 
urging m e to write to Mr. Muhammad. He underst ood what it was  to be in the white m an's priso n, 
she said , because h e, hims elf, had not long before gott en out of the federal prison at Milan, Michi gan, where h e had served five years  for evadi ng the draft.
 
Hilda sai d that The Ho norable Elija h Muh ammad came to Detroit t o reorganize his Temple 
Num ber O ne, which had become disorganized duri ng his prison time; but he lived in Chicago, 
where he  was organizing and building his Temple Num ber Two.It was Hilda who said t o me, 
"Would you like t o hear h ow the white man came to this planet E arth?"
 
And she told m e that key lesso n of Mr. Elija h Muh ammad's teachings,  which I  later learn ed was 
the demonology that every  relig ion has, called "Y acub's Histor y." Elijah Muhammad teaches his 
followers  that, first, the moon separated from the earth. Then, the first humans, Original M an, 
were a black pe ople. They f ounded the H oly City Mecca.
 
Among t his black race were twenty -four wise scie ntists. One of the scie ntists, at odds with the 
rest, creat ed the especially  strong black trib e of Shabazz, from which America's Negroes, so-
called , descend.
 
About sixty-six hundred years ago, when s eventy per cent of the people were sa tisfied, and thirty 
per c ent were dissatis fied, among th e diss atisfied was  born a "Mr . Yacub." He was bor n to crea te 
trouble, to break the peace, and to kill. His h ead was  unusually large. When he was four years 
old, he began sc hool. At the ag e of eighte en, Yacub had finished all o f his n ation's c olleges  and 
universities. He was known as "the big- head scie ntist. " Among ma ny other things, he  had learne d 
how to breed rac es scie ntifically.
 
This big- head scie ntist, Mr. Yacub, began p reaching in the streets of Mecca, making such h osts of 
converts t hat the authorities, i ncreasingl y conc erned, finally exiled him with 59, 999 followers  to 
the islan d of Patmos-describ ed in the Bible as the islan d where J ohn received t he m essage 
contain ed in Revelatio ns in t he New Testament.
 
Though he  was a black m an, Mr. Yacub, embittered t oward Allah now, decided, as revenge, t o 
creat e upon the earth a d evil race-a bleach ed-ou t, white r ace o f people.
 From his st udies, the big- head scie ntist k new that black men contained two germs, black a nd 
brown. He k new that the br own ger m stayed dormant as, being the lighter of the two germs, it 
was the weaker. Mr. Yacub, to upset the law  of nature, c onceived the ide a of employing what we 
today know as the recessi ve ge nes s tructure , to separat e from each other the two germs , black 
and brown, and then grafting the brown germ t o progressivel y lighter, weaker s tages. The 
humans res ulting, he  knew, would be, as they became lighter, and weaker , progressi vely also 
more susc eptible t o wickedness and evil.  And in this way finally he would ac hieve th e intended 
bleached-ou t white race of devils.
 
He knew that it would t ake h im several t otal color-ch ange st ages to get from black t o white. Mr . 
Yacub beg an his work by  setting up a eugenics law  on the islan d of Patmos.
 
Among Mr . Yacub's 5 9, 999 all-black followers,  every third or so child th at was b orn would s how 
some tr ace o f brown. As these b ecame adult, only brown  and brown, o r black and brown, were 
permitte d to marry. As their c hildren were bor n, Mr . Yacub's law dict ated that, if a black child, t he 
attending nurse, or m idwife, should stick a needle into its br ain an d give  the body to cre mators. 
The mothers were told it had been an "angel b aby," which ha d gone to heaven , to prepare a  place 
for her.
 
But a brown  child's m other was tol d to take ver y good c are o f it.
 
Others, a ssistan ts, were train ed by Mr . Yacub to continue his o bjective. Mr . Yacub, when h e died 
on the islan d at the ag e of one hundred and fifty-two, h ad left laws, and rules, for them to follow. 
Accor ding to the teachings o f Mr. Elija h Muh ammad, Mr . Yacub , excep t in his mind, never saw the 
bleached-ou t devil  race t hat his pr ocedures a nd laws  and rules cre ated.
 A two-h undred-year  span was  needed to elimina te on the islan d of Patmos allo f the black pe ople-
until only brown p eople remained.
 
The next two h undred years were ne eded to creat e from the brown race t he red rac e-with no 
more browns le ft on the isla nd.
 
In another two  hundred years, f rom the red rac e was  creat ed the yel low race.
 
Two hundred years lat er-the white rac e had at last b een cre ated.
 
On the islan d of Patmos was  nothing b ut these blond, pale-skinn ed, cold-blu e-eyed devils-
savages, nu de and shameless ; hairy , like a nimals, t hey walked on all fours an d they lived in 
trees .
 
Six hundred more years  passed before this rac e of people returned to the mainla nd, among t he 
natural bl ack p eople.
 
Mr. Elijah Muhammad teaches his f ollowers  that within six mo nths' time, through telling lies th at 
set the black me n fighting among ea ch other, this d evil race had turned what h ad been a peaceful 
heaven o n earth into a hell tor n by quarrelin g and fighting.
 
But finally the orig inal black people recognized th at their s udden troubles st emmed from this devil 
white race t hat Mr. Yacub had made. They ro unded them up, put them in c hains . With little aprons 
to cover  their n akedness, t his devil  race was ma rched off across th e Arabi an desert to the caves 
of Euro pe.
 
The lambskin a nd the cable-tow  used in Masonry  today are symbolic o f how th e nakedness o f the 
white man was covered when he was  chained and driven a cross t he hot sand.
 
Mr. Elijah Muhammad further teaches t hat the white d evil race in Europe'scaves was  savage. The 
animals trie d to kill him. He clim bed trees outside his cave, m ade clubs, trying to protect his f amily 
from the wild beasts o utsid e trying to get in.
 
When this devil race had spent two t housan d years in t he caves, Allah rais ed up Mos es to civilize 
them, and bring them out of the caves. I t was  written t hat this devil white rac e would rul e the 
world for six thousand years.
 
The Books o f Mos es are missing. That's wh y it is no t known that he was in t he caves.
 
When Moses arrived, the first of these devils  to accept his t eachings, t he first he led o ut, were 
those we call t oday the Jews.
 
Accor ding to the teachings o f this "Yacub's History ," whe n the Bible says  "Mos es lifted up the 
serpent in the wilderness, " that serpent is symb olic of the devil  white race Mos es lifted up out of 
the caves o f Europe, teaching them civilization.
 
It was wr itten that after Yacub's bleached white rac e had ruled t he world for six thousand years-
down t o our tim e-the black original r ace would give  birth to one whos e wisdom, knowledge, a nd 
power would be  infinite.
 
It was wr itten that some of the original bl ack p eople s hould be brought a s slaves to North 
America-to l earn t o better un derstand, at first h and, the wh ite devil's  true nature, in mo dem times.
 
Elijah Mu hammad teaches that the greatest and mightiest G od who appeared o n the ear th was 
Master W . D. F ard. He came from the East to the West, appearing  in North America at a time 
when t he history  and the prophecy that is written was coming to  realization, as the non-white people all over th e wor ldbegan to rise, and as the devil white civ ilization , condemned by Allah , 
was, through its d evilish na ture, destroy ing itsel f.
 
Master W . D. F ard was  half black a nd half white. He was made in this way  to enable him to be 
accepted by th e black p eople in America , and to lead them, while a t the same time h e was 
enabled to move un discovered among t he white p eople, so that he could u ndersta nd and judge 
the enemy of the blacks.
 
Master W . D. F ard, in 1931, posing as a seller o f silks, me t, in De troit, Michigan, E lijah 
Muhammad. Mast er W . D. Fard gave to  Elijah Muha mmad Allah's m essage , and Allah's divine 
guida nce, t o save the Lost-Fou nd N ation of Islam, the so-called Negroes, h ere in "this w ildern ess 
of North America. "
 
When my sister , Hilda, h ad finished telling  me this " Yacub's History ," she left. I don't know if I was 
able to open my mouth and say goo d-bye.
 
I was to learn later t hat Elijah Muhammad's tales, like t his on e of "Yacub," infuriated the Muslims 
of the East. W hile at Mecca, I remind ed them that it was th eir fault, sinc e they themselves ha dn't 
done enough t o make real I slam known in the West. Their silenc e left a vacu um into which a ny 
religious faker could ste p and misle ad our pe ople.
 
 
 
CHAPT ER E LEVEN
SAVED
 
I did write to Elija h Muh ammad. He lived i n Chicago a t that time, at 6116 South Michigan Avenue. 
At least twenty-five ti mes I must have wr itten that first one-page letter to him, over  and over . I was 
trying to make it b oth legible a nd underst andable. I practically  couldn't re ad my h andwritin g 
myself ; itshames eve n to remember it. My spelling an d my gram mar were as b ad, if not worse. 
Anyway, as well  as I could express it, I said I had been told about him by my  brothers a nd sisters, 
and I apologi zed f or my po or let ter.
 
Mr. Muhammad sent me a typ ed re ply. It had an all bu t electrical e ffect upon m e to see the 
signature of the "Messenger o f Allah. " After he  welcome d me into the "true knowledge," h e gave 
me something to  think ab out. The black priso ner, he said , symbolized wh ite socie ty's crime of 
keeping black men oppressed and deprived a nd ignorant , and unable to get decent jobs , turning 
them into criminals.
 
He told m e to have co urage. He even e nclos ed some mo ney f or me, a five-do llar bill. M r. 
Muhammad sends m oney all over the country  to priso n inmates who wr ite to him, probably to this 
day.
 
Regularl y my family wrote t o me, "Turn to Allah . . . pray to the East."
 
The hardest test I ever f aced in my li fe was pr aying.  You understand. My  comprehending, my 
believing  the teachings o f Mr. Muhammad had only required my mi nd's s aying to me, "That's 
right!" or " I never thought of that."
 
But bending my k nees to pray-that _act_-well, th at took me  a week.
 
You know what my li fe had been. Picki ng a lock t o rob someone's ho use was  the only way my 
knees h ad ever been bent before.
 
I had to force myself  to bend my knees. And waves  of shame a nd embarrass ment would f orce m e 
back up . 
For evi l to bend its k nees, a dmitting its guilt, to  implore t he forgiveness o f God, is th e hardest 
thing in the wo rld. It's e asy for me to see and to say thatnow. But then, when I was the 
personification of evil, I was going  through it. Again, again, I  would f orce mysel f back d own int o 
the praying-to-Alla h posture. W hen finally I was ab le to make myself  stay down-I di dn't know what 
to say to Allah .
 
For th e next years, I was th e nearest thing to a hermit i n the Nor folk Prison Colony . I never have 
been more busy in my li fe. I still marvel a t how swiftly my pr evious life's thinking  pattern slid awa y 
from me, like snow  off a roof. It is a s though s omeone else I knew of had lived by  hustling and 
crime. I would b e startle d to catch mysel f thinking in a  remote wa y of my earlier  self as another 
person.
 
The things I felt, I was piti fully unable to express in t he one-page l etter that went every  day to Mr. 
Elijah Mu hammad. And I wrote a t least o ne more daily letter, replying to one of my brothers a nd 
sisters. Every  letter I received fr om them added something to my kn owledge o f the teachings o f 
Mr. Muhammad. I would sit f or long periods and study his ph otographs.
 
I've never be en one for inac tion. Ever ything I've  ever felt strongl y about, I've do ne something 
about. I guess t hat's why, unable to do anythi ng else, I soon began writing to people I had known 
in the hustling wor ld, suc h as Sammy  the Pimp, John Hugh es, the ga mbling- house owner , the 
thief Jumpsteady, and several d ope peddlers. I  wrote them all ab out Allah a nd Islam and Mr. 
Elijah Mu hammad. I had no idea where m ost of them lived. I  address ed their le tters in care o f the 
Harlem or Roxbury  bars and clu bs where I' d known them.
 
I never got a si ngle reply. The average hustler and crimin al was  too uneducated to wr ite a letter. I 
have k nown  many slick, s harp-lo oking  hustlers, who would have you think they had an interest in 
Wall Street; privately , they would get someone else t o read a letter if they received o ne. Besides, 
neither would I have re plied t o anyone writing m e something as wild as "the white m an is the 
devil."
 
What certai nly went on the Harle m and Roxbury wires was that Detroit Red was going  crazy in 
stir, or else he was try ing so me hype t o shake up the wa rden's o ffice.
 
During  the years  that I stayed in the Nor folk Prison C olony , never di d any official directly  say 
anything t o me  about those letters, a lthough, o f course, they all p asse d through t he prison 
censorship. I'm sure, howe ver, they monitored what I wrote to add to the files which every  state 
and federal prison keeps o n the conversion o f Negro in mates by t he teachings  of Mr. Elijah 
Muhammad.
 
But at that time, I felt that the real reas on was th at the wh ite ma n knew  that he was th e devil.
 
Later on, I even wrote t o the Mayor o f Boston, to the Governor o f Mass achus etts, and to Harry  S 
Truman. They never answered; they pro bably never even saw my let ters. I hand-scratc hed to 
them how the white ma n's society  was res ponsible f or the black ma n's condition in this wilderness 
of North America.
 
It was b ecause o f my le tters t hat I happened to stumble upon starting t o acquire s ome kin d of a 
homemade education.
 
I became increasi ngly frustrated at not being abl e to express what I want ed to conve y in letters 
that I wrote, especially  those to Mr. Elija h Muh ammad. In the street, I had been the most 
articula te hustler out there-I h ad commanded attention whe n I said s omething. B ut now, trying to 
write sim ple E nglish, I not only wasn't articulat e, I wasn't even functional. How  would I sound 
writing in slang, t he way  I would say it, something such as, "Look, daddy, let m e pull your co at 
about a cat, Elijah Mu hammad-" Many  who t oday hear m e somewhere in perso n, or on television, or those who read something 
I've said, will think I went to  school far beyon d the eighth grad e. This impressio n is du e entirely  to 
my prison s tudies.
 
It had really  begun back in the C harlestown Priso n, when Bimbi first made me feel envy of his 
stock of knowledge. Bi mbi h ad always  taken charge o f any co nversa tion h e was in, and I had 
tried t o emulate him. But every  book I pick ed up had few se ntences which di dn't contain 
anywhere from one to nearly  all o f the words t hat might a s wel l have be en in Chin ese. When I just 
skipp ed those words, o f course, I  really  ended up with little idea of what th e book said . So I had 
come to the Norfolk Priso n Colo ny still  going  through only book-reading m otions. Pr etty soon, I 
would have quit even t hese mo tions, u nless I  had received the motivatio n that I did.
 
I saw that the best thing I could d o was get h old of a dictionary-to study, to learn some words. I 
was lucky  enough t o reason als o that I should try to improve my p enmanship . It was sad. I 
couldn't even wr ite in a s traight line. It was b oth ide as togeth er that moved m e to request a 
dictio nary along with some tablets and pencils f rom the Norfolk Priso n Colo ny sch ool.
 
I spent two days just riffling un certai nly through th e dic tionary's pages. I'd never realized so m any 
words existe d! I didn't know _which_ words I needed to learn. Finally , just t o start so me kind of 
action, I began copying.
 
In my slow, painstaking, ragged h andwriting,  I copied into my  tablet everything  printe d on that first 
page , down t o the punctuation ma rks.
 
I believe  it took m e a day. Then, aloud, I read back, t o mysel f, ever ything I'd written on the tablet. 
Over  and over, aloud, to mysel f, I read my own h andwriting. 
I woke u p the next m orning, t hinking ab out those wo rds-im mensely  proud to realize  that not only 
had I written so m uch at one time, but I'd written wo rds that I never kn ew we re in the world. 
Moreove r, with a little e ffort, I also could re member what ma ny of these words me ant. I reviewed 
the words  whose m eanings I di dn't remember. Funny thing, f rom the dictio nary first page ri ght 
now, that "aardvark" s prings  to my mi nd. The dictio nary had a picture o f it, a long-tailed, long-
eared, burrow ing African m ammal, which lives  off termit es ca ught by  sticking  out its t ongue as an 
anteater d oes for ants.
 
I was so f ascinated that I went o n-I copied the diction ary's next p age. And the same exp erience 
came whe n I studied that. With every  succee ding page , I also le arned of people and places and 
events from history. Actually the dic tionary is like a miniature e ncyclopedia. Fin ally the dictio nary's 
A secti on had filled a  whole t ablet-and I went on into the B's . That was  the wa y I started copying 
what even tually  became the entire dic tionary. It went a  lot faster after so much pr actice h elped me 
to pick u p handwritin g speed. Betwee n what I wrote i n my  tablet, and writing letters, duri ng the 
rest o f my ti me in prison I would gu ess I wrote a  million words.
 
I suppose it was  inevitable that as my word- base bro adened, I could for the first ti me pick up  a 
book and read and now begin t o understand what t he book was  saying. Anyon e who ha s read a 
great deal c an imagine t he new wo rld that opened. Let me tell you so mething: f rom then until I le ft 
that pris on, in ever y free moment I had, if I was not readi ng in the library , I was  reading on my 
bunk. You couldn't have got ten me out of books with a wedge. Be tween Mr . Muhammad's 
teachings, my c orrespondence, my visitors- usually  Ella and Reginald-a nd my reading of books , 
months passe d without my even thinking  about being impriso ned. In fact, up to then, I never ha d 
been so truly free in my lif e.
 
The Norfolk Priso n Colo ny's librar y was  in the school b uilding. A variety ofclasses was ta ught 
there by instruc tors who ca me from such plac es as Harvard a nd Boston universities. The weekly 
debates b etwee n inm ate teams were also h eld in the school building. You would be  astonis hed to 
know how worked up convict d ebaters a nd audiences would ge t over  subjects like " Should 
Babies B e Fed Milk?" 
Available o n the prison library's  shelves  were b ooks on  just about every general s ubjec t. Muc h of 
the big pri vate collection that Parkhurst had willed t o the prison was still in cra tes a nd boxes i n the 
back of the library -thousands o f old books . Some of them looked ancient: covers  faded, old-ti me 
parchment-lo oking  binding. Parkhurst, I've m entioned, seemed to have been principally  interest ed 
in his tory and religion. H e had the money an d the speci al interest to have a lot of books t hat you 
wouldn't h ave in ge neral circulati on. Any college library  would have b een lucky  to get that 
collectio n.
 
As you c an imagine, especially  in a priso n where th ere was he avy emphasis on  rehabilitati on, a n 
inmate was  smiled upon if he demonstra ted an unusually intense interes t in b ooks. There was  a 
sizable number of well-read inmates, especially  the popular d ebaters. Some were s aid by  many 
to be practic ally walking  encyclopedias. They were  almost c elebrities. No u niversity  would a sk 
any stu dent to devour literat ure as I did when t his n ew wor ld opened to me, of being able to read 
and _underst and_.
 
I read m ore in my roo m than in t he librar y itself. An inmate who was kn own to read a lot could 
check ou t more than the permitte d maxim um number of books. I preferred reading in the total 
isolatio n of my own roo m.
 
When I had progresse d to really  serious re ading, every  night a t about ten P. M. I would b e 
outraged with th e "lights out." It always seemed to catch me  right in t he middle o f something 
engrossing.
 Fortu nately, right o utside my d oor was a c orridor light that cast a glow into my room. The glow 
was enough t o rea d by, once my eyes adj usted to it. So when "lights o ut" came, I would sit o n the 
floor where I could c ontinue reading in that glo w.
 
At one-hour intervals  the night gu ards p aced past every  room. Each time I heard the approaching 
footsteps, I jumped into b ed and feigned slee p. And as soon as the gu ard pa ssed, I got ba ck out 
of bed onto the floor are a of that light-glo w, where I  would re ad for another fifty-eight minutes-until 
the guard approac hed again . That went o n until three o r four ever y morning. Three or four hours 
of sleep a night was  enough f or me. Often in the years in t he stree ts I h ad slep t less t han that.
 
*     *     *
 
The teachings o f Mr. Muhammad stresse d how hist ory had been "white ned"-when white m en had 
written history  books, the black m an simply had been left out. Mr. Muh ammad couldn't have said 
anything t hat would have s truck me  much har der. I had never f orgotten how when my class , me 
and all o f those whites, h ad studied sevent h-grade Unit ed States his tory back in Mas on, the 
history of the Negro had been covered in one paragraph, and the teacher h ad gotte n a big laugh 
with his joke, "Negroes' feet are so big that when t hey walk, they leave a hole in t he ground."
 
This is o ne reaso n wh y Mr. Muhammad's teachings  spread so swiftly all over th e Unit ed States, 
among _ all_ Negroes , wheth er or no t they became followers o f Mr. Muhammad. The teachings 
ring true-to every Negro. You can har dly show me  a black adult in America-or a  white one, for that 
matter-who kn ows fr om the history  books anything like t he truth about the black m an's role. I n my 
own case, once I heard of the "glorious h istory  of the black m an," I took speci al painsto h unt in 
the library  for books t hat would inform me on details about black history.
 
I can re member accurately  the very first s et of books that really impress ed m e. I have since 
bought t hat set of books a nd have it at home for my childre n to rea d as they gro w up . It's calle d 
_Wonders o f the W orld_. It's full of pictures o f archaeological  finds, statues that depict, u sually, 
non-Euro pean people.
 
I found books like W ill Dura nt's _ Story of Civilizatio n_. I read H. G . Wells' _O utline of Histor y_. 
_Souls O f Black Folk_ by W. E. B. Du Bois gave m e a glimps e into the black p eople's hist ory before they came to this country. Cart er G. W oodson's _N egro Hist ory_ op ened my eyes about 
black empires b efore the black slave was  brough t to the Unit ed States, a nd the early Negro 
strug gles f or freedom.
 
J. A. Rogers'  three volumes of _Sex and Race _ told about rac e-mixing before Christ's  time; about 
Aesop being a black man who t old fables; a bout Egypt's Ph araohs; about the great C optic 
Christian E mpires; a bout Ethiopia, t he earth's ol dest continuous b lack civ ilizatio n, as China is the 
oldest c ontin uous civilization .
 
Mr. Muhammad's teaching about how the white ma n had been cre ated led me to _Fin dings  In 
Genetics _ by Gregor  Mendel. ( The dictio nary's G sectio n was  where I h ad learn ed what 
"genetics" meant. ) I really  studied this b ook by the Austria n mo nk. Rea ding it over an d over , 
especially  certain sec tions , helped me  to understan d that if you st arted with a black ma n, a white 
man could be produce d; but starting with  a white m an, you n ever could pro duce a black m an-
becaus e the white ge ne is rec essive. And si nce n o one disp utes th at there was  but one Original 
Man, the conclusio n is clear .
 
During  the last year or s o, in the _N ew York Times_, Arnold Toynb ee used theword "bl eached" in 
describing the white man. (His wo rds were: " White (i.e. bl eached) human beings of North 
European origin. .  . .") Toynb ee als o referred to the European geograp hic are a as only a 
peninsula o f Asia. H e said there is n o such t hing as Europe. And if you look at the globe , you w ill 
see for yoursel f that America is o nly an exte nsion o f Asia. (Bu t at the same time Toynbe e is 
among t hose who have helped to bleach his tory. He h as wr itten that Africa was  the only continent 
that produced no history. He won't write that again. Every day now, the truth is coming  to light. )
 
I never will forget how shock ed I was when I began rea ding about slavery's total horror . It made 
such an impact upon m e that it later b ecame one of my f avorite subjects when I  became a 
minist er of Mr. Muhammad's. The wor ld's most monstrous crim e, the sin a nd the blood on the 
white man's h ands, a re almost impossible to believe. B ooks like th e one by Frederick Olms tead 
opened my eyes t o the horrors s uffered when t he slave  was landed in the Unit ed States. The 
European wom an, Fannie Ki mball, who ha d married a  Southern white slaveowner, describe d how 
human beings we re degrad ed. Of course I read _U ncle Tom's Ca bin_. In fact, I believe t hat's the 
only novel I h ave ever rea d sinc e I started serio us rea ding.
 
Parkhurst's collec tion a lso contained some bound pamphlets of the Abolitionist Anti-Slavery 
Society of New  Englan d. I read descriptions o f atrocities , saw  those illustrati ons o f black slave 
women tied up and flogged with whips; o f black m others watching th eir babies b eing dragged o ff, 
never to  be seen by t heir mo thers again ; of dogs a fter sl aves, and of the fugitive slave ca tchers, 
evil white me n with whips an d clubs a nd chains a nd guns. I  read about the sl ave pr eacher Nat 
Turner, who pu t the fear of God into the white slave mast er. Nat Turner wasn't going ar ound 
preaching pie-in-th e-sky and "non-violent" freedom for the black ma n. There in Virginia one night 
in 1831, Na t and seven other slaves s tarted out at his master's h ome and through t he night they 
went fr om one plantation " big house" to the next, killin g, until by th e next mor ning57 white people 
were dead and Nat h ad about 70 slaves f ollowing him. White people, terri fied for their li ves, f led 
from their homes, lock ed themselves up  in public b uildings, hi d in t he woods, a nd some even le ft 
the state. A small ar my of soldiers  took two mo nths to catch a nd hang Nat Turner. Somewhere I 
have re ad where Nat Turner's example is said to have ins pired J ohn Brown to invade Virginia a nd 
attack Har per's Ferr y nearly thirty  years lat er, with t hirtee n wh ite me n and five Negroes.
 
I read H erodo tus, "the father of History ," or, rather, I read about him. And I read the his tories o f 
various nations , which opened my eyes grad ually, then wider  and wide r, to how the whole world's 
white men had indeed acted like devils, pillagin g and raping an d bleeding and draining  the whole 
world's n on-white pe ople. I remember, for insta nce, books s uch a s Will Dura nt's st ory of Orient al 
civilization, and Ma hatma G andhi's a ccounts o f the strug gle to drive th e British out of India.
 
Book after book showed me how th e white m an had brought upon the wo rld's bl ack, br own, red, and yello w peoples ever y variety of the sufferings  of exploit ation. I saw how since the sixtee nth 
century , the so-called "C hristian tr ader" white ma n bega n to ply the seas in his lust f or Asian a nd 
African em pires, and plunder, and power. I read, I saw, how the white ma n never ha s gon e 
among t he non-white p eoples bearing  the Cross  in the true m anner and spirit of Christ's 
teachings- meek, humble, and Christ-like.
 
I perceived, a s I read, how th e collecti ve white m an had been actually nothing bu t a piratic al 
opportunist who u sed Faustian machinations to make his own Christianity  his initial wedge in 
criminal c onques ts. First, alwa ys "religiously ," he branded "heathen" and "paga n" labels upon 
ancient non-white cultures and civilizatio ns. The stage thus se t, he then turned upon his n on-
white victims h is weapo ns of war.
 I read how, entering India-h alf a _billion _ deeply reli gious brown  people-the British white ma n, by 
1759, through pr omises , tricker y and manipulations , controlled much of India through Gre at 
Britain's E ast India Co mpany. The parasitical British a dministrati on kept tentacling ou t to half of 
the subcontinent. In 1857, some o f the despera te people o f India finally mutinied-a nd, excep ting 
the African slave trade, nowhere h as his tory recor ded any more unnecess ary bestial and ruthless 
human carnage t han the British suppressio n of the non-white I ndian people.
 
Over  115 million African blacks-close to the 1930's population of the Unite d States-were 
murdered or e nslaved d uring th e slave tra de. And I read how when the slave ma rket was glutt ed, 
the cannibalistic  white powers  of Euro pe next carved u p, as their col onies, the riches t areas of the 
black continent. And Europe's c hanc elleries f or the next c entury played a  chess gam e of naked 
exploita tion a nd power fr om Cape H orn to  Cairo.
 
Ten guards a nd the warden couldn't have t orn m e out of those b ooks. No t even Elija h Mu hammad 
could have been m ore eloqu ent than those books were in providing indispu table pro of that the 
collective wh ite ma n had acted like a devil in virtually  ever y contact he had with th e world's 
collective no n-wh ite man. I liste n today to the radi o, and watch television, and read the headlin es 
about the collecti ve white m an's fear and tension concerning  China. When the white m an 
professes ignorance about why the Chin ese h ate him so , my mind can't h elp flashing back t o 
what I r ead, there in prison , about how the blood forebears o f this same white m an raped C hina 
at a time when Chin a was  trusting an d helpless. Those original white "C hristian tr aders" se nt into 
China millions o f pounds of opium. By 1839, so many of the Chin ese were a ddicts that Chin a's 
despera te governm ent destroyed twenty  thousand chests of opium. The first Opi um W ar was 
promptly  declar ed by th e white m an. Imagine ! Declaring  _war_ upon someone who objects t o 
being narcotized! The Chines e we re severely  beaten, with Chin ese-in vented gun powder . 
The Treaty of Nanking  made China pay the British white m an for the destroyed o pium; forced 
open China's major ports to British tra de; forced Chin a to abandon Ho ng Kong; f ixed China's 
import tariffs so low that cheap British articles s oon flooded in, maiming Chin a's industrial 
develo pment.
 
After a seco nd O pium War, the Tientsin Treaties l egalized th e ravagin g opium tra de, legali zed a 
British-French-A merica n control o f Chin a's cus toms. Chin a trie d del aying that Treaty's  ratification; 
Peking was loo ted and burned.
 
"Kill t he foreign white devils!" was th e 1901 Chin ese war cry in the Boxer Rebellion. Losing again , 
this ti me the Chin ese were driven f rom Peking's  choicest ar eas. The vicious, arr ogant white m an 
put up the famous signs, "Chines e and dogs no t allowed. "
 
Red China after W orld War II clos ed its do ors to  the Western white wor ld. Massi ve Chines e 
agricultural, scie ntific, and industrial e fforts ar e described in a book that _Life_ magazine rec ently 
publishe d. Some observers  inside Red C hina h ave rep orted that the world never has known suc h 
a hate-white campaign a s is now going  on in this non-white country where, pr esent birt h-rates 
continui ng, in fifty more years  Chines e will be half the earth's p opulation. And it seems t hat some 
Chines e chickens wi ll soon come home to roos t, with Chin a's recent success ful nuclear te sts.
 Let us face reality. We can see in the Unit ed Natio ns a n ew world ord er being shaped, along color 
lines-an  allianc e am ong t he non-wh ite nations . Americ a's U. N. Ambass ador Adlai S tevenso n 
complain ed not long ago that in the Unit ed Na tions " a skin gam e" was being played . He was ri ght. 
He was  facing reality. A "skin gam e" _is_ b eing pl ayed. But Ambass ador Stevens on sounded like 
Jesse James a ccusing t he m arshal o f carry ing a gun. Becaus e who in the wo rld's his tory ever 
has played a  worse "skin game" than the white m an? 
*     *     *
 
Mr. Muhammad, to who m I was wr iting daily, had no idea of what a new world ha d opened up to 
me through my e fforts t o document h is teachings in books.
 
When I discovered p hiloso phy, I tried t o touch all t he landmarks of philosophic al develop ment. 
Grad ually, I read m ost of the old philosophers, Occide ntal a nd Orien tal. The Orie ntal p hilosophers 
were the ones I came to prefer; finally, my impression was th at most Occid ental ph ilosophy had 
largely been borrowed from the Orie ntal think ers. So crates , for insta nce, traveled i n Egypt. Some 
sources even s ay that Socrates was initia ted into some o f the Egyptia n mysteries. Obviousl y 
Socrates go t some o f his wisdom among the East's wi se m en.
 
I have o ften reflected upon the new v istas that reading op ened to me. I knew  right there in priso n 
that reading h ad changed f orever  the course o f my life. As I see it today, the ability to read awoke 
inside me some long dor mant craving  to be mentally alive. I certainly  wasn't seeki ng any degree, 
the wa y a college  confers a  status symb ol up on its students. My homemade education gave me , 
with every  additional b ook that I read, a little b it more s ensitiv ity to the deafness, d umbness, and 
blind ness that was  afflicting t he black rac e in America. Not lo ng ago, an English writer telephoned 
me from London, asking  questions . One was, " What's your al ma mater?" I told him , "Books." You 
will never catch me with a free fifteen minutes in which I'm not studying something I feel might be 
able to help the black m an.
 
Yesterd ay I spoke in L ondon, and both ways on the plane across t he Atlantic I  was studying  a 
document about how the U nited Natio ns pro poses to  insure the human rights o f the oppresse d 
minorities o f the wor ld. The America n blackm an is t he world's mo st shameful cas e of minority 
oppressio n. W hat makes th e black ma n think of hims elf as only an internal Unit ed States issu e is 
just a  catch-phr ase, two words, " civil rights. " How  is the black m an going to get "civil rights" b efore 
first he wins his _human_ rights? If the American black m an will start t hinking a bout his _human_ 
rights, and then start thi nking  of himself as p art of one of the wor ld's grea t peoples, h e will see he 
has a c ase for the U nited Natio ns.
 
I can't t hink of a better cas e! Fo ur hundred years o f black blood and sweat investe d here in 
America, a nd the white m an still has the black ma n begg ing for what ever y immigrant fresh off the 
ship can take for granted the minute he walks  down t he ga ngplank.
 
But I'm digressing.  I told the Englishm an that my alm a mater was  books, a  good librar y. Every 
time I catch a p lane, I have with m e a book that I want to read-and that's a  lot of books t hese 
days. I f I weren't out here every  day ba ttling th e white m an, I could spend the rest of my life 
reading,  just s atisfying my  curiosity -because you ca n hardly  mention anything I' m no t curious 
about. I don't think a nybody  ever got mo re out of going t o priso n than I did. In fact, prison enabled 
me to study far mor e intensivel y than I would h ave if my life had gone differently  and I had 
attended some college. I  imagine that one of the biggest tro ubles with colleges is there ar e too 
many distractio ns, too much panty-raiding,  fraternities, a nd boola-b oola and all o f that. Where 
else but in a  priso n could I have a ttacked my ignor ance by being ab le to study intensely 
sometimes a s much as fifteen hours a day?
 
Schopenhauer, Kant, Nie tzsche , naturally , I read all of those. I don't resp ect them; I am just trying 
to remember so me of those whos e theories I  soaked up in those years. These three, it's s aid, lai d 
the groun dwork o n which th e Fascist an d Nazi  philosophy  was built. I  don't respec t them because 
it seems to me that most of their time was  spent arguing ab out things  that are not really important.They remind me of so m any o f the N egro "intellectu als," s o-called, with who m I h ave 
come in contact-they are alwa ys arguing ab out something us eless.
 
Spinoza  impressed me for a while when I found out that he was black. A black Sp anish Jew . The 
Jews  exco mmunica ted him  becaus e he advocat ed a pantheistic d octrin e, something like t he 
"allness o f God," or "God in ever ything." The Jews re ad their buri al services f or Spinoza, m eaning 
that he was de ad as far as they were co ncern ed; h is family was  run out of Spain, they ended up 
in Holla nd, I think.
 
I'll tell you s omething. The whole s tream of Western philos ophy has now woun d up in a cul-de-
sac. The white m an has perpetrated upon himsel f, as well  as upon the black m an, so gigantic a 
fraud that he has put himsel f into a crack . He d id it t hrough his el aborate , neurotic n ecessity to 
hide the black m an's true role in history .
 
And today the white m an is faced head on with what is h appening on  the Black Co ntine nt, Africa. 
Look at the artifacts being discovered t here, that are proving over and over again, how the black 
man had great, fine, sensitive civ ilizatio ns be fore the white ma n was out of the caves. B elow the 
Sahara, in the places where mo st of America's Negroes' f oreparents were  kidnapped, there is 
being unearthed some of the finest craftsmanship , sculp ture a nd other o bjects, that has ever 
been seen by mo dern ma n. Some of these things n ow are on view in such plac es as New York 
City's Metrop olitan Muse um o f Art. Gold work of such fine toleranc e and workm anshi p that it has 
no rival. Ancient objects pro duced by black hands. . . refined by t hose black hands with res ults 
that no human hand today can equal.
 
Histor y has been so "whit ened" by the white man that even the black professors h ave kn own little 
more than the most ignorant black m an about the talents a nd rich ci vilizations and cult ures o f the 
black man of mille nniums ago . Ihave lect ured i n Negro  colleges a nd some o f these brai nwash ed 
black Ph.D.'s, w ith their suspenders dragg ing th e grou nd with degre es, h ave run to the white 
man's n ewspap ers calling  me a "black fanatic." Why, a lot o f them are fifty years  behind the tim es. 
If I were presid ent of one of these black colleges, I' d hock t he campus if I had to, to send a bunch 
of black s tudents off digging in Africa f or more, m ore and more proof of the black rac e's hist orical 
greatness. The white m an now is in Africa diggin g and searc hing.  An African elephant c an't 
stumble without falling on some white m an with a shovel.  Practic ally every  week, we rea d about 
some grea t new fi nd from Africa's los t civilizations. All that's new is white scienc e's at titude. The 
ancient civilizations o f the black m an have been buried on the Black Co ntine nt all t he time.
 
Here is a n exa mple : a British a nthropol ogist named Dr. Louis S . B. Leakey is dis playing some 
fossil b ones-a foot, part of a hand, some jaws, an d skull fragme nts. On the basis of these, Dr. 
Leakey  has said it's time to rewrite c ompletely  the history of man's origin.
 
This sp ecies o f man lived 1,818,036 years be fore Christ. And these bones were found in 
Tanga nyika. I n the Black C ontin ent.
 
It's a  crime , the lie t hat has been told to gen eratio ns of black men and white me n both. Little 
innocent black childre n, born o f parents who b elieved that their race had no history. Little bl ack 
childre n seeing,  before they could talk, t hat their parents c onsid ered t hemselves in ferior. Innocent 
black children growing up , living out their lives, dying  of old age-a nd all of their lives  ashamed of 
being black. B ut the truth is p ouring o ut of the bag n ow.
 
Two other ar eas o f experience which h ave be en extrem ely formative in my li fe since pris on were 
first opened to me in the Norfolk Priso n Colo ny. For on e thing, I had my fi rst experie nces i n 
opening the eyes of my brainwashe d black brethren to some truths a bout the black race . And, the 
other: whe n I had readenough t o know something, I began t o enter the Priso n Colo ny's weekl y 
debating program-my  baptism into public speaking.
 
I have to admit a  sad, shameful fact. I had so loved b eing aro und the white m an that in priso n I really  disliked how Negro convicts stuck toget her s o mu ch. But when Mr . Muh ammad's te achings 
reverse d my at titude toward my black br others, in my guilt a nd shame I began to catch ever y 
chance I could t o recruit for Mr . Muhammad.
 
You have to be care ful, ver y careful, intr oduci ng the truth to the black ma n who has never 
previousl y heard the truth about himsel f, his own kin d, and the white m an. My brother Reginald 
had told m e that all Muslims experienc ed this in their recruiti ng for Mr. Muhammad. The black 
brother is s o brai nwash ed that he may even be repelled whe n he first hears t he truth. Reginald 
advised t hat the truth had to be dropped only a little b it at a time. And you h ad to wait a while to 
let it sink in b efore advancing th e next step.
 
I began first telling  my black br other in mates ab out the glorious history  of the black m an-things 
they never h ad dreamed. I told them the horrible slaver y-trade truths th at they never kn ew.
 
I would watch their faces when I told them about that, because the white m an had completely 
erased the slaves' p ast, a Negro in America ca n never k now his true family name, or eve n what 
tribe h e was desce nded from: the Ma ndingos, t he Wolof, the Ser er, the Fula , the Fanti, the 
Ashanti, or o thers. I t old them that some slaves b rought from Africa sp oke Arabic, a nd were 
Islamic in their reli gion. A lot of these black convicts still  wouldn't b elieve it u nless t hey could se e 
that a white ma n had said it. S o, often, I would read to these b rothers sel ected passages f rom 
white men's b ooks. I'd explain t o them that the real truth was  known to  some white men, the 
scholars; bu t there had been a conspirac y down through the gen eratio ns to  keep the truth from 
black men. 
I would k eep close watch on  how each one reacted. I always  had to be care ful. I never kn ew 
when s ome brainwash ed bl ack im p, some dyed-in-th e-wool Uncl e Tom, would n od at me and 
then go runni ng to tell the white ma n. When one was ripe-a nd I could tell-then awa y from the res t, 
I'd drop it on him, what Mr. Muh ammad taught: "The white m an is th e devil."
 
That would s hock m any o f them-u ntil th ey started thinking  about it.
 
This is pr obably as b ig a single wo rry as the Americ an priso n system has today-the way  the 
Muslim t eachings,  circulate d among all Negroes in t he country , are converting  new Muslims 
among bl ack m en in priso n, and black men are in p rison i n far grea ter nu mbers than their 
proportio n in t he population.
 
The reason is t hat among a ll Negroes th e black co nvict is t he most perfectly preconditio ned to 
hear the words, " the white ma n is the devil."
 
You tell that to any Negro. Exce pt for those relativel y few "i ntegratio n"-ma d so-called 
"intellect uals, " and those black me n who are o therwise f at, happy, and deaf, dumb, and blin ded, 
with their cru mbs f rom the wh ite ma n's rich table, you h ave struck a nerve center in t he America n 
black man. He may t ake a  day to react, a  month, a year; h e may never resp ond, openly; but of 
one thing you ca n be sure-when he thinks about his own li fe, he is going  to see where, t o him, 
personally , the white m an sure has acted like a devil.
 
And, as I say, above all Negroes, the black prison er. Here is a black man caged b ehind bars, 
probably  for years, p ut there by the white ma n. Usually  the convict  comes from among th ose 
bottom-of-the-pile N egroes , the Negroes who through th eir entire li ves h ave been kicked a bout, 
treated like childre n-Negroes who never h ave met one white man who di dn't either ta ke 
something from them or do something t o them. 
You le t this caged-up  black ma n start thinking, t he same way  I did when I first h eard Elijah 
Muhammad's te achings: l et him start thi nking  how, with be tter breaks when h e was young  and 
ambitious he  might have b een a lawyer, a doctor, a scientist , anythi ng. You let t his caged-up black 
man start re alizing, as I did, how from the first la nding o f the first sl ave ship, t he millions o f black 
men in America have b een like s heep in a den of wolves. That's wh y black pris oners b ecome 
Muslims s o fast when Elija h Mu hammad's teachings  filter int o their cages by wa y of other Muslim convicts. " The white man is t he devil" is a p erfect echo of that black co nvict's li felong experienc e.
 
I've told how debating was a weekl y event there at the Nor folk Pris on Col ony. My rea ding had my 
mind like s team under press ure. S ome way , I had to start telling  the white man about himself to 
his face. I decided I could d o this by  putting my name down to  debate.
 
Standing up and speaking b efore an audience was a thing that througho ut my previous li fe never 
would have cr ossed my mind. Out there in the streets , hustling, pu shing do pe, and robbing,  I 
could have had the dr eams from a pound of hashis h and I'd never have dr eamed anything so wild 
as that one day I would s peak in coliseums and arenas, a t the great est American universities, a nd 
on radio and television programs , not to mention speaking  all over  Egypt a nd Africa an d in 
Englan d.
 
But I will tell you t hat, right th ere, in the pris on, debating, speaking  to a crowd, was  as exhilara ting 
to me as the discovery  of knowledge t hrough r eading had been. Standing up there, t he faces 
looking u p at me, things in my head coming o ut of my m outh, while my br ain se arche d for the 
next b est thing t o follow what I was saying,  and if I could swa y them to my sid e by ha ndling it 
right, then I had won t he debate-on ce my f eet got wet, I was gon e on debating. W hichever sid e of 
the sel ected subject was assigne d to me, I'd track down a ndstudy ever ything I could find on it. I'd 
put mysel f in my opponent's plac e and decide how I'd try to win  if I had the other side; and then 
I'd figure a way  to knock down t hose points . And if there was a ny way in the world, I' d wo rk into 
my speech t he devil ishness o f the white man.
 
"Compulsor y Military Training- Or None?" That's one goo d chanc e I got un expect edly, I remember. 
My opponent flailed the air about the Ethiopians t hrow ing rocks a nd spears at  Italian air planes, 
"proving" t hat compulsor y military  training was ne eded. I said the Ethiopia ns' bl ack fl esh had been 
spattered agai nst tre es by bo mbs the Pope in R ome had blesse d, and the Ethiopians would have 
thrown even their bare bodies a t the airplan es be cause t hey had seen that they were fighting t he 
devil incarna te.
 
They yelled "foul," that I'd m ade the subject a  race issue . I said it wasn't race, it was  a historical 
fact, that they ought t o go a nd read Pierre van Paasse n's _Days  of Our Years_, and something 
not surprising to me, that book, right a fter the debate, disappeared from the priso n library . It was 
right there in pris on that I made up my m ind to devot e the res t of my life to telling th e white m an 
about himsel f-or di e. In a debate about whet her or not Homer ha d ever existe d, I threw  into those 
white faces the theory that Homer only symb olized h ow white E uropeans kid napped black 
Africans, then blin ded them so that they could n ever get ba ck to their own people. (Hom er an d 
Omar an d Mo or, you see, are related terms; it's like saying  Peter, Pedro, and petra, all t hree of 
which m ean rock. ) These bli nded Mo ors the Eur opeans taught t o sing ab out the Europeans' 
glorious acc omplishm ents. I made it clear t hat was the devilish white m an's idea of kicks. Aesop's 
_Fables_-a nother c ase i n poi nt. "Aesop" was o nly the Greek n ame for an Ethiopian.
 
Another ho t debate I re member I was in h ad to do with the identity of Shakespe are. N o color was 
involved t here; I just got i ntrigued over t he Shakesp earean dilemma. The King Ja mes tr ansla tion 
of the Bibl e is co nsidere d the grea testpiece o f literature in English. Its language s uppose dly 
repres ents the ulti mate in u sing the King's E nglish. Well, Shakes peare's langu age and the Bible's 
langu age are o ne and the same. They say that from 1604 to 1611, King James got p oets to 
transl ate, to write th e Bible. W ell, if Shakes peare existed, he was then the top poet around. But 
Shakes peare is nowher e rep orted connec ted with the Bible . If he existed, why didn't King James 
use him ? And if he did use him, why is it o ne of the wor ld's best kept secrets?
 
I know that many say that Francis B acon was  Shakes peare . If that is tr ue, why would B acon have 
kept it s ecret? Bacon wasn't royalty, when royalty sometimes us ed the _nom de plume_ because 
it was  "improper" for royalty to be artistic or t heatrical. W hat would B acon have had to los e? 
Bacon, in fact, would have h ad ever ything to  gain.
 In the priso n debates I argue d for the theory that King Ja mes hims elf was the real poet who u sed 
the _nom de plume_ Shakesp eare. King Ja mes was brilliant . He was th e great est ki ng who ever 
sat on the British t hrone. Who else among royalty, in h is tim e, would have h ad the giant t alent to 
write Sh akespe are's works?  It was h e who p oetically "fixed " the Bible-which in itself and its 
present King James version h as enslaved the wo rld.
 
*     *     *
 
When my brother Reginal d visited , I would talk t o him about new evide nce I found to document 
the Muslim t eachings. I n either volum e 43 or 4 4 of The Harvard Classics, I read Milton's 
_Paradis e Lost_. The devil,  kicked o ut of Para dise, was try ing to  regain p ossessi on. H e was 
using th e forces o f Europe, personified by the Popes, Charle magne , Richard t he Lionhearte d, 
and other knights. I  interpret ed this to  show that the Europeans were m otivate d and led by th e 
devil,  or the personification of the devil. So Milton and Mr. Elija h Mu hammad were ac tually  saying 
the same thing. 
I couldn't believe it when Reginal d bega n to speak ill of Elijah Muhammad. I can't specify th e 
exact t hings  he said . They were more in the nature o f implicatio ns agains t Mr. Muhammad-th e 
pitch of Reginald's voice, or the wa y that Reginal d look ed, rather than what he said .
 
It caught me totally unprepared. It threw me  into a state of confusion. My blo od brother, Reginald, 
in whom I had so m uch confidence, for whom I had so mu ch respec t, the one who h ad introd uced 
me to the Na tion o f Islam . I couldn't believe  it! And now Isla m meant more to me than anythi ng I 
ever had known in my  life. Islam and Mr. Elijah Mu hammad had changed my whole world.
 
Reginald, I learned, had been suspended from the Na tion o f Islam by Elija h Muh ammad. He had 
not practiced moral restrain t. After he had learned the truth, and had accepted the truth, and the 
Muslim laws,  Reginald was still  carrying on impro per relati ons with th e then secre tary of the New 
York Temple. Some other Muslim who le arned of it had made charges ag ainst Reginal d to Mr. 
Muhammad in Chic ago, an d Mr. Muh ammad had suspended Reginald.
 
When Reginald l eft, I was  in torme nt. That night, f inally, I wrote t o Mr. Muhammad, trying to 
defend my br other, appealing f or him. I told h im what Reginald was to  me, what my brother me ant 
to me.
 
I put the letter int o the box for the prison c ensor. Then all the rest of that night , I prayed to Allah. I 
don't think a nyon e ever  prayed m ore sincerely  to Allah . I prayed for some kin d of relie f from my 
confusion.
 
It was t he next night, as I lay on my b ed, I suddenly , with  a start, b ecame aware o f a man sitting 
beside m e in my ch air. He had on a dark suit. I  remember . I could see him as plainly  as I see 
anyon e I look a t. He wasn't bl ack, a nd hewasn't white. He was li ght-brown-skinn ed, an Asiatic 
cast of countenance, and he had oily black hair.
 
I looked right into his face.
 
I didn't get fr ighte ned. I knew I wasn't dr eami ng. I couldn't move , I didn't speak, and he didn't. I 
couldn't place him  racially -other than that I knew he was a non-Eur opean. I had no idea 
whatso ever who he  was. He jus t sat there. Then, suddenly as he had come, he was gon e.
 
Soon, Mr. Muhammad sent me a reply  about Reginal d. He wrote, "If you on ce believed i n the 
truth, and now you are beginni ng to doubt the truth, you di dn't believe t he truth in the first place. 
What could ma ke you doubt the truth o ther than your own weak s elf?"
 
That struck me. Reginald was not leading the discipline d life of a Muslim. And I knew that Elijah 
Muhammad was  right, a nd my blo od brother was  wrong. Be caus e right is ri ght, and wrong  is 
wrong. Lit tle di d I then realize th e day would c ome when Elijah Mu hammad would be accus ed by his own s ons a s bei ng guilty of the same a cts o f immorality that he judged Reginal d and so many 
others f or.
 
But at that time, all o f the doubt and confusion i n my  mind was  removed. All of the influenc e that 
my brother h ad wielde d over  me was broke n. Fro m that day on , as far as I am concern ed, 
everything th at my br other Reginald h as done is wrong.
 
But Reginald kept visiting  me. When he had been a Musli m, he had been immacula te in his a ttire. 
But now , he wore things like a  T-shirt, s habby-looking tro users, a nd sneakers. I could s ee him on 
the wa y down. W hen he spok e, I heard h im coldly. But I would listen. He was  my blood brother. 
Grad ually, I saw the chastise ment of Allah-what Christia ns would c all "the curse"-co me u pon 
Reginald. Elijah Mu hammad said that Allah was ch astising  Reginald-and that anyon e who 
challenged Elija h Mu hammad would b e chastened by Allah . In Islam we  were taught that as long 
as one didn't know the truth, he lived in d arkness. B ut once the truth was acc epted, and 
recognized, h e lived in light, a nd whoever  would then go ag ainst it would be punished by Allah.
 
Mr. Muhammad taught that the five-poi nted star stands f or justic e, and also f or the five se nses of 
man. We were taugh t that Allah execu tes jus tice by  working  upon the five sens es of those who 
rebel against His Mess enger , or agains t His truth. We were t aught t hat this was Allah's way of 
letting Muslims know  His sufficiency  to defend His Messe nger against any and all o ppositio n, as 
long as the Messe nger hims elf didn't d eviate f rom the path of truth. We were ta ught t hat Allah 
turned the minds o f any defectors i nto a  turmoil. I  though t truly  that it was  Allah doing this t o my 
brother.
 
One letter, I think f rom my brother Phil bert, t old m e that Reginal d was  with t hem in D etroit. I  heard 
no more about Reginal d until one day, weeks lat er, Ella visited me ; she told me that Reginald was 
at her h ome in Roxbury , sleeping.  Ella s aid sh e had heard a  knock, s he had gone to the door, and 
there was  Reginald, looking terrible . Ella s aid s he had asked, "Where did you come from?" And 
Reginald h ad told her he came from Detroit. She sai d she ask ed him, "How  did you get here?" 
And he had told her , "I walked. "
 
I believed h e _had_ walked . I believed i n Elijah M uhammad, and he had convince d us that Allah's 
chastisem ent upon Reginald's m ind had taken awa y Reginald's a bility to gauge dis tance a nd 
time. There is a  dimension of time with which  we are not familiar h ere in the West. Elijah 
Muhammad said that under Allah's c hastise ment, the five senses o f a man can be so deranged 
by thosewhose m ental powers  are great er than his that in five minutes his h air can turn snow 
white. Or h e will walk ni ne hundred miles a s he migh t walk five blocks .
 
In prison , since I had become a Muslim, I  had grown  a beard. W hen Reginal d visited me, he 
nervously  moved a bout in his c hair; h e told m e that each hair o n my be ard was a snake. 
Everywhere, he saw snakes .
 
He n ext bega n to believe that he was the "Messenger o f Allah. " Reginal d went ar ound in t he 
stree ts of Roxbury , Ella re porte d to me , telling  people that he had some d ivine p ower. He 
graduated from this to saying th at he was Allah.
 
He finally bega n saying  he was _grea ter_ t han Allah.
 
Authorities picke d up Reginald , and he was pu t into an institu tion. They couldn't find what was 
wrong. They ha d no way  to understand Allah's c hastis ement. Reginald was rele ased . Then he 
was picked up again, and was  put into another ins titution.
 
Reginald is in an instit ution now. I know where, b ut I won't s ay. I would n ot want to cause hi m any 
more trouble than he has alrea dy had.
 
I believe, to day, that it was w ritten , it was me ant, for Reginald to be used for one purpos e only: as a bait, as a minnow to reach into the ocean of blackn ess where I was, t o save m e.
 
I cannot understa nd it any ot her way .
 
After Elijah Muha mmad hims elf was later accused as a very immoral man, I came to believe t hat 
it wasn't a  divine chastise ment upon Reginald , but the pain he felt when his own family totally 
reject ed hi m for Elijah Muha mmad, and this h urt m ade Reginal d turn insa nely upon Elija h 
Muhammad. 
It's impossible t o dream, or to see, or to have a  vision of someone whom you n ever have s een 
before-an d to see him exac tly as he is. To see someone, a nd to see him exactly  as he looks, is t o 
have a  pre-vi sion.
 
I would l ater c ome to believe t hat my pre-v ision was o f Mast er W. D. Fard, t he Messiah , the one 
whom Elija h Muh ammad said ha d appointed him-Elijah Muhammad-as His  Last Mess enger  to the 
black people of North America.
 
*     *     *
 
My last year in p rison was sp ent back in t he Charlest own Priso n. Eve n am ong t he white inmates, 
the word  had filtered ar ound. Some of those br ainwashed black convicts talk ed too much. And I 
know that the cens ors ha d reported on my m ail. The Norfolk Pris on Col ony officials ha d become 
upset. They used as a reason for my transfer that I refused to take some kind o f shots, an 
inoculatio n or s omething.
 
The only thing t hat worried m e was th at I hadn't m uch tim e left before I would b e eligible f or 
parole-board consider ation . But I reasoned that they might look a t my re prese nting  and spreading 
Islam in a nother way: instead of keeping me in they might want t o get me out.
 
I had come to pris on with 20 /20 vision. But when I got s ent back to Charlest own, I had read so 
much by t he lights-ou t glow in my roo m at the Norfolk Priso n Colo ny that I had astigma tism a nd 
the first p air of the eyeg lasses that I have worn ever sinc e.
 
I had less m aneuverability  back in the mu ch stricter Charles-town Priso n. But I found that a lot of 
Negroes attended a Bible class, and I went there.
 Conducti ng the class was  a tall, blo nd, blue-eyed (a p erfect "devil") Harvard Se minary stu dent. 
He lec tured , and then he started in a  ques tion-an d-answer sessio n. I don't know which o f us had 
read the Bible m ore, he or I, but I had to give hi m cre dit; h e really was he avy on his relig ion. I 
puzz led a nd puzz led for a way to upset him, and to give those N egroes present something to 
think an d talk ab out and circulate .
 
Finally , I put up my hand; he nodded. He h ad talke d about Paul.
 
I stood up and aske d, "What color was Pa ul?" And I kept talking, with pa uses , "He had to be 
black . . . becaus e he was a H ebrew . . . and the orig inal Hebrews  were bl ack. .  . weren't they?"
 
He h ad started flushing red . You know the way white p eople d o. He sai d "Yes."
 
I wasn't t hrough yet. " What color was  Jesus. . . he was Hebrew, too. . . wasn't he?"
 
Both the Negro and the white c onvicts  had sat bolt upright. I don't care how to ugh t he convict, be 
he brainwash ed bl ack Christia n, or a  "devil" white Christian, neither o f them is re ady to hear 
anybo dy saying  Jesus wasn't white. The instruct or walked aro und. He shouldn' t have f elt bad. In 
all of the years since , I never have m et any int elligent white man who would try to insist t hat 
Jesus was  white. How could they? He s aid, " Jesus was  brown."
 
I let him get away  with th at compromis e. 
Exactl y as I had known it would, almost overnight t he Charlest own convicts, black and white, 
bega n buzzing with the story . Wherever I went , I could feel the nodding. And anytim e I got a 
chance to exchange words with  a blackbro ther in stripes , I'd say, "My  man! You ever heard about 
somebody  named Mr. Elijah Mu hammad?"
 
 
 
CHAPT ER TWELVE
SAVIOR
 
During  the spring  of nineteen fifty-two I  joyously wrote Elijah Mu hammad and my f amily that the 
Massac huse tts State Parole B oard had vot ed that I should be  released. But still a few months 
were taken up with th e red tape delay of paper work  that went b ack and forth, arranging  for my 
parole rele ase i n the custody of my oldest br other, Wilfred, in De troit, who n ow managed a 
furniture st ore. W ilfred got th e Jew who owned the store to sign a p romis e that upon releas e I 
would be  given i mmediat e employment.
 
By the prison system wire, I heard that Shorty also was  up for parole . But Shorty  was having 
trouble get ting some reputable perso n to sign f or him. (Later, I found out that in prison S horty had 
studied musical co mposition. He h ad even pr ogressed to writing some pi eces ; one of them I know 
he named "The Bastille Conc erto. ")
 
My going  to De troit inst ead of back to  Harlem or Bo ston was  influence d by my  family's feeling 
expresse d in t heir let ters. E speci ally my sist er Hilda had stresse d to me that although I  felt I 
underst ood Elijah M uhammad's teachings, I had much to learn , and I ought to come to Detroit 
and become a member of a temple o f practicing  Muslims.
 
It was in August when t hey ga ve m e a lec ture, a cheap Li'l Abner s uit, a nd a small a mount of 
money, and I walked out of the gat e. I never lo oked back , butthat doesn't make m e any different 
from a million in mates who h ave le ft a prison b ehind them.
 
The first stop I made was at a Turkish ba th. I go t some o f that physical f eeling  of prison-tai nt 
steamed off me. Ella, with who m I s tayed o nly overnight, h ad also agreed that it would be best for 
me to start again i n Detroit . The police in a new city wouldn't have it in for me; that was Ella's 
considerati on-no t the Musli ms, f or whom Ella had no use. Both Hilda and Reginald had trie d to 
work on  Ella. But Ella , with her stro ng will, didn't go for it at all. Sh e told m e that she felt anyone 
could be  whatever he  wante d to be, Holy  Roller, Sevent h Da y Adven tist, or what ever it was, b ut 
she wasn't going  to become any Muslim .
 
Hilda, the next m orning, gave me  some mo ney to  put in my pocket. Before I left, I went out and 
bought t hree things I remember wel l. I bought a better-looking  pair o f eyeglasses t han the pair th e 
prison had issu ed to me; and I bought a  suitc ase and a wrist watch.
 
I have th ought , since , that without fully knowin g it, I was pre paring  for what my li fe was about to 
become. Because those a re three things I've us ed more than anything els e. My  eyeg lasses 
correct t he astigm atism t hat I go t from all the reading in prison . I travel so mu ch now that my w ife 
keeps al ternate s uitcas es pa cked so that, whe n necessary , I can just grab o ne. And you won't f ind 
anybo dy more ti me-co nscious than I am. I live by my  watch, k eeping appointments. Even when 
I'm using my car , I drive by  my watch , not my s peedometer. Time is m ore importan t to me than 
distance .
 
I caught a  bus to Detr oit. The furniture s tore t hat my bro ther W ilfred m anaged was  right in the 
black ghett o of Detroit ; I'd better n ot name the store, i f I'm going  to tell the wa y they rob bed 
Negroes. W ilfred introd uced me  to the Jews who owne d the store. And, as agre ed, I was put to 
work, as a sales man. "Nothing Down" a dvertisem ents d rew poor Negroes into that store like f lypaper. It was a shame, 
the wa y they paid three and four times what the furniture h ad cost, because t hey co uld get cre dit 
from those Jews. It was th e same kind of cheap, gaudy- looking  junk t hat you ca n see in any of 
the black ghet to furnitur e stor es to day. Fabrics  were s tapled on the sofas. Imitation "leopard skin" 
bedspre ads, "tiger skin " rugs, suc h stuff as that. I would s ee clumsy , work -hardened, callo used 
hands scrawling and scratchi ng signa tures o n the contract, agreeing to highway-robbery interest 
rates in the fine print t hat never was  read.
 
I was se eing in real li fe the same poi nt made in a joke t hat duri ng the 1964 Pr eside ntial c ampaign 
_Jet_ m agazine re porte d that Senator Barry  Goldwater ha d told s omewhere. I t was  that a white 
man, a Negro, a nd a Jew were gi ven o ne wish e ach. The white man asked for securities; the 
Negro aske d for a lot of money; t he Jew asked for some imit ation jewelry  "and that colore d boy's 
address. "
 
In all my  years  in the stre ets, I'd been looking at the exploit ation that for the first ti me I really saw 
and understo od. Now I watch ed brothers en twining th emselves  in the economic clutch es of the 
white man who went home every night wi th another bag o f the money drain ed out of the ghe tto. I 
saw that the money, inst ead of helping the black ma n, was going to  help enrich t hese wh ite 
merc hants, who u sually lived in a n "exclusi ve" are a where a black man had better n ot get ca ught 
unless he  worked t here for somebody white.
 
Wilfred inv ited m e to share his ho me, and gratefully I accepted. The warmth of a home and a 
family was a healing ch ange f rom the prison cage f or me. It would d eeply move a lmost a ny newly 
freed convict, I think. B ut especially  this M uslim ho me's atmosphere s ent m e often to my knees to 
praise Allah. My  family's letters whi le I was  in priso n had includ ed a descriptio n of the Muslim 
home routine, but to truly  appreciate it, one had to be a part of the routine . Each act,and the 
significance of that act, was gently , patiently explain ed to me by my bro ther Wilfred.
 
There was  none of the morning confusion that exists in most homes. W ilfred, the father, the family 
protector and provider , was  the first to rise. " The father pr epares th e way  for his family," he said. 
He, t hen I, performed the morning ablutions . Next ca me W ilfred's wife, Ruth, and then their 
childre n, so that orderliness p revai led in t he use of the bathroom.
 
"In the name of Allah, I perform the ablution ," the Muslim s aid al oud before washing f irst the right 
hand, then the left hand. The teeth we re thoroughly  brus hed, followed by three rinsings  of the 
mouth. The nostrils  were als o rinse d out thrice. A shower t hen comple ted the whole b ody's 
purification i n rea diness for prayer.
 
Each family member, eve n childre n upon meeting each other for that new day's first time, greet ed 
softly and pleasantly, "As-Salaam-Alaik um" (the Arabic f or "Peace be unto you"). "Wa-Alaiku m-
Salaam" ("and unto you be  peace") was  the other's re ply. Over a nd over again, t he Muslim s aid in 
his own mi nd, "Allahu-Ak bar, Allahu-Ak bar" ("Alla h is th e great est").
 
The prayer  rug was spre ad by W ilfred while th e rest of the family puri fied themselves. I t was 
explaine d to me that a Muslim f amily prayed with the sun near the horizon. If that time was 
misse d, the prayer  had to be deferred until the sun was beyon d the horizon. "M uslims are not 
sun-worshipers. W e pray facing th e East to be in uni ty with the rest o f our 725 million br others 
and sist ers in the entire M uslim wo rld."
 
All th e family, in ro bes, lined up facing East. In unison, we stepped from our slippers t o stand on 
the prayer rug.
 Today, I say with my family in the Arabic tongue t he prayer which I first learn ed in English: " I 
perform the morning prayer  to Allah, the Mos t High, Allah is t he greatest. Glory  to Thee Oh Allah , 
Thine is th e praise, Bl esse d is Thy Name, and Exalted is Thy Majesty . I bear wi tness t hat nothing 
deserves t o be served or wo rshiped besides Thee."
 No solid food, only juice a nd coffee, was taken for our br eakfasts. Wilfred and I went o ff to work. 
There, at noon and again a t around three in the afternoon, unnotice d by others in the furniture 
store , we would rinse o ur ha nds, faces a nd mouths, and softly me ditate.
 
Muslim c hildren di d likew ise a t school, and Muslim wives a nd mothers interru pted their chores to 
join t he world's 72 5 million Muslims in co mmunicating  with G od.
 
*     *     *
 
Wednesdays, Fridays, an d Sundays  were the meeting d ays of the relatively small Detroit Temple 
Num ber O ne. Near t he temple , which  actually was a storefront, were t hree hog-slaught ering 
pens. The squ ealing  of hogs be ing slaught ered f iltered into our W ednesday  and Friday  meetings. 
I'm describing the condition that we Muslims were in b ack in the early 1950's.
 
The address o f Temple Nu mber O ne was 1470 Fre derick  Street, I think. The first Temple to be 
formed, back in 1 931, by Mas ter W . D. Fard , was  formed in Detroit , Michi gan. I never ha d seen 
any Christian-beli eving Negroes co nduct themselves  like th e Muslims , the individuals and the 
families alike. The men were quietly , tastefully dresse d. The wom en wore an kle-length gowns, n o 
makeup, a nd scarves covered t heir h eads. The neat childre n were  mannerly not only to adults b ut 
to other childre n as well.
 I had never dre amed of anything like th at atmosphere am ong bl ack p eople who h ad learn ed to 
be proud they were black, who h ad learned to love other bl ack pe ople inst ead of being jealous 
and suspicious . I thrilled to how we  Muslim me n used both hands to grasp a black br other's bo th 
hands, voic ing an d smiling  our happiness to meet him ag ain. The Muslim sisters, b oth ma rried 
and single, were gi ven a n honor a nd respect that I'd never seen bl ack m en give to their wom en, 
and it felt won derful to me. The salut ations wh ich we all exch anged were warm, f illed with mutual 
respect a nd dignit y: "Brother". . . "Sister". . . "Ma'am". . . "Sir." Even c hildren speaking  to other 
childre n used these terms. B eautiful!
 
Lemuel Hass an then was  the Minister a t Temple Num ber O ne. "As-Salaiku m," he greet ed us. 
"Wa-Salaikum ," we ret urned. Minister L emuel stood before us, near a  black board. The 
black board ha d fixed upon it in p ermanent p aint, on one side , the Unit ed States flag a nd under it 
the words  "Slavery, Suffering an d De ath," then the word " Christianity" al ongside t he sign of the 
Cross. B eneath the Cross was a painting  of a black m an hanged from a tree. On the other sid e 
was painted what we were t aught was the M uslim fl ag, the crescen t and star on a red backgrou nd 
with the words " Islam: Fre edom, Justice , Equ ality," and beneath that "Which On e Will Survive the 
War of Armaged don?"
 
For mo re than an hour, Minister L emuel lecture d about Elija h Muh ammad's te achings. I sat raptly 
absorbing Minister L emuel's every  syllable and gest ure. Frequ ently, he graphic ally illustra ted 
points by ch alking  key words or phr ases on the blackbo ard.
 
I thought it was ou trageo us th at our s mall t emple still ha d some empty seats. I complained to my 
brother W ilfred that there s hould b e no empty seats, with the surrou nding stre ets full of our 
brainwash ed bl ack br others and sisters, drinking, cursing, f ighting, d ancing,  carousing,  and using 
dope-the very  thingsthat Mr. Muh ammad taught were h elping t he black m an to stay  under the 
heel of the white m an here in America.
 
From what I could gather , the recruitm ent attitude at the temple s eemed to me to amount to a 
self-defeating wa iting v iew . . . an assumption that Allah would bring us more Muslims. I felt that 
Allah would be more inclin ed to help those who h elped themselves. I had lived f or years in ghett o 
stree ts; I knew the Negroes i n those stree ts. Harle m or De troit we re no different. I said I 
disagree d, that I thought we  should go o ut into the stre ets a nd get m ore Muslims int o the fold. All 
of my life, as you kn ow, I had been an activist, I had been impatient. My  brother Wilfred 
counsel ed m e to keep patience. And for me to be patient was ma de easier by  the fact that I could 
anticipat e soon seeing and perhaps meeting the man who was calle d "The Mess enger ," Elija h Muhammad himsel f.
 
Today, I have ap pointments with world-famous personages , inclu ding some heads of nations. B ut 
I looked forward to  the Sunday before Labor Da y in 1952 with an eagerness never since 
duplicat ed. D etroit Temple Nu mber O ne Muslims were going  in a motor caravan-I think ab out ten 
automobiles- to visit Chic ago Temple Nu mber Two, to hear Elijah Muhammad.
 
Not si nce c hildho od had I been so excited as whe n we  drove in Wilfred's car. At great Muslim 
rallies  since then I have s een, and heard, a nd felt ten thousand bl ack p eople a pplauding and 
cheering.  But on that Sunday afternoon when o ur two little t emples a ssemble d, perhaps o nly two 
hundred Muslims , the Chicago ans welcomi ng and greeting us D etroiters, I experie nced tinglin gs 
up my spine as I've never had sinc e.
 
I was to tally unprepared for the Messe nger Elija h Mu hammad's p hysical im pact upon my 
emotions. Fro m the rear o f Temple Num ber Two, h e came toward t he platform. The small, 
sensitive, ge ntle, b rown face that I had studied i n photographs, until I had dreamed about it, was 
fixed straight a head as the Messe ngerstrode , encircled by the ma rching, stra pping Fruit o f Islam 
guards. The Mess enger , compared t o them, seemed fragile, al most tiny. He and the Fruit of Islam 
were dresse d in d ark s uits, white shirts, and bow ties. The Messe nger wore a  gold-em broid ered 
fez.
 
I stared at the great man who ha d taken the time to write to  me when I was  a convict who m he 
knew nothing a bout. H e was  the man who m I had been told had spent years o f his li fe in suffering 
and sacrifice to lead us, the black pe ople, because he loved us so m uch. And then, hearing his 
voice, I sat leaning f orward, riveted upon his wo rds. (I try  to rec onstruc t what Elija h Muh ammad 
said from having  since h eard him sp eak h undreds of times.)
 
"I have n ot stopped one day f or the past twenty -one years. I  have been standing, pr eachi ng to 
you thr ougho ut those past twenty- one years,  while I was free, and even while I was in bondage. I 
spent three and one-half years in the federal p enitentiary , and als o over  a year in the city jail f or 
teaching t his truth. I was also deprived o f a father's love f or his family for seven lo ng years while  I 
was running f rom hypocrit es an d other enemies of this word a nd revelation of God-which w ill give 
life to you, a nd put you o n the same level wi th all ot her civ ilized a nd independent nations an d 
peoples of this p lanet earth. . . ."
 
Elijah Mu hammad spok e of how in t his wi ldern ess o f North America , for centuries t he "blue-eyed 
devil white m an" had brainwash ed the "so-called N egro." He told us how, as one res ult, the black 
man in America was "mentally, morally  and spiritually  dead." Elijah Mu hammad spok e of how th e 
black man was Ori ginal M an, who h ad been kidn apped from his h omeland and stripp ed of his 
langu age, his c ulture, his family struc ture, his family name, until the black m an in America d id not 
even re alize who he  was.
 
He told u s, and showed u s, how his teachings o f the true knowledge o f ourselves would li ft up the 
black man from the bottom of the white man's societ yand place the black ma n where he had 
begu n, at the top of civilization.
 
Conclu ding, pa using f or breath, he calle d my  name.
 
It was like a n electrical sh ock. No t looking  at me directly , he asked m e to stand.
 
He told them that I was just o ut of prison . He s aid h ow "strong" I had been while in pris on. "Ever y 
day," he said, "for years, Br other Malcolm h as written a  letter from pris on to me. And I have 
written to him as often as I could."
 
Standing there, feeling  the eyes o f the two h undred Muslims u pon me , I heard him make a 
parable a bout me. 
When God bragged about how f aithful Job was, s aid Elija h Muh ammad, the devil said o nly God's 
hedge ar ound Job kept J ob so faithful. "R emove that protective hedge, " the devil told G od, "and I 
will make Job curse you to your face."
 
The devil could claim t hat, hedge d in pris on, I had just u sed Islam, Mr . Muha mmad said. But the 
devil would say that now , out of prison , I would return to my drinking, sm oking, do pe, and life of 
crime.
 
"Well, now, our good brother Malcol m's he dge is re moved a nd we will see how he  does," Mr. 
Muhammad said . "I believe that he is going to remain faithful."
 
And Allah bless ed m e to remain true, firm and stro ng in my f aith in Islam , despit e ma ny severe 
trials to my faith. And even when even ts pro duced a crisis  betwee n Elijah Muha mmad and me, I 
told him  at the beginning  of the crisis,  with all t he sincerity  I had in me, that I still be lieved in hi m 
more stro ngly than he believed in h imself. 
Mr. Muhammad and I are not togeth er today only because of envy  and jealousy . I had more faith 
in Elija h Muh ammad than I could ever h ave in a ny other ma n upon this e arth.
 
You wi ll remember my having  said t hat, when I was in priso n, Mr . Muhammad would b e my 
brother W ilfred's h ouse gues t when ever he  visited Detroit Temple N umber On e. Every  Muslim 
said that never could you do as m uch for Mr. Muhammad as he would d o for you in re turn. That 
Sunday, after the meeting, he  invited o ur entire f amily grou p and Minist er Lemuel Hassa n to be 
his gues ts for dinner that eve ning, at his n ew home.
 
Mr. Muhammad said that his childre n and his followers ha d insisted that he move int o this large r, 
better e ighteen-roo m ho use in Chic ago at 4847 W oodlawn Avenue. They had jus t move d in t hat 
week, I b elieve. W hen we arri ved, Mr. Muhammad showed u s where he  had just b een painting. I 
had to restr ain my im pulse t o run and bring  a chair for the Messenger o f Allah . Instead, a s I had 
heard h e would do, he was worrying about my co mfort.
 
We had hoped to hear his wi sdom during th e dinner, but inste ad he encourage d us to talk. I  sat 
thinking  of how our Detr oit Temple m ore or less just s at and awaited Allah to bring  converts-an d, 
beyon d that, of the millio ns of black people all over  America , who never h ad heard o f the 
teachings t hat could stir an d wake a nd resurrect the black man. . . and there at Mr . Muh ammad's 
table, I  found my to ngue . I have alwa ys been one to speak my m ind.
 
During  a conversa tional lull, I a sked Mr. Muhammad how many Muslims were s upposed to be in 
our Temple Nu mber One in D etroit.
 
He said, " There are supposed to be thousands."
 "Yes, sir," I said. "Sir, what is your o pinio n of the best way of getting thousands t here?"
 
"Go after the young  people," he said. "Once you get th em, the older o nes will follow thr ough 
shame."
 
I made up my m ind that we we re going t o follow that advice.
 
Back in De troit, I talke d with  my brother W ilfred. I offered my  services t o our Temple's Minister, 
Lemuel Hass an. H e shared my d etermin ation that we sh ould apply Mr. Muhammad's f ormula in a 
recruitm ent drive. Beginni ng that day , every evening, straight f rom work  at the furniture s tore, I 
went do ing what we Muslims lat er came to call "fishing. " I knew the thinking  and the language o f 
ghett o stre ets: "My man, let me pull your c oat to something-"
 
My applicatio n had, of course , been made and during this ti me I received from Chicago my "X. " 
The Muslim's "X" symbolized the true African f amily name that he never could know. For me, my "X" re place d the white slave mast er name of "Little" which s ome blue-eyed d evil named Little h ad 
imposed upon my paternal forebears. The receip t of my "X" m eant that forever a fter in the nation 
of Islam, I would be known a s Malcol m X. Mr. Muh ammad taught t hat we would keep this "X" u ntil 
God Hims elf returned and gave us a  Holy  Name from His own mouth.
 
Recruit a s I would in the De troit ghe tto bars, i n the poolro oms, and on the corners, I f ound my 
poor, ignorant , brai nwash ed black br others mostly too deaf, dumb, and blin d, mentally, morally, 
and spiritually, to res pond. It angered me that only now and then would one dis play eve n a littl e 
curiosity  about the teachings t hat would resurrect the black man.
 
These few I would almost b eg to visit Temple N umber On e at our next m eeting. B ut then not half 
of those who agre ed to come would a ctually show up.
 
Grad ually, enough were m ade interest ed, though, that each month, a few more automobiles 
length ened our car avans to Temple Two in Chicago. B ut eve n after seeing an d hearing Elija h 
Muhammad in p erson, only a few of the intereste d visitors would a pply by formal letter to Mr . 
Muhammad to be accepted for Nati on of Islam m embership.
 
With a few months of plugg ing away , howe ver, our stor efront Temple O ne about triple d its 
membership . And that so deeply pleased Mr. Muhammad that he paid us the honor of a personal 
visit.
 
Mr. Muhammad gave me  warm prais e when Minister L emuel Hassa n told how har d I had labored 
in the cause of Islam.
 
Our c aravans gre w. I remember with what prid e we  led twen ty-five a utomobiles t o Chicago . And 
each time we went, we were ho nored with din ner a t the home of Elija h Mu hammad. He was 
intereste d in my p otential, I c ould tell fr om things  he would say .
 
And I worship ed hi m.
 
In early  1953, 1 left the furniture store . I earned a little better weekly  pay ch eck work ing at  the Gar 
Wood factory in Detroit, where b ig garb age truck b odies we re made. I cleaned up behind the 
welders each time they finished another truck b ody.
 
Mr. Muhammad was say ing a t his d ining ta ble by this time that one of his worst ne eds was more 
young  men willing to work  as hard a s they would h ave t o in or der to bear the responsibilities o f 
his mi nisters. H e was  saying that the teachings sh ould be spreading f urther than they had, and 
temples ne eded to be establishe d in o ther cities.
 
It simply  had never occ urred t o me that / might b e a minister . I had never f elt rem otely qualifi ed to 
directly  represe nt Mr . Muhammad. If someone had ask ed me about becoming  a minister , I would 
have b een astonishe d, and told them I was ha ppy and willing to serve M r. Muhammad in the 
lowliest c apacity .
 
I don't know if Mr. Muhammad suggested it or i f our Temple On e Minister L emuel Hassa n on his 
own decision e ncouraged m e to address o ur ass embled brothers a nd sisters. I know  that I 
testified to what Mr. Muh ammad's teachings  had done for me: "If I told you th e life I have lived, 
you would fi nd it hard to believe me . . . . When I say something a bout the white man, I am not 
talking ab out someone I don't know. . . ."
 
Soon after that, Minister Le muel Hass an urge d me  to address the bro thers and sisters with an 
extem poraneous l ecture . I was un certai n, and hesit ant-but at least I had debated in priso n, and I 
tried my b est. (Of course, I can't r emember exactly  what I  said , but I do know that in my  begin ning 
efforts my f avorite s ubjec t was  Christianit y and the horr ors of slavery, where I felt wel l-equipp ed 
from so much re ading in pris on. ) 
"My brothers and sist ers, our white sl avemast er's Christian religion h as taught us bl ack p eople 
here in t he wilderness of North America t hat we will spro ut win gs when we di e and fly up into the 
sky where G od wi ll have f or us a special pl ace called heaven. This is white m an's Christian 
religion used to _br ainwash_ u s black pe ople! We have _a ccepted_ it! We have _embrac ed_ it! 
We have _ believed_ it! We have _ practiced _ it! And whi le we are doing all of that, for himsel f, this 
blue-eyed devil  has _twisted_ his Christia nity, to keep his _ foot_ on our backs . . . to keep our 
eyes fixe d on the pie in the sky  andheaven in t he hereafter. . . while _ he_ enjoys  _his_ heaven 
right _ here_ . . . on _this e arth_ . . . in _this lif e_."
 
Today when thousands of Muslims an d others have b een audiences ou t before me, when 
audiences o f millio ns have b een beyond radio and television microp hones, I'm sure I  rarel y feel 
as m uch electricit y as was th en genera ted in me by th e upturned faces of those seven ty-five or a 
hundred Muslims , plus other curio us visitors, sit ting there in o ur storefront temple with  the 
squealing o f pigs  filtering  in from the slaught erhouse jus t outside.
 
In the summer of 1953-all pr aise is d ue to Allah-I was named Detr oit Temple N umber On e's 
Assista nt Minist er.
 
Every day after wo rk, I walked, "fishing" f or potential c onverts in t he Detroit b lack ghe tto. I saw 
the African features of my black br others an d sist ers whom the devilish white m an had 
brainwash ed. I saw the hair a s mine had been for years, c onked by co oking  it with lye un til it lay 
limp, looking straight like the white m an's hair. Time a nd again Mr. Muh ammad's te achings were 
rebuffed and even ridicule d . . . ."Aw, man, get out of my face, you niggers  are craz y!" My  head 
would reel s ometimes, with mi ngled ang er and pity for my p oor bli nd bl ack br others. I c ouldn't 
wait for the next time our Minister Le muel Hass an would let m e speak:
 
"We didn't land on Plymo uth Rock, my br others and sisters-Pl ymouth Rock landed on _us!_" . . . 
"Give _a ll_ you ca n to help Mess enger Elijah Muhammad's independence program for the black 
man! . . . This white m an alwa ys has controlled u s black pe ople by keeping us r unning to him 
beggin g, 'Pleas e, lawdy , please, Mr. White Man, boss , would you p ush me off another cru mb 
down f rom your t able that's saggin g with  riches . . . .'
 
". . . my _beautiful_, black bro thers a nd sisters! And when we say 'black ,' weme an everything  not 
white, brothers and sisters! B ecause _look_ a t your skins! We're all bl ack to the white m an, but 
we're a thousand and one different colors. Turn aro und, _look_ at each other! W hat shade of 
black African polluted by devil  white man are you? You see me -well, in t he stree ts they used to 
call me  Detroit Red . Yes! Yes, that raping, re d-headed devil was  my _gra ndfather_! That close, 
yes! My _mother's_ f ather! S he didn't like t o speak o f it, can you bl ame her ? She said s he never 
laid eyes o n him! She was  _glad_ for that! I'm _glad _ for her! If I could dr ain awa y _his_ bl ood 
that pollutes _my_ body, and pollutes my co mplexion, I'd do it! Be cause I hate every  drop of the 
rapist's b lood that's in me !
 
"And it's no t just me, it's _ all_ o f us! During slaver y, _think _ of it, it was a _rare_ one of our b lack 
grandmothers, o ur great-g randmothers a nd our grea t-great-grand mothers who e scaped the white 
rapist sl avemast er. That rapist slave mast er who emascul ated the black m an . . . with thr eats, with 
fear . . . until even today the black man lives  with f ear of the white m an in his he art! L ives eve n 
today still under the heel o f the white man!
 
"_Think_ of it-think o f that black slave  man filled with fear and dread, hearing  the screa ms o f his 
wife, his mo ther, his d aught er bei ng _taken_-in the barn, the kitch en, in the bushes! _Think_ of it, 
my dear brothers a nd sisters! _ Think_ of hearing  wives, m others, d augh ters, b eing _ra ped_! And 
you we re too filled with _ fear_ of the rapist to do anything a bout it! And his vi cious , animal attacks' 
offspring,  this white m an named things like ' mulat to' and 'quadro on' a nd 'octoroo n' and all those 
other things  that he has called u s-you and me-when h e is n ot calling  us '_nigger_'!
 "Turn around and look at  each other, brothers a nd sisters, a nd _think_ of this! You and me, 
pollu ted all th ese colors-an d this devil  has the arroganc e and the gall to think we, his victims, 
should _ love_ hi m!"
 I would b ecome so chok ed up that sometimes I would walk in t he stree ts un til late into the night . 
Sometimes I would s peak to  no one for hours, t hinking t o myself  about what the white ma n had 
done to our p oor p eople here in America.
 
*     *     *
 
At the Gar W ood factory where I worked, one day the supervisor  came, looking nervous . He s aid 
that a man in the office was waiting  to see m e.
 
The white man standing in there said, "I'm from the F.B.I." He flipped open-that way they do, to 
shock you- his little f olded black lea ther case containing his i dentification. He told me to come with 
him. He d idn't say  for what, or wh y.
 
I went with hi m. They want ed to know, at their office, why hadn't I registere d for the Korean War 
draft?
 
"I just got out of priso n," I said. " I didn't know  you took anybody with priso n records ."
 
They really  believed I thought ex- convicts  weren' t supposed to register. They ask ed a lot of 
questio ns. I was glad they didn't a sk if I intended to put on the white m an's uni form, becaus e I 
didn't. They just took it f or grant ed that I would . They told me they weren't going to send me to jail 
for failing to register , that they were going t o give me  a break, b ut that I would have t o register 
immedi ately.
 
So I went s traight from there t o the draft board. When they gave me  a form to fill out, I wrote in 
the appropriate places th at I was a Muslim , and that I was a consci entio us object or. 
I turned in t he form. This m iddle-aged, bored-acting d evil who scanned it lo oked out from under 
his eyes a t me. He got u p and went in to another office, obviously  to consult so meone over  him. 
After a while, h e came out and motioned for me to go in there.
 
These three-I b elieve th ere were t hree, as I remember-old er devils  sat behind desks. They all 
wore that "troubleso me n igger" expressi on. And I look ed "white devil" right ba ck int o their eyes. 
They asked m e on what basis did I claim to be a Musli m in my relig ion. I told them that the 
Messe nger of Allah was Mr. Elijah Mu hammad, and that all who f ollowed Mr. Muh ammad here in 
America were Muslims. I  knew they had heard this b efore from some Temple O ne young  brothers 
who had been there before m e.
 
They asked if I knew what " conscienti ous o bject or" m eant. I told them that when t he white man 
asked m e to go o ff somewhere an d fight and maybe d ie to preserve  the way the white man 
treated the black ma n in America, t hen my co nscienc e ma de me object .
 
They told me  that my case would be "pending." But I was pu t through t he physical anyw ay, and 
they sent me a card wi th some kin d of a classif icatio n. That was 1 953, then I heard no more for 
seven years, when I received another classi fication card in t he mail. In fact, I carry it in my wal let 
right n ow. Here : it's c ard nu mber 20 219 25 1377, it's d ated Novem ber 2 1, 1960. It says, "Class 5-
A," whatever th at means, and stamped on the card's b ack is "Mic higan Local B oard No. 1 9, 
Wayne County, 3604 South Wayne Road, Wayne, Michigan. "
 
*     *     *
 
Every time I spoke at our Temple One, my voice would still be hoarse from the last ti me. My 
throat took a long time to get in to conditi on. 
"Do you know _why_ the white m an really hates you? It's b ecause every time he sees your  face, he sees a mirror  of his crime-an d his guilt y conscienc e can't bear to face it!
 
"Every  white ma n in America, when he looks into a black m an's eyes, sh ould fall to his k nees an d 
say 'I'm s orry, I'm sorry -my kin d has committe d hist ory's greatest crime ag ainst your kin d; will you 
give me the chanc e to atone?' But do you bro thers and sisters exp ect a ny white m an to do that? 
_No_, you _ know_ b etter! And why won't he do it? B ecause he _can't_ do it. The white m an has 
_created_ a devil, to  bring ch aos u pon this ear th. . . ."
 
Somewhere about this ti me, I left the Gar W ood factory and I went to work for the Ford M otor 
Com pany, one of the Lincoln-Mercury  Division a ssembly  lines.
 
As a young mi nister , I would go t o Chicago an d see Mr . Elijah Mu hammad every time I could get 
off. He e ncouraged me to come whe n I could. I was tre ated as if I had been one of the sons of Mr. 
Muhammad and his dark , good wife Sis ter Clara Mu hammad. I saw their children only 
occasion ally. Most of them in those years worked ar ound C hicago in various jo bs, la borers, 
driving taxis, and things  such as that. Also liv ing in t he home was Mr . Muha mmad's dear Mot her 
Marie.
 
I would s pend al most as much time with Mot her Marie a s I did with M r. Muhammad. I loved to 
hear her reminisc ences about her son Elijah's e arly life when they lived in Sandersv ille, Ge orgia, 
where he  was born in 1897.
 
Mr. Muhammad would t alk wi th me for hours. After eating good, healthful Muslim f ood, we would 
stay at the din ner table and talk. Or I  would ride with hi m as he drove o n his daily rounds between 
the few g rocery stores that the Muslims t hen owned in Chicago. The stores were exa mples to 
help black pe ople see what t hey could do for themselves by  hiring  their own kin d and trading wi th 
their own ki nd and thus quit b eing exploite d by th e white m an.
 
In the Muslim-owned combin ation grocery-drug st ore o n Wentworth and 31st Street, Mr . 
Muhammad would sweep t he floor or so mething like th at. He would d o such work him self as an 
exam ple to his f ollowers  who m he  taught t hat idle ness a nd laziness we re among t he black m an's 
greatest sins agai nst hi msel f. I would want to snatch the broom from Mr. Muh ammad's h and, 
becaus e I thought h e was t oo valua ble to be sweepi ng a floor. But he wouldn't let m e do anything 
but stay with him and liste n wh ile he advised m e on the best way s to spread his message.
 
The way we we re with each other, it would m ake me  think o f Socrat es on  the steps of the Athens 
mark et place, spre ading his wisdom to his st udents. Or how on e of those students, Aristotle, had 
his st udents follow ing be hind him, walkin g through t he Lyceum. 
 
One day, I remember, a dirty  glass o f water was  on a counter a nd Mr. Muhammad put a cle an 
glass of water b eside it. "You want to know how to spread my t eachings?" h e said, a nd he pointed 
to the glasses o f water . "Do n't condemn if you see a person has a dirty glass o f wate r," he said, 
"just show them the cle an glass o f water t hat you have. When they inspect it, you won't h ave to 
say that yours  is better."
 
Of all the things that Mr. Muhammad ever was to  teach me, I don't know why, that still st ands out 
in my mi nd. Although I h aven't a lways practice d it. I  love  too much to battle. I'm incline d to tell 
somebody  if his glass o f water is dirty .
 
Moth er Marie, when Mr. Muh ammad was  busy, would tell m e about her son's b oyhoo d and of his 
growing up  in G eorgia t o young ma nhood.Mo ther Marie's a ccount of her son began when she 
was hersel f but seven years ol d. She told me that then she had a vision t hat one day she would 
be the mother o f a very great man. She married a Baptist m inister, Reveren d Poole, who wo rked 
around Sandersville on the farms, a nd in the sawmills. Among t heir thirt een children , said Mot her 
Marie, little Elijah was ve ry different, almost from when he could walk  and talk.
 The small, frail boy us ually settled his ol der bro thers' and sisters' dis putes, Mo ther Marie said. 
And young as he was,  he became regard ed by th em as their leader. And Elija h, about the time he 
entered sch ool, b egan displ aying a strong race c onscio usness . After the fourth grade, b ecause 
the family was so poor, Elija h had to quit sc hool and begin f ull-tim e wo rking. An older sist er taught 
Elijah a s much as she was a ble a t night .
 
Moth er Marie sai d that Elija h spent hours pori ng through the Bibl e, with tears shining in h is eyes. 
(Mr. Muhammad told me  himsel f later t hat as a boy he felt that the Bible's words we re a locked 
door, that could b e unlocked , if only he knew how, and he crie d because o f his frustrat ed anxiet y 
to receive  underst anding. ) Elijah gre w up  into a still-frail te enager who displayed a  most 
uncommonly stro ng love for his rac e, and, Mot her Marie s aid, i nstead of condemning Negroes' 
faults, you ng Elija h alwa ys would speak o f reasons for those faults.
 
Moth er Marie ha s sinc e die d. I believe that she had as large a  funeral a s Chicago h as seen. No t 
only Muslims, b ut others kn ew of the deep bond that Messe nger Elija h had with his m other.
 
"I am not ashamed to say how little le arning  I have ha d," Mr. Muhammad told me. "My  going to 
school no  further t han the fourth grade proves th at I can know nothing exce pt the truth I have 
been taught by  Allah. Allah taught m emathematics. He f ound me with a slug gish t ongu e, and 
taught m e how to pronounc e words."
 
Mr. Muhammad said that somehow, he never c ould s tand how the Sandersv ille white f armers, the 
sawmil l foremen, or o ther white employers  would habitually and often curse Negro workers. He 
said he would polit ely ask a ny for whom he worked never t o curs e him . "I would a sk th em to just 
fire me if they did n't like my work, bu t just don't curse m e." (Mr . Muhammad's or dinary 
conversati on was th e manner h e used when m aking s peec hes. He was  not "eloque nt," as 
eloqu ence is usually meant, but whatever  he uttered had an impact on me that trained or ators d id 
not begin to have. ) H e said that on the jobs h e got, h e worked s o honestly that ge nerally  he was 
put in c harge o f the other Negroes.
 
After Mr. Muhammad and Sister Clara me t and marrie d and their f irst two c hildren h ad been born, 
a white e mployer e arly in 1 923 did curse Mr. Muhammad, then Elija h Poole. Elijah P oole, 
determi ned to avoid tro uble, took his family to Detroit, a rriving when h e was twenty -five. Five 
more childre n would b e born there in D etroit, a nd, finally, the last o ne in Chic ago.
 
In Detroit i n 1931, Mr. Muhammad m et Mast er W. D. Fard.
 
The effects o f the depressio n we re bad ever ywhere , but in the black ghet to they were h orrible, 
Mr. Muhammad told m e. A small, light br own-skinn ed m an knocke d from door to door a t the 
apartments of the poverty -stricken Negroes. The man offered for sale silks an d other ya rd goods, 
and he identified himself as "a brother from the East." 
 
 
This m an bega n to tell N egroes how they came from a dista nt land, in the seeds of their 
forefathers. 
He warned them against e ating the "filthy pig" a nd other "wrong  foods" that it was  habitual f or 
Negroes to eat.
 
Among t he N egroes whom h e found most rec eptive, h e began h olding little meetings in their poor 
homes. The man taught bo th the Quran a nd the Bible, a nd his s tudents inclu ded Elijah P oole.
 
This m an said his na me was W. D. Fard. H e said that he was bor n in the _Koreish _ tribe of 
Muhammad ibn Abdullah, the Arabian prophet Hims elf. This peddler o f silks an d yard goo ds, Mr . 
W. D. Fard, knew  the Bibl e better than any of the Christian-bre d Negroes.
 
In the ess ence, Mr . W. D. F ard taught t hat God's tr ue name was Allah, that His tru e relig ion was Islam, that the true name for that religion's p eople was Muslims.
 
Mr. W. D. Fard taught t hat the Negroes in America were dir ectly descen ded from Muslims . He 
taught t hat Negroes in America were L ost S heep, lost for four hundred years f rom the Natio n of 
Islam, and that he, Mr. Fard , had come to red eem and return the Negro to  his tr ue religion.
 
No h eaven was in the sky , Mr. Fard taught, a nd no hell was in the groun d. Instead, both heaven 
and hell we re conditions in which  people lived right h ere o n this pl anet Earth. Mr. Fard taught t hat 
the Negro in America h ad been for four hundred years  in hell, and he, Mr. Fard , had come to 
return them to where heaven f or them was-back home, among their own kin d.
 
Master F ard taught t hat as hell was on  earth, also o n earth was  the devil -the white rac e which 
was bred from black Original Ma n six thousan d years be fore, purposely to creat e a hell o n earth 
for the next six  thousand years. 
The black people, God's children, were G ods t hemselves, Mas ter Fard taught. And he taught that 
among t hem was  one, also a  human being like t he others, who was th e God of Gods: The Most, 
Most High, The Supreme B eing, s upreme in wisdom and power- and His proper name was Allah.
 
Among his handful of first converts i n 1931 in De troit, Mas ter W . D. Fard t augh t that every  religion 
says that near the Last Day , or n ear the End of Time, God would c ome, to res urrect the Lost 
Sheep, to separa te them from their e nemies, and res tore t hem to their own pe ople. Mas ter Fard 
taught t hat Prophecy  referred to this Fin der a nd Savior  of the Lost Sheep as The Son of Man, or 
God in P erson, or The Lifegiver, The Redeemer, or The Messiah , who would co me as lightning 
from the East a nd appear in t he West.
 
He was  the One to who m the Jews re ferred as The Messiah, the Christians as The Christ, a nd 
the Muslims a s The Mah di.
 
*     *     *
 
I would sit , galvanized, h earing what I  then accepted from Mr . Muh ammad's own mo uth as bei ng 
the true hist ory of our religion, the true reli gion for the black m an. Mr. Muhammad told me  that 
one eve ning he had a revelation t hat Mast er W. D. Fard re prese nted the fulfillme nt of the 
prophecy .
 
"I asked Him ," said Mr . Muhammad, "'Who are you, a nd what is your  real n ame?' And H e said , 'I 
am The One the world ha s been looki ng for to come for the past two thousa nd years.'
 
"I said to Him again, " said Mr . Muhammad, "'What is your _tr ue_ name?' And then He s aid, 'My 
name is Mah di. I c ame to guide you int o the right pa th.'"
 Mr. Elijah Muhammad says  that he sat liste ning with an open heart and an open mind-th e way  I 
was sitting listening to Mr. Muhammad. And Mr. Muhammad said he never d oubted any word th at 
the "Savior" ta ught h im.
 
Starting  to orga nize, Mas ter W . D. Fard set up a class for training  minist ers to carry the teachings 
to America's b lack p eople. In giving names to these f irst minist ers, Mast er Fard n amed Elijah 
Poole "Elijah K arriem ."
 
Next, Mast er W. D. F ard es tablished in 19 31 in De troit a University  of Islam. It had adult class es 
which taugh t, among other things, ma thematics, t o help the poor Negroes quit b eing d uped and 
deceived by the "trickn ology" of "the blue-eyed d evil white ma n."
 
Starting  a school i n the rough meant that it lacke d quali fied teachers, b ut a start ha d to be made 
somewhere. Mr . Elijah K arriem removed his own c hildren f rom Detroit p ublic sc hools, to start a 
nucleus o f children i n the Univers ity of Islam .
 Mr. Muhammad told m e that his older children's l ack o f formal e ducation reflected their sacrific e 
to form the backb one for today's Univers ities of Islam  in De troit an d Chicago wh ich have b etter-
qualifi ed faculties.
 
Master W . D. F ard sel ected Elijah Karriem to be the Supreme Minist er, over all o ther mi nisters, 
and among all of those others spra ng up a bitter je alousy . All of them had better ed ucation than 
Elijah K arriem, and als o they were m ore ar ticulat e than he was.  They raged, eve n in his 
presence , "Why should we b ow down to someone who a ppears less qualifi ed?"
 
But Mr. Elija h Karrie m was  then in some way  re-na med "Elijah M uhammad," who a s the Supreme 
Minister beg an to rec eive from Mas ter W . D. Fard for the next thr ee and a half years  private 
teachings, d uring  which ti me he says he "heard things n ever reveale d to others." 
During  this p eriod, Mr. Elijah Muhammad and Mas ter W . D. Fard went to Chicago a nd establishe d 
Temple Num ber Two. They als o est ablish ed in Milwaukee the beginnings  of a Temple Nu mber 
Three.
 
In 1934, Mast er W. D. F ard dis appeared, withou t a trace .
 
Elijah Mu hammad says that attempts were m ade upon his life, because the other ministers' 
jealo usy had reached such a pitch. He says th at these "hypocrites" forced him to flee to Chicago. 
Temple Num ber Two be came h is he adqu arters un til the "hypocrites" pursued him there, f orcing 
him to flee again. In Washington , D. C., he bega n Temple Num ber F our. Also whi le there, in the 
Congression al Library , he studied books which h e says Mast er W. D. Fard h ad told him co ntained 
different pieces of the truth that devil  white man had record ed, but which we re not in books 
generally  availabl e to the public.
 
Saying  that he was still pursued by th e "hypocrites, " Mr. Muhammad fled from city to city , never 
stayin g long in any . Whenever a ble, now an d then, he slip ped home to see his wif e and his eight 
young  children , who we re fed by other p oor Muslims who shared what littl e they had. Even Mr . 
Muhammad's orig inal Chicago f ollowers wouldn't know  he was at home, for he says th e 
"hypocrit es" m ade serious e fforts to kill him.
 
In 1942, Mr. Muhammad was arrest ed. He says  Uncle Tom Negroes had tipped off the devil white 
man to his teachings, a nd he was charged by t his devil  white m an with draft-dodging, al though he 
was too old for milit ary service. He was sentenced to five years  in priso n. In the Milan, Michigan, 
federal pris on, Mr . Muh ammad served t hree and a half years, th en he was parole d. He had 
returned to his wo rk in 1946, to remove the blin ders fr om the eyes of the black man in the 
wilderness of North America.
 I can hear mysel f now, at the lectern in o ur little M uslim Temple, passion ately  addressing  my 
black brothers a nd sisters:
 
"This little, gen tle, sweet man! The Ho norable Elija h Muh ammad who is a t this very hour teaching 
our b rothers an d sist ers over  there in C hicago! Allah's Mess enger- which m akes hi m the most 
powerf ul black m an in America! F or you and me, he has sacri ficed seven years on  the ru n from 
filthy hypocrites, h e spent another t hree and a half years  in a prison cage! H e was  put there by 
the devil white man! That devil white m an does not want t he H onora ble Elija h Muh ammad stirring 
awake t he sl eeping gian t of you an d me, and all o f our ignora nt, br ainwashe d kind here in t he 
white man's h eaven and the black m an's he ll herei n the wilderness o f Nort h Americ a!
 
"I have s at at our Messe nger's  feet, hearing t he truth from his own m outh! I have ple dged o n my 
knees' t o Allah t o tell th e white m an about his crim es and the black man the true teachings o f our 
Honorable Elijah Mu hammad. I don't care if it costs my lif e . . . ."
 
This was  my attitude. These were my un compro mising  words, u ttered a nywhere, without 
hesitatio n or f ear. I was his most faithful servant, and I know  today that I did believe in hi m more 
firmly than he believed in himsel f. 
In the years  to come, I was  going  to have to face a psychological  and spiritual crisis.
 
 
 
CHAPT ER THIRTEEN
MINIST ER MA LCOLM X
 
I quit t he Ford Mo tor Co mpany's Li ncoln-Mercury  Division. I t had becomeclear to me that Mr . 
Muhammad needed minist ers to spread his teachings, t o establish mor e temples a mong the 
twenty-two m illion bl ack bro thers who were br ainwashed and sle eping in t he cities o f Nort h 
America.
 
My decisio n came relativel y quickly . I have al ways  been an activist, and my pers onal chemistry 
perhaps made me reach m ore quick ly than mo st ministers in the Na tion o f Islam that stage o f 
dedicati on. B ut every minist er in the N ation , in his own time, in his own wa y, in the privac y of his 
own soul, ca me to the conviction t hat it was w ritten that all of his "before" life had been only 
conditio ning and preparation t o become a d isciple o f Mr. Muhammad's.
 
Everything  that happens-Islam teaches-is written.
 
Mr. Muhammad invited me to visit his h ome in Chicago, a s often as possible, while he  train ed me, 
for months.
 
Never in prison had I studied and absorb ed so intensely as I  did now un der Mr . Muhammad's 
guida nce. I  was immersed in the worship ritu als; in what he taught u s were the true natures of 
men and wome n; the organizatio nal a nd administra tive pr oced ures; t he real m eanings, a nd the 
interrelated me anings, and uses, of the Bible and the Qura n.
 
I went t o bed ever y night ever m ore awe d. If not Allah , who else could have p ut such wisdom into 
that little humble lamb o f a man from the Georgia  fourth grad e and sawmills an d cotton patches. 
The "lamb of a man" analogy I drew  for mysel f from the pro phecy in t he Book of Revelatio ns of a 
symbolic la mb with a two-edge d sword in its m outh. Mr. Muhammad's two-edge d sword  was his 
teachings, which cu t back and forth to free the black ma n's m ind from the white m an.
 
My adoratio n of Mr. Muhammad gre w, in the sens e of the Latin roo t word_adorare _. It means 
much m ore than our "adoratio n" or "a dore." It means that my worship o f him was so aweso me 
that he was th e first m an whom I had ever feared-no t fear such a s of a man with a gun, but the 
fear such as o ne has of the power  of the sun.
 
Mr. Muhammad, whe n he felt me able, permitte d me to go t o Boston. Brother Ll oyd X lived t here. 
He invited p eople whom he had gotte n interest ed in Isla m to hear me in his liv ing room.
 
I quo te what I said when I  was just st arting  out, and then later o n in other pl aces, as I can best 
remember the ge neral p attern t hat I used, in successive ph ases, in t hose days. I know that then I 
always  liked to start off with my f avorite analogy  of Mr. Muhammad.
 
"God has given M r. Muhammad some sharp tr uth," I told them. "It is like a  two- edged sword. It 
cuts into you. I t causes you grea t pain, but if you ca n take t he truth, it wi ll cure you and save you 
from what o therwise would be certain d eath."
 
Then I wouldn't waste any time to start opening their eyes a bout the devil white m an. "I know you 
don't re alize the enormity, the horrors, o f the so-called _C hristian_ white man's crim e. . . .
 
"Not even i n the _Bible _ is th ere s uch a  crim e! Go d in His wrath s truck down with _ fire_ the 
perpetra tors o f _less er_ crim es! _ One hundred m illion_ of us black people! Your grand parents! Mine! _M urdere d_ by this wh ite ma n. To get fifteen million o f us her e to ma ke us his slaves, on 
the wa y he murdered one hundred million! I wish it was  possibl e for me to show  you the sea 
bottom in those d ays-the black b odies, the blood, the bones broke n by bo ots and clu bs! The 
pregna nt black wom en who were thr own overb oard i f they got t oosick! Thrown overb oard to the 
sharks that had learn ed that followin g these slave ships was the way to gro w fat!
 
"Why, the white man's ra ping of the black race's wom an began right o n those slave shi ps! The 
blue-eyed devil  could not even wait until h e got them h ere! Why, brothers a nd sisters, civ ilized 
mankind has never k nown  such an orgy of greed and lust a nd murder. . . ."
 
The dramatization of slavery never failed intensely  to arouse Negroes h earing its h orrors  spelled 
out for the first time. It's u nbelievable h ow many black men and wome n have l et the white m an 
fool them into hol ding an almost ro mantic id ea of what slave days were like. And once I had them 
fired up with slaver y, I would shi ft the scene to themselves.
 
"I want you, when you leave t his roo m, to start to _see_ all t his whenever you se e this devil white 
man. Oh, yes,  he's a devil! I just want you to start watchi ng him, in his p laces where he doesn't 
want you ar ound; watch him reveling  in his precio us-ness, and his exclusiveness , and his vanity , 
while he continues to subjugate you a nd me.
 
"Every  time you s ee a white m an, think about the devil you're s eeing! Think of how it was  on 
_your_ slave f oreparents' bloody, sweaty  backs t hat he _built_ this e mpire th at's t oday the rich est 
of all na tions-where his evil and his greed cause him to be hated around the world!"
 
Every meeting, t he people who had been there b efore returned, b ringing fr iends. N one of them 
ever had heard the wraps taken off the white man. I can't re member any black man ever in those 
living-roo m au diences i n Brot her Ll oyd X's ho me at 5 Wellingto n Str eet who d idn't stand up 
immedi ately  when I asked after ea ch lecture , "Will all stand who b elieve what you h ave he ard?" 
And each Sunday night, some o f them stood, whi le I could s ee others no t quiter eady , when I 
asked, "How many o f you want t o _follow_  The Honorable E lijah Mu hammad?"
 
Enough h ad stood up after ab out three months th at we were  able to open a littl e temple. I 
remember with  what pl easure we rented some folding chairs. I was beside myself  with jo y when I 
could rep ort to Mr. Muhammad a new temple a ddress.
 
It was when we got t his little m osqu e that my sister Ella f irst b egan to come to hear m e. She sat, 
staring, a s though s he couldn't believe it was  me. Ella never move d, eve n when I  had only asked 
all who beli eved what t hey had heard to stand up. She contribut ed when our collectio n was  held. 
It didn't bother or ch allenge m e at all about Ella. I never eve n thought about converting her , as 
toughmin ded and cautious a bout joining  anything as I person ally knew  her to be. I wouldn' t have 
expect ed anyon e short of Allah Hims elf to have b een able to convert Ella.
 
I would cl ose t he meeting as Mr. Muhammad had taught m e: "In the name of Allah, the 
beneficent, the merciful, all praise is due to Allah , the Lord o f all the worlds, t he beneficent, 
merci ful master o f the day of judgm ent in which  we now live -Thee alone do we serve, a nd Thee 
alone do we b eseech f or Thine aid. Guide us on the right p ath, the path of those upon whom 
Thou has bestowed favors - not of those u pon who m Thy wrath is br ought down, n or the path of 
those who go astray  after they have heard Thy teaching. I  bear witness th at there is no  God but 
Thee and The Honorable Elija h Mu hammad is Thy Servant a nd Apostle. "I believed h e had been 
divinely sent to our people by Allah Himsel f.
 
I would rais e my  hand, for them to be dismisse d: "D o nothing unto anyone that you would n ot like 
to have d one unto yourself . Seek peace, and never be the agg ressor-but if anyon e attacks you, 
we do not teach you to turn the otherch eek. May Allah b less you t o be success ful and victorious 
in all t hat you do ."
 Except for that one day when I had stayed with Ella on the wa y to Detroit a fter prison, I had not 
been in the old Roxbury  streets for seven years.  I went t o have a reunion with Sh orty.
 
Shorty, when I found him, acted uncertai n. The wire ha d told h im I was in town, a nd on some 
"relig ious kick. " He di dn't know  if I was serio us, or i f I was an other o f the hustling pre acher-pimps 
to be found in every  black ghet to, the ones with so me little st orefront churches of mostly 
hardworking,  older women, who ke pt their "p retty boy" you ng preacher dress ed in "sharp" clot hes 
and driv ing a fancy car . I quick ly let Shorty know how serious I was with  Islam, but then, talking 
the old stre et talk, I quick ly put him at his ea se, and we  had a great reunion. We laughe d until we 
cried a t Shorty's  dramatization o f his reacti ons when he heard that judge keep saying "Count one, 
ten years . .  . count two, t en years -" We talked about how having those white gi rls with us had 
gotte n as tea years where we  had seen in priso n ple nty of worse o ffenders with f ar less tim e to 
serve.
 
Shorty still ha d a little b and, and he was  doing fairly well. He was ri ghtfully very proud that in 
prison he had studied music. I  told him en ough about Isla m to see from his reacti ons t hat he 
didn't re ally want to hear it. In priso n, he had misheard about our religion. He got me off the 
subject by ma king a joke. H e said that he hadn't had enough pork c hops an d white wom en. I 
don't know if he has yet, or n ot. I know that he's ma rried t o a white woman now. . . and he's fat as 
a hog from eating hog.
 
I also saw  John Hugh es, the ga mbling- house owner , and some others I had known who we re still 
around Roxbur y. The wire about me had made them all u ncomfortable, b ut my "What you kn ow, 
Daddy?" approach a t least e nabled us t o have so me conversatio ns. I never m entioned Islam to 
most of them. I knew,from what I had been when I was with  them, how brai nwash ed they were.
 
As Temple Eleven's minist er, I served o nly brie fly, because a s soon as I got it orga nized, by 
March 1 954, I left it in c harge o f Minister Uly sses X, an d the Messe nger moved me on to 
Phila delphia.
 
The City of Brotherly  Love b lack p eople re acted even faster to  the truth a bout the white ma n than 
the Bostonians had. And Philad elphi a's Temple Twelve  was established by the end of May . It had 
taken a little under three months.
 
The next m onth, becaus e of those Boston and Philad elphi a succ esses, Mr. Muh ammad 
appointed me  to be the m inister of Temple Seven-in vital N ew York City.
 
I can't s tart to describe for you my welter  of emotions. F or Mr. Muh ammad's teachings  really to 
resurrect America n black people, Isla m obviously had to gro w, to grow  very big. And nowhere i n 
America was  such a si ngle temple potential available as in New York's  five b oroughs.
 
They contain ed over a  million black p eople.
 
*     *     *
 
It was ni ne years sinc e West Indian Archie and I had been stalking the stree ts, m omentarily 
expecti ng to try and shoot each other down like d ogs.
 
"_Red!_" . . ."My man!" . . ."Red, this _c an't_ be you-W ith my na tural ki nky red hair n ow clos e-
cropped, in p lace of the old long- haired , lye-co oked conk th ey had always  known on  my head, I 
know I looked mu ch different.
 "Gim'me some _skin _, man! A drink h ere, b artender-what ? You _quit !_ Aw, man, come o ff it!"
 
It was so good seeing so ma ny whom I had known  so well.  You can understan d how that was. 
But it was W est Indian Archie a nd Sammy t he Pimp for who m I was prim arily looking. And the first 
nasty shock c ame quickl y, about Sammy. He h ad quit pi mping, h e had gotten pr etty high up  in the numbers bu siness , and was doi ng well. Sa mmy even had married. Some fast young  girl. But then 
shortly after his wedding o ne morning he was found lying de ad across his b ed-th ey said with 
twenty-five t housand dollars in h is po ckets . (Pe ople don't want t o believe th e sums t hat even the 
minor un derwor ld handles . Why, listen : in Marc h 1964, a Chicago nick el-and-di me b ets Wheel of 
Fortu ne m an, Lawrence W akefield, died, and over $760, 000 in cash was in his a partment, in 
sacks a nd bags .  . . all taken from poor Negroes .  . . and we wond er why we stay so poor. )
 
Sick a bout Sammy, I queried f rom bar to bar am ong o ld-tim ers for W est Indian Archi e. The wire 
hadn't reported him dead, or liv ing somewhere els e, but none seemed to know where he  was. I 
heard the usual hu stler f ates of so m any ot hers. Bullets , knives, priso n, dope, diseas es, insanity , 
alcoholism. I imagine it was a bout in that order. And so m any o f the survivors whom I knew as 
tough hyen as an d wol ves o f the streets in the old days now were so pitiful. They had known a ll 
the angles, bu t beneath that surface they were p oor, ignora nt, untrained black men; life had 
eased up on them and hype d them. I ran across clos e to twenty -five of these o ld-tim ers I had 
known pr etty well,  who in the space of nine years ha d been reduced to the ghett o's mi nor, 
scavenger hu stles t o scra tch u p room rent and food money. Some now worked downt own, 
messengers, janitors, things like t hat. I was thankful to Allah that I had become a Muslim an d 
escaped their f ate.
 
There was  Cadillac Drake. He was  a big jolly , cigar-sm oking,  fat, black, gau dy-dressing pi mp, a 
regular  afternoon character when I was  waiting on  tables i n Sm all's Par adise. Well, I recognized 
him shuffling toward me  on the street. He h ad gotten hooked on heroin; I' d heard that. He was  the 
dirtiest, sloppiest b um you ever laid eyes on. I hurried p ast becaus e we  would bo th have b een 
embarrass ed if he recognized me , the kid h e used to toss a dollar tip .
 
The wire worked to locate West Indian Archi e for me. The wire of the stre ets, when it wants t o, is 
something like W estern Union with the F.B.I. for messengers.  At one of my e arly services a t 
Temple Seven, an old scavenger  hustler, to whom I gave a few dollars, came u p whe n serv ices 
were dismisse d. He told me that West Indian Archie was sick, liv ing up in a rented room in the 
Bronx.
 
I took a taxi to the address. W est Indian Archi e opened the door. He st ood there in rum pled 
pajamas an d barefooted, squinting a t me.
 
Have you ever seen someone who se emed a ghos t of the person you rem embered? It took him a 
few seco nds t o fix me  in his me mory. He claim ed, hoarsely , "Red! I'm so glad t o see you! "
 
I all b ut hugged t he old man. He was  sick in that weak way. I helped him back. He sat down o n 
the edge o f his b ed. I sat in his o ne chair, and I told hi m how his forcing  me out of Harle m had 
saved my li fe by turning me  in the directio n of Islam.
 
He said, " I alwa ys liked you, Red ," and he said that he had never re ally wanted to kill me. I told 
him it had made me shudder ma ny times to think how close we had come to killing  each other. I 
told him  I had sincerely  thought I  had hit that combinated six-way number for the three hundred 
dollars h e had paid me. Archie sai d that he had later wondere d if he had made some mistake, 
since I was  so re ady to die about it. And then we agree d that it wasn't worth even talking ab out, it 
didn't m ean anything  anymore . He k ept saying, over a nd over,in betwee n other things, th at he 
was so glad t o see m e.
 
I went i nto a little of Mr. Muh ammad's te aching with Archie. I  told him how I had found out that all 
of us who h ad been in the streets were victims o f the white m an's socie ty I told Archi e what I had 
thought in priso n about him; that his br ain, which c ould t ape-record h undreds of number 
combin ations a d ay, should have b een put at the sendee of mathematics or scienc e. "Red, that 
sure is s omething to think a bout," I can rem ember hi m saying.
 
But neither of us would s ay that it was  not too late. I have t he feeling that he knew, as I could s ee, that the end was  closing  in on Archie . I became too moved a bout what he had been and what he 
had now become to be able to stay mu ch longer . I didn't h ave m uch money, and he didn't want to 
accept what little I was able to press o n him. But I made him take it.
 
*     *     *
 
I keep having  to remind myself  that then, in June 1954, Temple S even i n Ne w York City was a 
little st orefront. W hy, it's almost u nbelievable that one bus couldn't have been filled with th e 
Muslims in New York City!  Even a mong our own b lack p eople in the Harle m ghet to, you could 
have s aid "M uslim" to a thousan d, and mayb e only one would n ot have a sked you " What's that?" 
As for white people, exce pt for that rel ative handful privy to certai n polic e or priso n files, not five 
hundred white p eople in all of America knew  we existe d.
 
I began firing Mr . Muhammad's t eaching at the New  York me mbers a nd the few fr iends they 
manage d to bring in. And with e ach meeting, my disc omfort gre w that in Harlem , choked with 
poor, ignorant black m en suffering all o f the evils  that Isla m could cure, every time I lectured my 
heart out and then asked those who wante d to follow Mr. Muhammad to stand, only two or t hree 
would. And, I have t o admit, sometimes no t that many. 
I think I  was all the angrier w ith my own in effectiveness b ecause I knew the streets . I had to get 
myself  toge ther and think out the problem . And the big tro uble, obviously , was  that we  were only 
one among the many voices of black d iscon tent on every  busy Harle m corn er. The different 
Natio nalist groups , the "Buy Black! " forces, a nd others like that; dozens o f their st ep-lad der 
orators we re tryin g to incre ase t heir f ollowings. I h ad nothing agai nst a nyone tryin g to promote 
independence and unity among bl ack me n, but they still were ma king it tough f or Mr. 
Muhammad's voice  to be heard.
 
In my first effort to get over t his hurdle, I  had some little l eaflets print ed. There wasn't a m uch-
traveled H arlem str eet c orner t hat five or six goo d Muslim b rothers an d I miss ed. We would st ep 
up right in front of a walking black man or woman so that they had to acce pt our leaflet, and if 
they hesita ted one secon d, they had to hear u s sayin g some catc h thing such as "Hear h ow the 
white man kidnapped and robbed and raped our black r ace-"
 
Next, we  went to work "fishing" o n those Harlem corners-on the fringes of the Natio nalist 
meetings. The method today has ma ny refinements, but then it consiste d of working  the alwa ys 
shifting edges o f the audiences th at others ha d managed to draw . At a Nationalist m eeting, 
everyone who was  listening was  interes ted in the revoluti on of the black rac e. We began to get 
visible res ults al most immediately after we beg an thrusting h andbills  in people's h ands, "Com e to 
hear us , too, brother.
 
The Honorable Elijah Mu hammad teaches us how to cure th e black m an's spiritual, mental, 
moral, ec onomic, and political sickness es-"
 
I saw the new faces o f our Temple Seven meetings. And then we  discovered the best "fishing" 
audience o f all, by far the best-co nditio ned audience f or Mr. Muhammad's t eachings: th e 
Christian c hurch es. 
Our S unday services were hel d at two P . M. All over Harle m duri ng the hour or s o before that, 
Christian c hurch services were dismissing. W e by-pass ed the larger  church es wi th their higher 
ratio o f so-called " middle-class " Negroes who were so full of pretense and "status" that they 
wouldn't b e caught in our little s torefront.
 
We went " fishing" f ast and furiously when t hose little evangelical  store front churc hes e ach let out 
their thirty to fifty people on the sid ewalk. " Come to hear u s, brother, sister- " "You haven't heard 
anything u ntil you have heard the teachings o f The Honorable E lijah Mu hammad-" These 
Congregations were usually Southern migrant people, us ually older, who would go anywhere to  
hear what t hey called "g ood pre aching. " These were  the church c ongre gations who were alwa ys 
putting ou t little signs a nnouncing th at inside t hey were selling fried chicke n and chitlin di nners to raise s ome mo ney. And three or f our nigh ts a week, they were  in their st orefront rehearsing  for 
the next Sunday, I guess, shaking  and rattling a nd rolling th e gos pels w ith their guitars and 
tambourines .
 
I don't know if you k now it, but there's a  whole circuit o f commercial gosp el entertainers who h ave 
come o ut of these littl e churches i n the city  ghettoes or from down S outh. People s uch as Sis ter 
Rose tta Tharpe, The Clara W ard Singers  are exa mples , and there mu st be five h undred lesser 
lights of the same ge neral or der. Mah alia Jacks on, the great est o f them all-she was a preacher's 
daughter i n Louisian a. She came u p there to Chicago where s he worked c ooking a nd scrub bing 
for white p eople a nd then in a factory while she sang in t he Negro  churches t he gospel s tyle th at, 
when it c aught on, made her the first Negro t hat Negroes ever ma de famous. She was  selling 
hundreds of thousan ds of recor ds am ong Negroes before white p eople ever knew who Ma halia 
Jacks on was. Anyway, I know that somewhere I once read that Mah alia sai d that every  time s he 
can, sh e will slip unannounce d into some little gh etto store front churchan d sing w ith her p eople. 
She calls that "my f illing station."
 
The black Christians we " fished" to our Temple were c ondition ed, I found, by t he very  shock I 
could gi ve th em about what h ad been happening to  them while they worship ed a blond, blue-
eyed G od. I knew the temple that I could b uild if I could re ally get to those Christia ns. I tailore d 
the teachings  for them. I would start to speak and sometimes b e so em otionally charged I  had to 
explain mysel f:
 
"You see my  tears, bro thers a nd sisters . . . . Tears have n't be en in my eyes sinc e I was a young 
boy. But I cannot help this when I feel the responsibilit y I have to  help you c omprehend for the 
first time what t his white m an's religion t hat we call Christianity  has _done_ to us . . . .
 
"Brothers and sist ers here for the first time, please don't let that shock you. I know you did n't 
expect this. Because alm ost n one of us black pe ople have t hought t hat mayb e we  were m aking a 
mistake n ot wondering if  there wasn't a special religion s omewhere for us-a special relig ion for 
the black ma n.
 
"Well, there is such a religion. I t's calle d Isla m. Let me spell it for you, I-s-I-a-m ! _Islam!_ But I'm 
going  to tell you ab out Isla m a little la ter. First, we  need to understa nd some things  about this 
Christianity  before we ca n underst and wh y the _answer_ f or us is Isla m.
 
"Brothers and sist ers, the white m an has brainwash ed us black pe ople to fasten our gaze upon a 
blond-haire d, blue-eyed Jesus ! We're wo rshiping a Jesus that doesn't even _ look_ like u s! Oh, 
yes! Now just bear with m e, listen to the teachings of the M essenger o f Allah, The Honorable 
Elijah Mu hammad. Now, just think of this. The blond-haired , blue-eyed white m an has taught you 
and me to worship a  _white_ Jesus, a nd to shout and sing and pray to this G od that's _ his_ G od, 
the white m an's God. The white m an has taught u s to shoutand sing  and pray until we _die_, to 
wait until _ death_, for some dreamy heave n-in-the-her eafter, when we're  _dead_, while this wh ite 
man has his milk a nd honey in the streets paved with gold en dollars ri ght here on _this_ e arth!
 
"You don't want to believe what I  am telling you, br others an d sist ers? W ell, I'll tell you what you 
do. You go o ut of here, you jus t take a good look around where you li ve. L ook at not only how 
_you_ live, b ut look a t how anybody  that you _ know_ lives -that way , you'll b e sure th at you're not 
just a  bad-luck a ccide nt. And whe n you get t hrough looking at  where _you _ live, then you t ake 
you a walk down a cross Ce ntral Park , and start to look at  what t his white God had brough t to the 
white man. I mean, take yourself  a look d own th ere a t how the white man is liv ing!
 
"And don't stop there. I n fact, you won't be  able to stop for long-his d oormen are going t o tell you 
'Move on!' But catch a  subway and keep on downtown. Anywhere you m ay want to  get o ff, _look_ 
at the white ma n's apartments, business es! G o right on down t o the tip of Manhattan Isla nd that 
this d evilish white m an stole fr om the trusting In dians for twen ty-four dollars! L ook at his Cit y Hall, 
down t here; look at his W all Street! Look at yourself ! Look at _his_ God!" 
I had learn ed early one importan t thing, and that was to alwa ys te ach in terms t hat the people 
could un derstand. Also, where th e Na tionalists  whom we ha d "fished" were almost all m en, 
among t he store front Christians, a  heavy preponderance were wome n, and I had the sense to 
offer something special for them. "_Beautiful_ black woma n! The Hon orabl e Elijah M uhammad 
teaches us that the black m an is going  around saying he  wants res pect; well, the black m an 
never w ill get anybo dy's resp ect u ntil h e first learns t o res pect his own wome n! The black ma n 
needs _today_ to stand up and throw  off the weakness es im posed upon him by th e slavem aster 
white man! The black m an needs to start today to shelter a nd protect and _respec t_ his black 
women !" 
One hundred p ercent would s tand up withou t hesitation when I said, " How many _b elieve_ what 
they have heard?" But still never more than an agoniz ing few would sta nd up when I invited, "Will 
those s tand who want t o _follow_ The Hon orable Elijah Mu hammad?" 
 
I knew that our strict  moral co de and discipline was what repelle d them mo st. I fired at this point, 
at the reas on for our co de. "The white m an _wants _ black men to stay immoral, un clean and 
ignorant . As long as we stay in these conditions we will keep on begging him  and he will control 
us. We never ca n win  freedom and justice a nd equality  until we are doing something f or 
ourselves!"
 
The code, o f course , had to be explai ned to any who were tentativel y interested in b ecoming 
Muslims. And the word got around in their little st orefronts quickly , which is why  they would c ome 
to hear me , yet would n't join Mr. Muh ammad. Any f ornicatio n was  absolutely  forbidden in t he 
Natio n of Islam. Any ea ting o f the filthy pork, or other injurious or unhealthful foods; any us e of 
tobacc o, alc ohol, or n arcotics. No Muslim who f ollowed Elijah Muhammad could d ance, ga mble, 
date, attend movies, or s ports, o r take long vaca tions f rom work. Muslims sl ept no more than 
health requi red. Any do mestic quarreling,  any disco urtesy , especially  to wome n, was no t allowed. 
No ly ing or stealing, an d no insubordin ation to civil authority , except on the groun ds of relig ious 
obligatio n.
 
Our m oral l aws were policed by our Fruit o f Islam-a ble, dedicat ed, and trai ned Muslim m en. 
Infractio ns result ed in sus pensi on by M r. Muhammad, or isola tion f or various periods, or even 
expulsion for the worst o ffenses " from the only grou p that really cares a bout you."
 
*     *     *
 Temple Seven grew  somewhat with each me eting. It just gre w too slow ly to suit me. During th e 
weekdays, I tr aveled by bus and train. I taught e ach Wednesday at Phila delphia's Temple Twelve. 
I went t o Springfi eld, M assach usetts, to try to start a new temple. A temple which Mr . Muh ammad 
numbered Thirteen was  establishe d there with the help of Brother Os borne, who h ad first heard 
of Islam from me in prison . A lady visiting a Spring field m eeting ask ed if I'd come to Hart ford, 
where sh e lived; she specified the next Thursday  and said sh e would a ssemble some friends. 
And I was right th ere.
 
Thursday is tr aditio nally domestic servants' d ay off. This sister h ad in her housing projec t 
apartment about fifteen of the maids, cooks, c hauffeurs and house me n who worked for the 
Hartford-area white p eople. You've heard that saying, "N o man is a hero to his valet. " Well, those 
Negroes who waited o n wealthy whites ha nd and foot opened their eyes quicker  than most 
Negroes. And when they went " fishing" e nough a mong more servants , and other black people in 
and around Hart ford, Mr. Muh ammad before long was  able to assign a  Hart ford temple the 
number Fo urtee n. And every  Thursday I scheduled my t eaching there.
 
Mr. Muhammad, whe n I went to see him in Chicago, had to chastise me on some point during 
nearly every visit. I jus t couldn' t keep from showing in s ome manner that with his ministers 
equip ped with the power  of his me ssage, I felt the N ation should go m uch faster. His pa tience a nd 
his wi sdom in chastising  me would alwa ys humble me  from head to foot. He s aid, one time, that 
no true lea der b urdened his f ollowers with a grea ter lo ad than they could carry, and no true lea der sets too fast a pace for his f ollowers t o keep up.
 
"Mos t people seeing a man in an old touring car going real slow  think the man doesn't want t o go 
fast," Mr. Muh ammad said, " but the m an knows that to drive any faster would destroy the old car. 
When he gets a  fast car, then he will drive at a fast speed." And I remember hi m telling  me 
another tim e, whe n I complain ed about an inefficient minister a t one of his m osques , "I would 
rather have a  mule I can depend upon than a race hors e that I can't d epend upon."
 
I knew that Mr. Muhammad _wan ted_ that fast car t o drive. And I don't think you c ould pick th e 
same n umber of faithful brothers and sist ers from the Nati on of Islam today and find "fishing" 
teams to beat the efforts of those who helped to bring  growth to  the Boston, P hiladelphia, 
Spring field, Hart ford, and New York temples . I'm, of course, j ust m entioning those that I knew 
most about because I was directly  involved. This was thr ough 1 955. And 1955 was  the year I 
made my first trip o f any distance. It was  to help open the temple that today is Number Fif teen-in 
Atlanta, Georgia.
 
Any Muslim who ever move d for personal r easo ns from one city to another was  of cours e 
exhorte d to plant seeds for Mr. Muh ammad. Br other Ja mes X, o ne of our top Temple Twelve 
brothers, h ad interest ed enough bl ack pe ople in Atlanta so that when Mr. Muh ammad was 
advised, he told me  to go t o Atlanta and hold a  first m eeting. I t hink I have had a hand in most of 
Mr. Muhammad's temples, b ut I'll never f orget that opening in Atlanta.
 
A funeral p arlor was  the only  place large en ough that Br other James X co uld a fford to rent. 
Everything  that the Natio n of Islam did in t hose days, from Mr. Muh ammad on down, was  strictly 
on a shoestring.  When we all arrived, though, a  Christian Negro's funeral was  just d ismissing, so 
we had to wait awhile, a nd we watched the mo urners ou t.
 
"You saw them all cry ing over  their physical  dead," I told our grou p when we got i nside. "But the 
Natio n of Islam is rejoicing over you, o ur me ntally dead. That may s hock you, but, oh, yes, you 
just d on't realize how our whole black r ace in America is mentally dead. We are h ere today with 
Mr. Elijah Muhammad's te achings which resurrect the black ma n from the dead . . . ."And, 
speaking o f funerals, I should mention that we never failed to get s ome new Muslims when non-
Muslims, f amily and friends of a Muslim d eceased, attended our sh ort, m oving cerem ony that 
illustrated Mr. Muhammad's t eaching, "C hristians h ave th eir funerals f or the living, ours a re for our 
departed."
 
As the minist er of several  temples , conducting  the Muslim c erem ony had occasio nally fallen to 
my lot. As Mr. Muh ammad had taught me , I would st art by  reading over t he caske t of the departed 
brother or sister a prayer  to Allah . Next I re ad a simple o bituary record of his or h er life. Then I 
usually read from Job; two p assages , in the sevent h and fourteenth c hapters, where Job speaks 
of no life after death. Then another p assage where David, when his s on died, sp oke also o f no life 
after de ath.
 
To the audience b efore me, I explain ed why  no tears were to be shed, and wh y we had no 
flowers,  or singing,  or organ-pl aying.  "We shed tears for our brother, and gave him our music a nd 
our tears while he  was alive. If he wasn't wept for and given o ur mu sic an d flowers t hen, wel l, now 
there is n o need, because he is no  longer aware. We now will give his f amily any money we might 
have s pent."
 
Appointed Muslim Sis ters quickl y passed small trays  from which everyone took a thin, round patty 
of peppermint candy. At my signal, t he candy was  put into mouths. "We will file by now f or a last 
look at our brother. We won't cry-just as we d on't cry over candy. Just as this sweet candy  will 
dissolve, so will our bro ther's sweet ness t hat we have e njoyed when he lived n ow dissolve into a 
sweetness in o ur me mories. "
 
I have ha d probably a couple o f hundred Muslims t ell me that it was attending one of our funerals for a departed brother or sist er that first turned them toward Allah. But I was  to learn l ater t hat Mr. 
Muhammad's te aching a bout death andthe Muslim f uneral serv ice was in drastic c ontradictio n to 
what Isla m taught in the East.
 
We had gro wn, by 1956-we ll, sizable. Every  temple h ad "fished" with  enough s uccess that there 
were far more Muslims , especially  in the ma jor cities o f Detroit, Chic ago, an d New York than 
anyon e would h ave guesse d from the outside . In fact, as you kn ow, in the re ally big cities, you 
can have a  very big orga nizatio n and, if it makes no  public sh ow, or no ise, n o one will necessaril y 
be aware th at it is around.
 
But more than just increasi ng in numbers, Mr . Muhammad's version o f Islam now had been 
getting in s ome other types of black p eople. We began now getting those with so me e ducation, 
both academic, an d voca tions a nd trades, and even some with "p ositio ns" in the white world, a nd 
all of this was st arting  to bring us clos er to the desired fast car for Mr . Muhammad to drive. W e 
had, for inst ance, some civil servants, some nurs es, clerical workers, sales men from the 
department stores. And one of the best things was  that some bro thers o f this type were 
develo ping into smart, fi ne, aggressi ve young mi nisters f or Mr. Muhammad.
 
I went witho ut a lot o f sleep trying to merit his increasing evide nces o f trust a nd confidence in my 
efforts to help build o ur Nati on of Islam. It was in 1 956 that Mr. Muhammad was ab le to authorize 
Temple Seven t o buy and assign f or my use a new Chevrolet. (The car was  the Nati on's, n ot 
mine. I had nothing that was mi ne but my clothes, wr ist watch, and suitc ase. As in t he case of all 
of the Nati on's mi nisters, my liv ing expe nses were pai d and I had some p ocket money. Where 
once you c ouldn't have named anything  I wouldn' t have d one for money, now money was the last 
thing to cross my m ind.) Anyway, in letting m e know about the car, Mr. Muhammad told m e he 
knew how I loved to roam, planting s eeds for new Muslims , or m ore temples , so he didn't want 
me to be tied down. 
In five m onths, I put about 30, 000 miles of "fishing" on that car before I had an accid ent. Late one 
night a  brother a nd I were co ming thr ough W eathersfield, Co nnecticut , when I  stopped for a red 
light and a car s mash ed into me from behind. I was just s hook up, not hurt. That excited devil had 
a wom an with hi m, hi ding her face, so I knew she wasn't h is wife. We were exch anging  our 
identification (h e lived in Meride n, Co nnecticut) when the police arrived, an d their a ctions told me 
he was somebody import ant. I later f ound out he was one of Con nectic ut's m ost promine nt 
politicia ns; I won't call his n ame. Anyway, Temple Seve n set tled on a law yer's  advice, a nd that 
money went d own o n an Oldsmobile , the make of car I've b een driv ing ever since.
 
*     *     *
 
I had always  been very  care ful to stay comple tely clear of any perso nal clos eness w ith any of the 
Muslim sist ers. My total co mmitment to Islam demanded having no other interests, e speciall y, I 
felt, no wome n. In almost ever y temple at least one single sist er had let out some broad hi nt that 
she thought I needed a wife. So I alwa ys made it clear that marriage had no interest for me 
whatso ever; I was too busy.
 
Every month, when I  went t o Chicago , I would f ind that some sister h ad written complaining t o Mr. 
Muhammad that I talked so hard ag ainst wom en when I taught our s pecial class es about the 
different natures o f the two sexes. Now , Islam h as very  strict laws  and teachings about wom en, 
the cor e of them being that the true nature o f a man is t o be strong, an d a woma n's tru e nature is 
to be weak, an d while a man must at all tim es res pect his woma n, at the same time h e needs to 
underst and that he must control h er if he exp ects t o get h er res pect.
 
But in those days I had my own p erson al reas ons. I wouldn' t have c onsid ered it possible f or me to 
love any woman . I'd had too much exp erience that wom enwere only tricky , deceit ful, 
untrustworth y flesh. I had seen too many me n ruine d, or a t least ti ed down, or in so me other wa y 
messed up by women. Women talked too much. To tell a woman not to talk too mu ch was like 
telling  Jesse James n ot to carry a gun, or t elling  a hen not to cackle . Can you im agine Jess e James witho ut a gun, o r a hen that didn't cackl e? And for anyon e in a ny kind o f a leadershi p 
position, such as I was,  the worst  thing in t he world that he could h ave was the wrong woman . 
Even S amson, the wor ld's strongest man, was destroyed by t he wom an who sl ept in his ar ms. 
She was  the one whose wo rds hurt him.
 
I mean, I'd had so much exp erience . I had talked to too many prostitu tes a nd mistress es. They 
knew more about a whole lot of husbands t han the wi ves o f those husbands di d. The wives 
always  filled their hu sbands' e ars s o full of wife complai nts that it wasn't t he wi ves, it was th e 
prostit utes an d mistresses who heard the husbands' in nerm ost pr oblems a nd secre ts. They 
thought of him, and comforted him, and that incl uded liste ning to him, and so he would t ell them 
everything.
 
Anyway, it had been ten years  since I  thought anything ab out any mistress, I  guess, and as a 
minist er now , I was  thinki ng even less a bout ge tting any wife. And Mr . Muh ammad himsel f 
encourage d me  to stay single.
 
Temple Seven sist ers us ed to tell brothers, "Y ou're j ust st aying single because Bro ther Minist er 
Malcolm never looks at anybo dy." No, I didn't make it any secret to any of those sist ers, how I f elt. 
And, yes, I  did tell the br others to  be very, very careful.
 
This sister-we ll, in 1956, she join ed Temple Seve n. I just n otice d her, not with the slightest 
interest, you u ndersta nd. For a bout the next year , I just noticed her. You know, she never would 
have dr eamed I was even thinki ng about her. In fact, probably you co uldn' t have c onvinced her I 
even k new her name. It wasSister B etty X. She was tall, br own-skinn ed-dark er than I was. And 
she had brown eyes.
 
I knew she was a native of Detr oit, a nd that she had been a student at Tuskegee I nstitute down in 
Alabama-an  education major. She was in Ne w York at one of the big hospit als' sch ool o f nursi ng. 
She lec tured to the Muslim gir ls' and women's classes o n hygiene and medical facts.
 
I ought t o explai n that each week night a  different Muslim cl ass, or eve nt, is sche duled. Mo nday 
night, every  temple's Fruit of Islam trains. People think this is j ust milit ary drill, judo, kara te, things 
like th at-wh ich _is_ p art of the F.O.I. training, bu t only one part. The F.O.I. spends a lot m ore time 
in lec tures a nd discussi ons o n men learning  to be men. They deal with t he res ponsibilities o f a 
husband and father; what t o expec t of wome n; the rights o f wome n which are not to be abrogate d 
by the husband; the importance of the father-ma le image in the stro ng household; current events; 
why honesty, and chas tity, are vital in a  pers on, a home, a community, a nation, and a civilization; 
why one should b athe at least once each twenty-four hours; bu siness principles; and things  of 
that nature.
 
Then, Tuesday night in every Muslim te mple is Unity  Night, where the bro thers and sisters e njoy 
each other's conversatio nal c ompany  and refreshments, such a s cookies a nd sweet and sour fruit 
punches. W ednesday nights, a t eight P. M., is what is c alled
 
Student E nrollm ent, where Isla m's b asic issu es are discuss ed; it is ab out the equivalen t of 
catechis m class in the Cat holic relig ion.
 
Thursday nights there ar e the M.G .T. (Muslim Girls' Training) and the G.C.C. (Gen eral Ci vilization 
Class), where th e wom en and girls of Islam are taugh t how to  keep homes, how to rear childre n, 
how to care f or husbands , how to cook , sew , how to act at home and abroad, and other thi ngs that 
are importan t to being a good Muslim sist er an d mother a nd wife.
 
Frida ys ar e devot ed to Civ ilizatio n Night, when class es ar e hel d for brothers a nd sisters in t he 
area of the domestic rela tions , emphasizing how both husbands and wives m ust underst and and 
respect e ach other's tru e natures. Then Saturday  night is f or all Muslims a  free night, when, 
usually, they visit at each other's homes. And, of course, o n Sundays, ever y Muslim t emple h olds its serv ices.
 
On the Thursday M.G .T. and G.C.C. n ights, s ometimes I would drop in on the classes, and 
mayb e at Sister B etty X's  class es-just a s on other n ights I m ight dr op in on the different brothers' 
classes . At first I would just ask h er things  like how were the sisters le arning -things like that, and 
she would say  "Fine, Br other Minister." I'd say , "Thank you, Sis ter." Lik e that. And that would be 
all th ere was to  it. And after a while, I would have ver y short conversatio ns wi th her, just to be 
friendly.
 
One day I thought it would hel p the wom en's cl asses i f I took her-just b ecause s he happened to 
be an instruc tor, to the Muse um of Natur al Histor y. I wante d to show her some Mus eum dis plays 
having  to do with t he tree of evolu tion, that would h elp her in her lectur es. I could show her proofs 
of Mr. Muh ammad's teachings  of such t hings as that the filthy pig is on ly a large ro dent. The pig is 
a gra ft between a rat, a cat and a dog, Mr . Muhammad taught us . When I mentioned my ide a to 
Sister B etty X, I made it very  clear t hat it was just t o help her lectures to the sisters. I  had eve n 
convince d myself  that this was th e only reason .
 
Then by th e time o f the afternoon I said we  would go, wel l, I telephoned her; I told her I had to 
cancel th e trip , that something importan t had come up. She said, "Well, you s ure waited l ong 
enough t o tell me , Brother Minister , I wasjust re ady to walk  out of the door." So I told h er, well, all 
right, come o n then, I'd make it s omehow . But I wasn't going to  have m uch time.
 
While we  were d own there, o ffhandedly I ask ed her all ki nds o f things. I j ust want ed some ide a of 
her thinking; you u ndersta nd, I mean _how_ s he thought. I  was halfway impresse d by her 
intelligence and als o her ed ucation. In those d ays she was one of the few whom we ha d attracted 
who had attended college.
 
Then, right a fter that, one of the older sisters c onfided to me a personal pr oblem that Sister B etty 
X was having. I was really  surprised t hat when s he had had the chance, Sister B etty X had not 
mentioned anything to me about it. Every  Muslim m inister is always hearing th e problems o f 
young  people whose p arents have ostracized t hem for becoming Muslims . Well, when Sis ter 
Betty X told her foster par ents, who we re financing  her e ducatio n, that she was  a Muslim , they 
gave her a choice: le ave the Muslims, or they'd cut o ff her nursing  scho ol.
 
It was ri ght near the end of her term-b ut she was h anging  on to Islam . She began taki ng baby-
sitting jobs for some of the doctors who lived o n the grounds of the hospital where she was 
training.
 
In my positio n, I would n ever h ave ma de any m ove w ithout thinking h ow it would affect the Natio n 
of Islam organization a s a whole.
 
I got to turning it over in my mind. W hat would h appen if I just _ should_ happen, sometime, to 
think ab out getting m arried t o somebody? For inst ance Sister B etty X-although it could b e any 
sister in a ny temple , but Sister Be tty X, for instance , would just happen to be the right height f or 
somebody  my height, and als o the right age .
 
Mr. Elijah Muhammad taught u s that a tall man married t o a too-sh ort woma n, orv ice-versa, t hey 
looked odd, not matched. And he taugh t that a wife's ideal age was  half the man's age, p lus 
seven. He ta ught t hat wome n are physiological ly ahead of men. Mr. Muhammad taught t hat no 
marriage c ould succe ed where the woma n did not look up  with respec t to the man. And that the 
man had to have s omething above a nd beyon d the wif e in o rder f or her to be able to look to him 
for psychological s ecurity .
 
I was so s hock ed at mysel f, when I realized _what _ I was thi nking, I quit going a nywhere n ear 
Sister B etty X, or any where I knew  she would be . If she came into our resta urant and I was 
there, I  went o ut somewhere. I was glad I knew that she had no idea what I had been thinking about. My  not talking  to her would n't gi ve her any reas on to think a nything, sinc e there h ad never 
been one _perso nal_ word spoken betwee n us-even i f she had _thought _ anythi ng.
 
I studied about if I just _should_ happen to say something to her-what would her position b e? 
Because she wasn't going to  get a ny chanc e to embarrass me . I had heard too many wome n 
bragg ing, " I told that chump 'Ge t lost !'" I'd had too mu ch experienc e of the kin d to make a man 
very cautio us.
 
I knew one good thing; s he had few relatives. My  feeling  about in-la ws was  that they were 
outlaws. Right a mong the Temple Seven Muslims, I  had seen mor e marriages  destroyed by in-
laws, u sually anti-Muslim, t han any other single  thing I knew of.
 
I wasn't a bout to say any of that romance stuff that Hollywood and television had filled wome n's 
heads with. If I was going to  do something, I was going to  do it direc tly. And anything  I was  going 
to do, I was going  to do _my_ way . And because _I_ want ed to do it. Not b ecause I saw 
somebody  do it. Or re ad about it in a  book. Or saw  it in a  moving pict ure so mewhere.
 
I told Mr . Muhammad, when I  visited him in Chic ago that month, that I wasthinking ab out a very 
serious step. He smile d when h e heard what it was.
 
I told hi m I was just thinking  about it, that was  all. M r. Muhammad said that he'd like t o meet this 
sister .
 
The Natio n by this ti me was financially able to bear the expe nses s o that instruct or sisters f rom 
different temples could be  sent to Chic ago to attend the H eadqu arters Temple Two wom en's 
classes , and, while t here, to meet The Honora ble Elija h Muh ammad in perso n. Sis ter B etty X, of 
course, k new all a bout this, s o there was n o reason for her to think anything of it when it was 
arrange d for her to go t o Chicago. And like all v isiting  instruct or sisters, s he was th e house gues t 
of the Messe nger and Sist er Clara Mu hammad.
 
Mr. Muhammad told m e that he thought t hat Sister B etty X was a fine sister .
 
If you are thinking ab out doing a t hing, you o ught t o make up your mi nd if you are going t o do it, 
or not do it. One Sunday night, a fter the Temple Seven m eeting, I drove my car o ut on the Gar den 
State Parkwa y. I was on my way  to visit my  brother W ilfred, in Detr oit. W ilfred, the year  before, in 
1957, had been made the minist er of Detroit's Temple One. I hadn't seen him, or a ny of my f amily, 
in a good while.
 
It was a bout ten in the morning when I got i nside D etroit. G etting gas at a filling station, I just went 
to their pay phone on a wall; I t elephoned Sist er Betty X. I h ad to get I nformation to get t he 
number of the nurses' resid ence at this hospital. M ost n umbers I memorized, b ut I had always 
made it so me point never to memorize  her number. Somebody got her to the phone finally. She 
said, "Oh, hello, Brother Minister-" I  just said it to her d irect: " Look, do you want t o get m arried ?"
 
Naturally, she acted all sur prised and shock ed. 
The more I have t hought ab out it, to this d ay I believe she was on ly putting on  an act. Because 
women know. They know.
 
She said, jus t like I knew  she would, "Yes." Then I said, well,  I didn't h ave a whole lot of time, 
she'd b etter catc h a plane to Detroit.
 
So she grabbed a plane. I met her foster par ents who lived in Detroit. They had made up by this 
time. They were  very friendly, and happily surprised . At least, they acted that way .
 
Then I introduce d Sist er Betty X at my oldest brother Wilfred's house. I had alrea dy ask ed him 
where pe ople could get m arried without a whole lo t of mess an d waiting. He t old m e in Indiana. 
Early  the next mo rning, I picke d up Betty at her parents' ho me. We drove to the first town in 
Indiana. We found out that only a few days be fore, the state law  had been changed, and now 
Indiana had a long waiting  perio d.
 
This was  the fourteenth of January, 1958; a Tuesday. We weren't far from Lansing,  where my 
brother P hilbert lived. I  drove t here. Philb ert was  at work when we sto pped at his house and I 
introduce d Betty X. She and Philbert's wif e were  talking when I  found out on the phone that we 
could get m arried i n one day, if we rush ed.
 
We got t he necessary  blood tes ts, then the lice nse. Where the certificate said "R eligion, " I wrote 
"Muslim ." Then we went t o the Justic e of the Peace.
 
An old hunchbacke d white m an performed the wedding. And all o f the witnesses were white. 
Where you are s uppose d to say  all th ose "I do' s," we did. They were all st anding there, smiling 
and watching every  move . The old devilsaid, "I pronounce you ma n and wife ," and then, "Kiss 
your bride."
 
I got her o ut of there. All of that Holly wood s tuff! Like these wom en wanti ng men to pick t hem up 
and carry them across thr eshol ds an d some of them weigh m ore than you d o. I don't know how 
many marriage bre akups are caused by these movie-an d televis ion-addicted women expecti ng 
some b ouqu ets a nd kissing  and hugging  and being swept out like Cin derella f or dinner a nd 
dancing- then getting m ad when a  poor, scrag gly husband comes in tired a nd sweaty from 
working  like a dog all d ay, looki ng for some food.
 
We had dinner there a t Philbert's h ome in Lansing. " I've go t a surprise f or you," I  told him when 
we came in. "You haven' t got a ny surprise f or me," he said. When he got h ome from work  and 
heard I' d been there i ntrod ucing  a Muslim sister , he knew I was eit her m arried, or on  the way  to 
get m arried.
 
Betty's nursing  school schedule calle d for her to fly right b ack t o New  York, a nd she could ret urn 
in four days. S he claims she didn't tell anybo dy in Temple Seve n that we h ad married .
 
That Sunday, Mr. Muhammad was going  to teach a t Detroit's Temple One. I had an Assista nt 
Minister in New  York n ow; I telephoned him to take over  for me. Saturday, Betty came back. The 
Messe nger, after his teaching o n Sunday, made the announce ment. Even in Michigan , my 
steering  clear of all sisters was so well  known, t hey just c ouldn't believe it.
 
We drove right ba ck to  New  York toge ther. The news really  shook everybody  in Temple Seven . 
Some young  brothers lo oked at me as though I had betrayed t hem. But ever ybody else was 
grinning like C heshire c ats. The sist ers just a bout ate up Betty. I never w ill forget h earing on e 
exclaim, "Y ou got him!" That's like I  was telling  you, the _nature_ of wome n. She'd _got _ me . 
That's par t ofwhy I never have b een able to shak e it o ut of my mind that she knew something-all 
the time. Maybe she did get me !
 
Anyway, we lived f or the next two a nd a half years in Queens, sh aring  a house of two small 
apartments with Br other Jo hn AH a nd his wife of that time. He's now th e Na tional Secretary  in 
Chicago.
 
Attallah , our oldest d aught er, was b orn in November 1958.
 
She's n amed for Attila h the H un (h e sack ed R ome). Sh ortly after Attallah c ame, we move d to our 
present seven-roo m ho use in a n all-black section of Queens, Long Island.
 
Another gi rl, Qu bilah (named after Qubilah Khan) was bor n on Christm as Day  of 1960. Then, 
yasah (" Ilyas" is Arabic for "Elijah ") was  born in July  1962. And in 1964 our fourth daugh ter, Amilah, a rrived.
 
I guess by now I will say I love Betty. She's th e only woma n I ever even though t about loving. And 
she's one of the very  few-four wome n-whom I have ever trus ted. The thing is, Betty's a good 
Muslim woma n and wife. You see, Isl am is t he only religion t hat gives bo th husband and wife a 
true underst anding of what love is. The Western " love" c oncept, you ta ke it a part, it re ally is lust. 
But love tra nscen ds jus t the physical. L ove is dis positio n, behavior, attitude, thoughts, likes , 
dislikes- these things  make a beautiful wom an, a beautiful wife. This is the beauty that never 
fades. You find in your W estern civ ilizatio n that whe n a m an's wife's physical  beauty fails, s he 
loses her a ttraction. But Isla m teaches u s to look into the woma n, and teaches her to look into us.
 
Betty does this, so she understa nds m e. I would even s ay I don't imagine many other wome n 
might p ut up with the way I am. Awakening this brainwashe d black ma n and telling this arrogant , 
devilish white man the truth about himsel f, Betty understa nds, is a  full-time job. If I have work  to 
do when I am home, the little ti me I am at home, she lets m e have th e quiet I need to work  in. I'm 
rarely at home more than half of any week; I  have b een away  as mu ch as five m onths. I never get 
much chance t o take her a nywhere, a nd I know she likes to be with her husband. She is u sed to 
my calling  her from airp orts a nywhere fr om Boston to San Francisco, or Miami t o Seattle, or, here 
lately, cabling  her from Cairo, Accra, o r the Holy  City of Mecc a. Once on the long-dista nce 
telephone, Betty told me in beautiful phrasing  the way she thinks . She said, "Y ou ar e presen t 
when you ar e away ."
 
Later that year, after B etty and I were marrie d, I exhaus ted myself  trying to be everywhere a t 
once, tryin g to help the Natio n to keep gro wing. Gu est-te aching at the Temple in Boston, I ended, 
as always, "Who among you wi sh to _follow_ The Hon orabl e Elijah M uhammad?" And then I saw, 
in utter a stonishment, that among t hose who were  standing was  my sister-_Ella!_ We have a 
saying th at those who ar e the hardest to convince ma ke the best Muslims . And for Ell a it h ad 
taken five years.
 
I mentioned, you w ill remember, how in a big city, a sizable organization can remain pr actically 
unknown, u nless s omething happens that brings  it to the gen eral pu blic's at tention . Well, cert ainly 
no one in the Nati on of Islam h ad any a nticipa tion of the kind of thing t hat would happen in 
Harlem one night .
 
Two white police men, breaking u p a street sc uffle betwee n some N egroes, or dered other Negro 
passers- by to  "Move o n!" Of these byst anders, two ha ppened to be Musli m bro ther J ohnson 
Hinto n and another brother o f Temple Seven . They did n't sc atter and run the wa y the white co ps 
wante d. Bro ther Hinton was attacked with nigh tsticks. His scalp was split open, and a police car 
came a nd he was taken to a nearby precinct .
 
The second brother telephoned our restaurant . And with some telephone calls,in less t han half an 
hour ab out fifty of Temple S even's m en of the Fruit o f Islam were st anding in ranks-f ormation 
outside the police preci nct h ouse.
 
Other Negroes, curious, came ru nning, a nd gath ered in excitem ent behind the Muslims . The 
police , coming to the station house front door, and looking ou t of the windows,  couldn't believe 
what th ey saw. I went i n, as the minister o f Temple Seven , and demanded to see our bro ther. The 
police first said he wasn't th ere. Then they admitted he was, bu t said I couldn't s ee him. I said that 
until he was seen, and we were  sure h e received pro per m edical attention , the Muslims would 
remain where t hey were.
 
They were nervous and scared of the gath ering  crowd o utsid e. W hen I saw our Br other Hinto n, it 
was all I could d o to contain mysel f. He was  only semi-co nscious . Blood had bathed his he ad and 
face and shoulders. I hope I never again h ave to  withstand seeing another cas e of sheer p olice 
brutality like t hat.
 I told the lieutenant in charge, "That man belongs in the hospital." They c alled a n ambulance. 
When it came and Brother Hinto n was  taken to Harle m Hos pital, we Muslims f ollowed, in loose 
formatio ns, for about fifteen blocks al ong Lenox Avenue, probably  the busiest t horoughfare in 
Harlem . Negroes who n ever had seen anything  like this were c oming o ut of stores a nd 
resta urants an d bars a nd enlarging the cro wd follow ing us .
 
The crowd was big, a nd angry, behind the Muslims in front of Harlem Hospit al. Harlem's black 
people we re long since sick and tire d of police brutality. And they never h ad seen any 
organization o f black m en take a firm stand as we were.
 
A high p olice o fficial came u p to me, sayin g "Get those people out of there." I told him that our 
brothers were st anding peacefully, disciplin ed perfectly, and harming no  one. He told m e those 
others, b ehind them, weren' t disciplin ed. Ipolitely told him  those others we re his pr oblem.
 
When doctors a ssure d us that Br other Hinto n was  receiving the best of care, I gave the order a nd 
the Muslims slip ped away . The other Negroes' m ood was  ugly, but they disp ersed also, when we 
left. We wouldn' t learn until later t hat a steel plate would h ave to  be put into Br other Hinto n's skull. 
(After that operation, the Na tion o f Islam helped him to sue; a jury award ed him over $70, 000, 
the largest p olice br utality  judgme nt that New  York Cit y has ever  paid. )
 
For New  York Cit y's millions o f readers of the downt own p apers, it was, a t that time, another one 
of the peri odic "R acial Unrest in Harle m" stories. I t was  not played up, because o f what had 
happened. But the police d epartment, to be sure , pull ed out and carefully studied the files on the 
Natio n of Islam, and appraise d us with new eyes. Most i mport ant, in Harle m, the world's m ost 
heavily populated black ghet to, the _Amsterdam News_ ma de the whole s tory headline n ews, 
and for the first ti me the black man, woman, and child in t he stree ts we re discussing " those 
Muslims. "
 
 
 
CHAPT ER FOUR TEEN
BLACK MUSL IMS
 
In the spring o f nineteen fifty-nine-some months b efore Br other Johnson Hint on's c ase h ad 
awaken ed the Harlem black gh etto to us-a N egro journalist, Louis Lo max, t hen living in New  York, 
asked m e one morning wheth er our N ation of Islam  would co operate in being filmed as a 
television d ocumentary program f or the Mike W allace Show, which featured controversial 
subjects. I  told Lomax that, naturally, anything like that would h ave to  be referred to The 
Honorable Elijah Mu hammad. And Lomax did fly to  Chicago t o consult Mr. Muhammad. After 
questio ning Lomax, t hen cautioning him ag ainst s ome thingshe di d not desire, Mr. Muh ammad 
gave his consen t.
 
Cam eram en bega n filming Na tion o f Islam scen es ar ound our mo sques in New York, Chicago, 
and Washington, D. C. S ound rec ordings we re made of Mr. Muh ammad and some ministers, 
includi ng me, teaching bl ack au diences t he truths about the brainwashe d black ma n and the devil 
white man.
 
At Boston Universit y aro und the same tim e, C. Eric Lincoln, a  Negro sch olar th en working  for his 
doctora te, had selected for his thesis su bject t he Natio n of Islam. Lincoln's int erest h ad been 
aroused the previous year when , teaching at Clark College in Atlanta, Georgia, h e rec eived from 
one of his Religion s tudents a term paper whose introductio n I can now quote from Lincoln's 
book. It was th e plainsp oken convictions of one of Atlanta's n umerous young black collegians who 
often visited our local Temple Fifteen.
 
"The Christia n reli gion is incompatible with the N egro's a spiratio ns for dignit y and equality  in 
America, " the student had written. "It has hindered where it migh t have h elped; it has been evasi ve when it was  morally  bound to be forthright; it has separat ed believers  on the basis o f 
color , although it has declare d its missi on to be a universal br otherhood under Jes us Christ. 
Christian l ove is t he white man's love f or hims elf and for his race. For th e man who is no t white, 
Islam is th e hope for justice and equ ality in t he world we  must build t omorrow."
 
After so me prelimin ary research sh owed Professor Li ncoln what a subjec t he had hold of, he had 
been able to obtain several  grants, a nd a publisher's en couragem ent to exp and his t hesis i nto a 
book.
 
On the wire of our relativel y small Na tion, these two big d evelopments-a television s how, and a 
book about us-naturally  were big news. Every Muslim happily anticip ated that now, through t he 
white man's p owerf ul co mmunica tions media, o ur brainwash ed black br others an d sist ers across 
the Unit ed States, a nd devils, to o, were going to see, hear, and read Mr. Muh ammad's teachings 
which cut back a nd forth like a  two- edged sword.
 
We had made our own ver y limite d efforts to employ the power o f print. First, s ome tim e back, I 
had made an appointment to see editor James Hicks o f the _Amsterd am News_, publishe d in 
Harlem . Editor Hicks  said h e felt every  voice in the community  deserved to be heard. Soon, each 
week's  _Amsterdam News_  carried a  little c olum n that I wrote. Then, Mr. Muhammad agre ed to 
write a column for that valuable _Amsterdam New s_ spac e, and my column was tra nsferred to 
another bl ack newspa per, the Los Angel es _Heral d Dispatc h_.
 
But I kept wanting  to start, somehow, our own newspa per, that would b e filled with Natio n of Islam 
news.
 
Mr. Muhammad in 1957 sent me to organize a Temple in Los Angeles. W hen I had done that, 
being in that city  where the _H erald Dispa tch_ was,  I went vis iting a nd I worked in their office; 
they let me observe  how a newspap er was put toget her. I've  always  been blesse d in t hat if I can 
once watch s omething being d one, gen erally I can catch onto how to do it myself . Quick "picki ng 
up" was pro bably the number one survival rule when I'd been out there i n the streets a s a hustler.
 
Back in New  York, I  bought a  secondhand camera. I don't know how ma ny rolls of film I shot until 
I could t ake usable p ictures . Ever y chance I had, I wrote s ome little n ews about interes ting Nation 
of Islam ha ppenings. O ne day ever y month, I'd lock up in a room and asse mble my  material a nd 
pictures f or a printer th at I found. I named the newspa per _M uhammad Speaks _ and Muslim 
brothers s old it o n the ghett o sid ewalks. Li ttle d id I dream that later on , when jealo usy set in 
among t he hierarchy , nothing about me would b e prin ted in t he paper I had founded. 
Anyway, national pu blicity was  in the offing for the Natio n of Islam when Mr . Muh ammad sent me 
on a three-week trip to Africa. Even a s small as we then we re, some o f the African and Asian 
personages had sent Mr . Muhammad private word th at they liked his efforts to awake n and lift up 
the American b lack p eople. Sometimes , the messages had been sent through me. As Mr . 
Muhammad's em issary , I went t o Egypt, Arabi a, to the Sudan, to Nigeria, a nd Ghana.
 
You wi ll often hear today a lot of the Negro le aders c omplaining th at what thrust the Musli ms int o 
internatio nal pr ominenc e was  the white ma n's press, radio, television, a nd other m edia. I have no 
shred of argum ent with that. They are absolutely correct. Why, none of us in the Natio n of Islam 
remotely  anticip ated what was a bout to happen.
 
*     *     *
 
In late 1959, the television program was aire d. "The Hate That Hat e Pro duced"-the title-was 
edited tightl y into a k aleid oscop e of "shock er" images . . . Mr. Muh ammad, me, and others 
speaking . .  . strong- looking, set-f aced black men, our Fruit of Islam  . . . white-scarved, white-
gowned Muslim sist ers of all ages. . . Muslims in o ur rest aurants, and other businesses . . . 
Muslims a nd other bl ack pe ople entering an d leaving our mosques . . . .
 Every phrase was  edited to increas e the shock m ood. As the pro ducers intended, I think p eople 
sat just a bout limp when the progra m went o ff.
 
In a way , the public reac tion was like what h appened back in the 1930's when Orso n Welles 
fright ened America with a radio p rogram d escribing, as though it was actually happening, an 
invasion by "m en from Mars. "
 
No o ne now jumped from any window s, but in New  York City  there was aninst ant avalanc he of 
public reacti on. It's my p erson al opi nion that the "Hate . . . Hate . . ." title was prim arily 
responsible for the reactio n. Hundre ds of thousan ds of New  Yorkers, bl ack a nd white, were 
exclaiming  "Did you h ear it? Did you s ee it? Pr eachi ng _hate_ of white people!"
 
Here was on e of the white man's m ost characteristic be havior  patterns-where bl ack m en are 
concerne d. He loves  hims elf so mu ch that he is st artled if he discovers th at his victims don't share 
his vaing lorious sel f-opinion. In Americ a for centuries it h ad been just f ine as long as the 
victimized, br utalized an d expl oited black people had been grinning and begging and "Yessa, 
Massa " and Uncle Tomming. But now , things were  different. First  came the white newspa pers-
feature writers  and colum nists: " Alarming" . .  ."hate-me ssengers" . .  ."threat to the good r elatio ns 
between the races " . . ."black s egregati onists" . . ."black s upremacists, " and the like.
 
And the newspap ers' ink wasn't dry  before the big national weekl y news magazines st arted: 
"Hate-teachers" . . ."violence-se ekers" .  . ."black racists " . . ."black f ascists " . . ."anti-Christian " . . . 
"possibly  Communist-ins pired . . . ."
 
It rolled o ut of the press es of the biggest d evil in the history  of mankind. And then the aroused 
white man made his next m ove.
 
Since slaver y, the America n wh ite ma n has always  kept some h andpick ed Negroes who fared 
much better than the black ma sses suffering and slaving ou t in the hot fields. The white m an had 
these " house" and "yard" Negroes for his sp ecial servants. He threw them mo re cru mbs from his 
rich ta ble, he even le t them eat in his kitch en. He knew that he could alwa ys co unt on them to 
keep "g ood massa" happy in his self-image o f being so "good" and "right eous ." "Good massa" 
always  heard just what he  wante d to hear from these "house" and "yard" bl acks. "Y ou're s uch a 
good , _fine_ ma ssa!" Or, "Oh, massa, those o ld black nigger  fieldhands ou t there, they're h appy 
just like they are ; why, massa, they'renot intelligent e nough f or you to try and do any better for 
them, massa-"
 
Well, slavery time's " house" and "yard" Negroes ha d become mo re sophistic ated, that was  all. 
When now th e white m an picke d up his telephone and dialed his "house" and "yard" Negroes-
why, he didn't eve n need to instruc t the trained black puppets. They had seen the television 
program ; had read the newspa pers. They were alre ady composing th eir lines. They knew what to 
do.
 
I'm not going  to call any na mes. But if you ma ke a list o f the biggest Negro "l eaders, " so-calle d, in 
1960, then you've named the ones who b egan to attack u s "field" Negroes who were so unding 
_insane_, talking  that way  about "good m assa."
 
"By no  means do these Muslims re prese nt the N egro masses-" That was th e first worr y, to 
reass ure "go od m assa" that he had no reas on to be concerned about his f ieldhands in t he 
ghett oes. "An irresp onsible hate cult" . . ."an unfortunate Negro im age, just when the raci al pictur e 
is improving-"
 
They were stumbling  over each other to get quoted. "A deplor able reverse-racism " . . ."Ridiculous 
pretenders t o the ancient Isl amic d octrin e" . . ."Here tic anti-Christianity- '
 
The telephone in o ur then sm all Temple Seven rest aurant nearly  jumped off the wall. I had a receiver  against my e ar five hours a d ay. I was listening, an d jotting in my n otebook, a s press, 
radio , and televis ion people calle d, all o f them wanting t he Musli m reac tion t o the quoted attacks 
of these b lack "l eaders. " Or I was o n long-distance to Mr. Muh ammad in Chicago, re ading fr om 
my notebook and aski ng for Mr. Muhammad's ins tructio ns.
 
I couldn't understan d how Mr . Muhammad could ma intain his calm and patience, hearing  the 
things I told him . I could scarcely  contain mysel f. 
My unlist ed home telephone number somehow got o ut. My wife Betty put down th e phone after 
taking one message, a nd it was ring ing again . It seemed that wherever I went , telephones were 
ringing.
 
The calls na turally  were direct ed to me, New  York Cit y bei ng the major news- media headquarters, 
and I was the New York minist er of Mr. Muh ammad. Calls c ame, long-distance from San 
Francisco to Maine .  . . from even London, Stockhol m, Paris. I would see a Musli m bro ther a t our 
resta urant, or B etty at home, trying to  keep cool; t hey'd h and me the receive r, and I couldn' t 
believe it, either. One funny thing-in all t hat hectic peri od, s omething quickly  struck my notice: the 
Europeans n ever press ed the "hate" qu estion . Only  the Americ an white m an was so pl agued and 
obsesse d with being "hated." He was  so guilty , it was  clear t o me, of hating Negroes.
 
"Mr. Malcolm X, wh y do you te ach black s upremacy , and hate?" A red flag wa ved f or me, 
something chemical h appened insid e me , every  time I heard that. When we Muslims h ad talked 
about "the devil white m an" he had been rela tively abstract, someone we Muslims rarely act ually 
came into c ontact with, b ut now here was  that devil- in-the-flesh on the phone-w ith all of his 
calcula ting, cold-eyed , self-righteous tricks an d nerve and gall. The voices questio ning me 
became to me as breathing,  living devils.
 
And I tried t o pour o n pure fire in r eturn . "The white m an so guilty of white s upremacy  can't hide 
_his_ guilt by  tryin g to accuse The Honorable Elija h Mu hammad of teaching black s upremacy  and 
hate! All Mr . Muha mmad is doing is tryin g to uplift the black m an's me ntality and the black man's 
social a nd economic co nditio n in this c ountry.
 
"The guilty , two-faced white man can't decide what he wants. O ur slave foreparents would h ave 
been put to death for advoca ting so-called 'integratio n'with t he white m an. Now when Mr . 
Muhammad speaks o f 'separation ,' the white m an calls us 'hate-teachers' and 'fascists'!
 
"The white m an doesn't _want _ the blacks! H e doesn't _want _ the blacks t hat are a  parasite upon 
him! He d oesn't _wa nt_ this bl ack ma n whose presenc e and condition in this country  expose t he 
white man to the world f or what he is! S o wh y do you at tack Mr . Muh ammad?"
 
I'd have _ scathing_ in my voice; I  _felt_ it.
 
"For the white ma n to ask the black m an if he hates hi m is just like th e rapist asking t he _raped_, 
or the wolf  asking the _sheep_, 'Do you ha te me?' The white m an is in n o moral _ position _ to 
accuse a nyone else o f hate!
 
"Why, when all of my ancestors ar e snake-bit ten, and I'm snak e-bitten, a nd I warn my childre n to 
avoid sn akes , what d oes that snake sound like accusing  _me_ of hate-teaching? "
 
"Mr. Malcolm X," those d evils would a sk, "why  is your Fruit o f Islam b eing trai ned in judo and 
karat e?" An image o f black m en learni ng anything  suggesting self-defense seemed to terrify  the 
white man. I'd turn their ques tion around: "Why does ju do or karat e suddenly get so ominous 
becaus e black me n study it? Across America , the Boy Scouts, the YMCA, even t he YWCA, the 
CYP, PAL-they _all_ te ach judo! It's all ri ght, it's
 
fine-until _ black m en_ teach it! Even little gra mmar school classes , little gir ls, ar e taught t o defend 
themselves-" 
"How  many of you ar e in your organization , Mr. Malc olm X? Right Reverend Bishop T. 
Chickenwin g says you have only a handful of members-"
 "Whoever tells you h ow many Muslims t here are d oesn't k now, and whoever d oes know will 
never tell you-"
 
The Bishop Chick enwings we re also o ften quoted about our "a nti-Christianity ." I'd fire right back 
on that:
 
"Christia nity is th e white m an's reli gion. The Holy Bibl e in t he white man's h ands and his 
interpreta tions o f it have b een the grea test single ideological weap on for enslav ing millions of 
non-white human beings. Ever y country  the white man has conquere d with  his guns , he has 
always  paved t he way, and salved his c onscie nce, by carrying the Bible a nd interpreting  it to call 
the people 'h eathens' an d 'pagans' ; then he sends his guns, t hen his mission aries be hind the 
guns t o mop up-"
 
White report ers, ang er in their voices, would call u s "demagogues, " and I would try  to be ready 
after I h ad been asked the same qu estion two or thr ee times.
 
"Well, let's go ba ck to  the Gre ek, a nd mayb e you wi ll learn t he first thing you n eed to know about 
the word  'demagogu e.' 'De magogue' m eans, actually, 'teacher o f the people.' And let's exa mine 
some d emagogues . The greatest of all Gre eks, S ocrat es, was  killed as a 'demagogue.' Jesus 
Christ die d on the cr oss be caus e the Pharise es of His day we re upholdi ng their law , not the spirit. 
The modern Pharisees are try ing to heap destructio n upon Mr. Muhammad, calling  him a 
demagogu e, a crackp ot, and fanatic. W hat about Gandhi? The man that Churchill  called 'a naked 
little f akir,' refusing food in a British jail? B ut then a quart er of a billion people, a whole 
subcon tinent, rallie d behind Ga ndhi-and they twisted the British lion's tail! W hat about Galileo, 
standing b efore his inquisitors, saying 'T he earth _does_ move!' W hat about Martin Lu ther, nailing 
on a door his thesis agai nst the all-power ful Catholic church which c alled h im 'heretic' ? We, the 
followers  of The Ho norable Elija h Muh ammad, are today inthe gh ettoes as once the sect of 
Christianity's  followers were like ter mites in the catacombs and the grottoes-and they were 
preparing  the grave o f the m ighty Roman Em pire!"
 
I can re member those h ot telephone sessi ons with th ose report ers as if it were yesterday . The 
reporters we re angry. I was angry. When I'd reach i nto history , they'd try to pull m e back to the 
present. They would quit int erviewing,  quit their work, tr ying to defend their pers onal white devil 
selves. They would un earth Lincoln and his f reeing o f the slaves. I 'd tell them things Li ncoln said 
in speec hes, _agai nst_ t he blacks . They would drag u p the 1954 Supreme Court decisio n on 
school int egration.
 
"That was o ne of the greatest magical f eats ever per formed in America ," I'd tell them. "Do you 
mean to tell m e that nine Supreme Court j udges, who ar e past m asters o f legal phr aseology, 
couldn't have worked t heir de cision t o make it stick a s _law_? No! I t was  tricker y and magic that 
told Negroes t hey were d esegregate d-Hooray!  Hooray!- and at the same ti me it told whites 'Here 
are your lo opholes.' "
 
The reporters would try  their ut most to raise some "good" white m an whom I  couldn't refute as 
such. I'll never f orget how on e practically  lost his voice. He asked m e did I feel _any_ wh ite me n 
had ever d one anythi ng for the black m an in America. I  told him, "Y es, I can think of two. Hitler, 
and Stalin. The black m an in America c ouldn't get a  decent factory job u ntil Hitler p ut so much 
press ure on  the white m an. And men Stalin ke pt up the press ure-'
 
But I don't care what p oints I made in the interviews, it pr actically  never got printed the way I said 
it. I was learning un der fire how the press, when it wants to , can twist, an d slant. If I had said 
"Mary  had a little lam b," what pr obably would h ave appeared was "M alcolm X La mpoons Mary ."
 Even s o, my bit terness was  less against the white pr ess th an it was  against t hose Negro "leaders" who ke pt attacking  us. Mr . Muh ammad sai d he wante d us to try our b est not to publicly 
counterattack th e black "l eaders" b ecause one of the white m an's tricks was  keeping the black 
race d ivided and fighting against e ach other. Mr. Muhammad said that this had tradition ally kept 
the black pe ople from achiev ing the unity which was th e worst  need of the black race i n America .
 
But inst ead of abating, t he black puppets c ontin ued ripping an d tearing a t Mr. Muhammad and the 
Natio n of Islam-un til it bega n to appear as though we  were afraid to speak ou t against t hese 
"important" Negroes. That's when Mr . Muhammad's patienc e wo re thin. And with his no d, I began 
returning their f ire.
 
"Today's  Uncle Tom doesn't wear a handkerchie f on his h ead. This m odern, twentieth-cen tury 
Uncle Thomas now often wears a t op hat. He's usually well-dresse d and well -educated. He's 
often the personi fication of culture and refinement. The twenti eth-ce ntury  Uncl e Thomas 
sometimes s peaks W ith a Yale or Harvard a ccen t. Sometimes h e is k nown  as Pr ofessor, Doctor , 
Judge, and Reverend, eve n Right Reverend Doctor. This twen tieth-c entury Uncle Thomas is a 
_professio nal_ Negro . . . by th at I mean his pr ofession is b eing a Negro for the white man."
 
Never b efore in America h ad these hand-pick ed so-called " leaders" been publicly blasted in this 
way. They reac ted to the trut h about themselves even m ore hotly than the devilish wh ite ma n. 
Now their "ins titutional" indict ments o f us beg an. Instead of "leaders" s peaki ng as themselves, f or 
themselves, now their weighty name organizations a ttacke d Mr. Muhammad.
 
"Black bo dies with white h eads!" I called t hem what t hey we re. Every one of those "Negro 
progress" o rganizatio ns had the same compositi on. B lack "l eaders"were ou t in the public eye-to 
be seen by th e Negroes for who m they were su ppos ed to be fighting the white ma n. But 
obscurely , behind the scenes , was  a white b oss-a pr eside nt, or bo ard c hairm an, or so me other 
title, pulling th e real strings.
 
It was h ot, hot copy, both in the white a nd the black press . _Life_, _Look_, _News week_ and 
_Time_ re porte d us. Some newspaper c hains bega n to run not one story, but a series o f three, 
four, or five "expos ures" of the Nati on of Islam. The _Reader's Digest_ with its wor ldwide 
circulatio n of twenty-four million c opies in thirt een langu ages  carried a n article title d "Mr . 
Muhammad Speaks ," by t he wr iter to who m I a m telling  this b ook; and that led off other m ajor 
monthly mag azines' c overage o f us.
 
*     *     *
 
Before very  long, ra dio a nd television p eople b egan asking me  to defend our N ation of Islam in 
panel d iscussio ns an d debates. I was to be confronted by ha nd-pick ed sc holars b oth whites a nd 
some o f those Ph.D. " house" and "yard" N egroes who ha d been attacking  us. Every  day, I was 
more inc ense d with  the gen eral misre prese ntation and distortion o f Mr. Muhammad's teachings; I 
truly think t hat not once did it cross my mi nd that previousl y I never had been _inside _ a radio or 
television st ation-let alone faced a micr ophone to audiences o f millions of people. Priso n debating 
had been my on ly experienc e speaki ng to anyone but Muslims.
 
From the old hustling  days I knew that there we re tricks  to everything. In the priso n debating, I 
had learned tricks to  upset my opponents, to catch them where t hey didn't expec t to be caught. I 
knew there were bo und to be tricks I didn't kn ow anythi ng about arguing on the air.
 
I knew that if I closely  studied what t he others di d, I could lear n things in ahurry to help me to 
defend Mr. Muhammad and his teachings.
 
I'd walk int o those studios. The devils an d black P h.D. puppets would b e acting so friendly  and 
"integrate d" with ea ch other-laughing  and calling ea ch other by first names, and all that; it was 
such a b ig lie it made me sick in my s tomach. They would even b e trying to act friendly toward 
me-we all k nowing they had aske d me there to try and beat out my br ains. They would o ffer me coffee. I would t ell th em "No, thanks ," to please just tell m e where was I supposed to sit. 
Sometimes the micro phone sat on the table before you , at other ti mes a  smaller , cylindrical 
micro phone was h ung on  a cord a round your n eck. From t he start, I like d those microp hones 
better; I didn't have t o keep cons tantly aware o f my dista nce f rom a microp hone on the table.
 
The program hosts would st art w ith some kin d of dice-lo ading, n on-relig ious intro duction f or me. It 
would be  something like
 
-and we have wi th us today the fiery, angry chief Malcolm X o f the New  York Muslims . . . ." I made 
up my own introductio n. At home, or driv ing my car , I practice d until I c ould interru pt a radio or 
television h ost and intr oduc e mysel f.
 
"I repres ent Mr. Elijah Muhammad, the spiritual h ead of the fastest-grow ing group of Muslims in 
the Western He misph ere. W e who f ollow him know that he has been divinely taught a nd sent to 
us by G od Hims elf. We believe t hat the mis erable plight of America's twenty millio n black people 
is the fulfillment of divine pro phecy. We also believe t he pr esence t oday in America o f The 
Honorable Elijah Mu hammad, his teachings  among th e so-called N egroes , and his na ked wa rning 
to America conc erning  her tr eatment of these so-c alled Negroes, is all th e fulfillment of divine 
prophecy . I am privileged t o be the minister o f our
 
Temple Num ber S even her e in New York City which is a  part of the Na tion o fIslam, under the 
divine lea dership of The Honorable Elija h Mu hammad-"
 
I would l ook ar ound at those devils  and their train ed black p arrots s taring  at me, while I was 
catching my breath-an d I had set my to ne.
 
They would ou tdo each other, leaping in on  me, hammering  at Mr. Muhammad, at me, and at the 
Natio n of Islam. Those "integration "-mad Negroes-you kn ow what t hey jumped on. _Why_ 
couldn't Muslims _s ee_ that "integration" was  the answer to  America n Negroes' pr oblems? I'd try 
to rip that to pieces.
 
"No _sane_ black ma n really wants int egration! No _s ane_ white m an really  wants i ntegratio n! No 
sane bl ack m an really  believes t hat the white m an ever w ill give the black m an anything more 
than token in tegration . No! The Ho norable Elija h Muh ammad teaches t hat for the black man in 
America t he only solutio n is co mplete _ separati on_ from the white m an!"
 
Anyon e who ha s ever he ard m e on radio or television programs k nows  that my tec hnique is non-
stop, until what I  want t o get s aid is s aid. I  was developing t he technique t hen.
 
"The Ho norable Elija h Muh ammad teaches us that since W estern societ y is d eteriorating, it h as 
become overrun with im morality, and God is going  to judge it , and destroy  it. And the only way the 
black people caugh t up in this soci ety can be saved is no t to _integrate _ into this corrup t soci ety, 
but to _separate _ from it, to a land of our _own_, where we ca n reform ourselves, lif t up our moral 
standards, a nd try to be godly . The Western world's mo st learne d diplom ats h ave f ailed to solve 
this gra ve race pr oblem. Her learn ed legal exp erts have failed. Her s ociologists  have f ailed. Her 
civil leaders have f ailed. Her fr aternal le aders have f ailed. Since all o f these have _ failed_ to 
solve  this rac e problem, it is ti me for us to sit d own and _reaso n!_ I am certain that we  will be 
forced to agree that it t akes _G od Himsel f_ to solve  this gra ve racial dilemma." 
Every time I mentioned "separation," some of them would cr y that we Muslims were st anding for 
the same thing that white racists a nd demagogu es sto od for. I would explain t he difference. "No ! 
We reject _segregatio n_ eve n mo re militantly  than you s ay you do ! We want _separation_, which 
is not the same! The Honorable Elijah Muhammad teaches us that _segre gation_ is when your 
life and libert y are controlled , regulat ed, _by someone else_. To _segregate _ means to control. 
Segregatio n is th at which is f orced upon inferiors by su periors. B ut _separatio n_ is that which is 
done voluntarily , by two equ als-for the goo d of both! The Honorable E lijah Mu hammad teaches u s 
that as long as our people here in America ar e dependent upon the white m an, we will alwa ys be beggin g him for jobs , food, clothing, an d housing.  And he will alwa ys co ntrol our lives, regula te 
our lives, an d have t he power  to segregat e us. The Negro  here in America h as been treated like a 
child. A child stays  within t he mother until the tim e of birth! W hen the time of birth arrives, th e child 
must be separate d, or it will _destroy_ its mother and itself. The mother ca n't carry that child a fter 
its tim e. The child cries f or and needs its own wor ld!"
 
Anyon e who ha s liste ned to me will have to  agree t hat I believed i n Elijah M uhammad and 
repres ented him one hundred per cent. I never tried to take a ny credit f or myself .
 
I was never in o ne of those panel disc ussions without some of them just waiting  their chance t o 
accuse m e of "inciting Negroes t o violence ." I didn't eve n have t o do any speci al studying to 
prepare f or that one.
 
"The great est m iracle Christia nity has achieved in America is t hat the black m an in white Christia n 
hands has not grown violent. It _is_ a  miracl e that 22 million bl ack pe ople have not _rise n up_ 
against their oppressors- in wh ich they would h ave been justified by all moral criteria, a nd even by 
the democratic tr aditio n! It is a miracle t hat a nation of black p eople h as so fervently  continued to 
believe in a turn-th e-other-cheek an d heaven-f or-you-a fter-you-die philos ophy! It _is a  miracle _ 
that the America n black pe ople have r emained a p eaceful people, whi le catching all the centuries 
of hell t hat they have caught, here in white man's h eaven ! The _miracle_ is t hat the white m an's 
puppet Negro 'le aders,' his pr each ers and the educated Negroes lad en with degrees, a nd others 
who have b een allowed to wax  fat off their bl ack po or brothers, have b een able to hold the black 
masses quie t until now."
 
I guar antee you o ne thing-ever y time I was mixed up in those stu dios with th ose brainwashe d, 
"integration "-ma d black p uppets, and those tricky  devils trying to rip a nd tear me  down, as long as 
the little r ed light glo wed "on the air," I trie d to represen t Elijah Muhammad and the Natio n of 
Islam to the utmost.
 
Dr. C. Eric L incoln's book was pu blishe d amid wideni ng controvers y about us Muslims, a t just 
about the time we were  starting t o put on our first b ig mass r allies.
 
Just as the television "H ate That Hate Pro duced" title h ad projected that "hate-teaching" im age o f 
us, now Dr. Lincoln's b ook was  titled _The Black Muslims in America _. The press snatched at that 
name. "Black Muslims " was in all t he book revie ws, which  quoted from the book only what was 
critical  of us, and generally praised Dr. Lincoln's wr iting.
 
The public mind fixed o n "Black Muslims. " From Mr. Muhammad on down, th e name "Black 
Muslims" distress ed everyone in the Nati on of Islam. I tried for at least two years t o kill off that 
"Black Muslims. " Every  newspa per a nd magazine wr iter a nd micro phone I got cl ose t o: "_No!_ 
We are black _ people_ here in Americ a. Our _relig ion_ is I slam . We are pro perly  calle d 
'Muslims'!" But that "Black Muslims" name never got disl odged .Our m ass rallies, from their very 
begin ning,  were a stounding success es. W here once Detroit's str uggling little Temple One pr oudly 
sent a ten-automobile caravan t o Chicago to hear Mr. Muh ammad, now, from East Coast 
Temples-th e older Temples as well as the new ones that all of the massive  publicity had helped 
us to bring into being- as many as 150, 200 and even as m any as 300 big, c harter ed buses rolled 
the highwa ys to wherever M r. Muhammad was going  to speak. O n each bus, two Fruit o f Islam 
men were in c harge. Big t hree-by -nine-foot painted canvas b anners h ung o n the buses' sides , to 
be read by the highwa y traffic and thousands of people at home and on the sidewalks  of the 
towns th e buses pa ssed through.
 
Hundreds m ore Muslims a nd curious Negroes drove t heir own cars. And Mr . Muh ammad with his 
personal j et plane from Chicago. From t he airport to the rall y hall, Mr. Muh ammad's mo torcade 
had a siren-screa ming  police escort. Law age ncies o nce had sco ffed at our Natio n as " black 
crackp ots"; now th ey took speci al pains to safeguard ag ainst s ome "white cr ackpo ts" causing a ny 
"incidents" or "accide nts." 
America h ad never se en such f antastic a ll-black me etings! To hear Elija h Muh ammad, up to ten 
thousand and more black p eople p oured from public and private tr ansporta tion t o over flow the big 
halls we ren ted, suc h as the St. Nichol as Arena in New  York City , Chicago's Colise um, and 
Washingto n, D.C. 's Uline Arena.
 
The white man was barr ed from attendanc e-the first time the America n black man had ever 
dreamed of such a  thing. And that brought u s new attacks from the white m an and his black 
puppets. "Black segregationists . . . racists! " Accusi ng us of segregation ! Across Americ a, whites 
barring  blacks was st andard.
 
Many  hundreds arri ved too late for us to seat them. We always  had to wire up  outsid e 
loudspeakers. An electric  atmosphere excited t he great, shifting ma ssesof black p eople. The long 
lines, three and four abreast, funneling t o the meeting hall, were k ept in strict or der by  Fruit o f 
Islam me n communicati ng by walk ie-talkie . In anterooms just inside t he halls, more Fruit o f Islam 
men and white-gowned , veiled ma ture Muslim sist ers thoroughly  searche d every  man, woma n, 
and child se eking  to enter. Any alcohol a nd tobacc o had to be check ed, and any objects wh ich 
could po ssibly be used to attempt to harm Mr. Muh ammad. He always  seemed deathly afraid that 
some o ne would h arm h im, and he insist ed that everyone b e search ed to forestall this. Today I 
underst and better, why .
 
The hundreds of Fruit o f Islam m en represe nted contingen ts wh ich had arrived early  that 
morning, fr om their Temples i n the nearest cities. Some were detailed a s ushers, who seated the 
people by designa ted sectio ns. The balconies a nd the rear h alf of the main floor we re filled with 
black people of the gen eral public. Ahead of them were t he all-Muslim s eating sectio ns-the white-
garbed beautiful black sisters, a nd the dark-suited, white-shirte d bro thers. A special s ection near 
the front was f or black s o-called " dignitaries. " Many of these had been inv ited. Among them were 
our b lack p uppet and parrot a ttackers, t he intellectu als and professio nal Negroes over who m Mr. 
Muhammad grieved s o mu ch, for these were th e educated ones who should h ave be en foremost 
in leading th eir poor black brothers o ut of the maze o f misery  and want. We want ed them to miss 
not a single  syllable o f the truths from Mr. Muhammad in person .
 
The front two or t hree press rows  were filled with the black report ers and cameram en 
repres enting the Negro press, o r those who had been hire d by the wh ite ma n's n ewspap ers, 
magazines, radio , and television. America's black writers  should h old a banqu et for Mr. 
Muhammad. Writing a bout the Natio n of Islam was  the path to success for most of the black 
writers  who now are rec ognized.
 Up o n the speaker's pl atform, we mi nisters an d other officials of the Natio n, entering  from 
backstage, found ourselves c hairs  in the five or six  rows be hind the big c hair reserved f or Mr. 
Muhammad. Some of the m inisters had come hundreds of miles to be present. We would b e 
turning about in our chairs, b eaming wi th smiles, wringing each other's hands, and exch angin g 
"As-Salaam-Alaiku m" and "Wa-Alaikum-S alaam" in o ur gen uine deep rejoicing  to see each other 
again.
 
 
Always,  meeting u s old er hands in Mr . Muhammad's s ervice f or the first time, there were  several 
new minist ers o f small new Temples. My  brothers W ilfred and Philbert were res pectively now th e 
minist ers o f the Detr oit an d Lansing Temples. Minist er Jeremi ah X he aded Atlanta's Temple. 
Minister Jo hn X ha d Los Angeles' Temple. The Messe nger's s on, Minister Wallace Mu hammad, 
had the Phila delphia Temple. Minister W oodrow X had the Atlantic City  Temple. Some of our 
minist ers ha d unusual b ackgrou nds. The Washington, D.C., Temple Minister L ucius X was 
previousl y a Sevent h Day  Adventist a nd a 32nd degree Mas on. Minister Ge orge X of the 
Cam den, New  Jersey , Temple was a pathologist. Minister David  X was previousl y the minister o f 
a Rich mond, Virginia, C hristian c hurch; he and enough o f his c ongre gation h ad become M uslims 
so that the congregation split an d the majority turned the church in to our Rich mond Temple. The 
Boston Temple's o utstanding young  Minister Lo uis X, previously  a well-known  and rising  popular singer  called "The Ch armer ," had written our Natio n's po pular first song, titled "White Man's 
Heaven is B lack Mali's Hell." Minister Lo uis X  had als o authored our first p lay, "Orge na" ("A 
Negro" spelled backwards); its t heme was the all-black trial o f a symbolic white man for his world 
crimes ag ainst n on-whites; f ound guilty, sentence d to death, he was dr agged off shouting ab out 
all he  had done "for the nigra  people."
 
Younger even than our talented Louis X  were s ome newer mi nisters, Minist erThomas J. X of the 
Hartford Temple b eing o ne exam ple, a nd another the Buffalo Temple's Minister Ro bert J. X.
 
I had either orig inally establishe d or orga nized f or Mr. Muhammad most of the represe nted 
temples. Gre eting ea ch of these Temples' brother mi nisters would bri ng back into my m ind 
images of "fishing" for converts alo ng the streets a nd from door-to-door where ver the black 
people we re congregate d. I remembered the countless m eetings  in living rooms where mayb e 
seven would b e a crowd; t he grad ually building, buil ding-on up to renting folding c hairs  for dingy 
little st orefronts which Muslims scru bbed to spotless ness .
 
We toge ther o n a huge h all's speaking  platform, and that vast au dience b efore us, miraculo usly 
manifested, as far as I was concern ed, the inc omprehensible power  of Allah. For the first time, I 
truly understoo d something Mr . Muhammad had told m e: he claim ed that when h e was going 
through th e sacrificial trials o f fleeing th e black hypocrites from city to city , Allah h ad often sent 
him visions o f great audiences who would o ne day he ar the teachings; a nd Mr. Muh ammad sai d 
the visions also buoyed him when h e was lock ed up for years  in the white m an's priso n.
 
The great audience's restless whisperings  would ce ase .  . . .
 
At the micro phone would be the Na tion's N ation al Se cretary  John Ali, or the Boston Temple 
Minister Lo uis X. They enlivene d the all-black at mosphere, s peaking  of the new world o pen to the 
black man through t he Natio n of Islam. Sister Tynetta Dynear would s peak be autifully of the 
Muslim wome n's p owerful, vital contrib utions , of the Muslim women's roles in o ur Na tion's e fforts 
to raise t he physical,  mental, m oral, s ocial, a nd political c ondition of America's bl ack p eople.
 
Next, I would c ome to the m icrop hone, specifically  to conditio n the audienceto hear Mr. 
Muhammad, who h ad flown from Chicago t o teach us all in person .
 
I would rais e up my ha nd, "_As-Sal aikum-S alaam-_"
 
"_Wa-Alaikum-S alaam!_" It was  a roared respo nse from the great a udience's Muslim s eating 
section.
 
There was  a general pa ttern th at I would f ollow on  these occasions:
 
"My black bro thers and sisters-o f all reli gious belie fs, or o f no religious b eliefs-we  all have in 
common the greatest binding tie we co uld h ave . . . we all are _black_ p eople!
 
"I'm not going to take a ll day telling  you so me o f the greatnesses o f The Honorable Elijah 
Muhammad. I'm jus t going  to tell you now his _gre atest_ great ness! He is t he _first_, the _only_ 
black leader to  identify, to you an d me, _who _ is our enemy!
 
"The Ho norable Elija h Muh ammad is th e first b lack le ader among u s with the _courage_ to tell us-
out here in public-something which  when you b egin to  think of it back in your h omes, you will 
realize  we bl ack pe ople have b een _living_ with, we h ave been _seeing_, we have b een 
_suffering_, a ll of our lives!
 
"Our _e nemy_ is the _white m an!_
 
"And why is Mr . Muha mmad's teaching us this s uch a  great t hing? B ecause when you k now _who_ your e nemy is, he can no longer k eep you div ided, and fighting, o ne brother agai nst the 
other! B ecause when you rec ognize who your  enemy is, he  can no longer use tricker y, promises , 
lies, hypocrisy , and his evil acts to keep you d eaf, dumb, and blin ded! 
"When you r ecogni ze _who _ your en emy is, h e can no longer  brainwash you, he can no longer 
pull wool over your  eyes  so that you n ever s top to see that you ar e living in pur e _hell_ o n this 
earth, while he  lives in pure _heaven _ right on this same earth!-This enemy who tells you t hat you 
are b oth supposed to be worshiping the same white C hristian God that-you a re told-sta nds f or the 
_same_ things  for _all_ m en!
 
"Oh, _yes _, that devil is our enemy. I'll _pr ove_ it! Pick up any daily  newspap er! Rea d the false 
charges levele d against our b eloved religious l eader. It only points up the fact that the Ca ucasia n 
race n ever wants any bl ack ma n who is not their puppet or parrot to speak for our p eople. This 
Cauc asian devil slavem aster does not want or trust us to leave him-yet when we st ay her e 
among hi m, he continues to  keep us at the ver y lowest level o f his society!
 
"The white m an has alwa ys _loved _ it when he could keep us black me n tucked away 
somewhere, a lways out of sight , around the comer! The white m an has alwa ys _loved_ the ki nd 
of black l eaders whom h e could ask, 'Well, how's things w ith your p eople u p there?' B ut because 
Mr. Elijah Muhammad takes a n uncompromising sta nd with the white m an, the white man 
_hates_ hi m! W hen you hear the _white man_ hate him, you, t oo, because you d on't underst and 
Biblical pr ophecy, wrongl y label Mr. Muh ammad-as a  racist, a  hate-teacher, or o f being an ti-white 
and teaching black s upremacy -"
 
The audience s uddenly would b egin a  rustling  of turning . . . .
 
Mr. Muhammad would b e rapidly  moving al ong up a center aisle f rom the rear-as o nce he had 
entered our humble little m osqu es-this ma n whom we regarde d as Islam's gentle , meek, brown-
skinn ed Lamb. Stalwart, striding, cl ose-crop ped, hand-pick ed Fruit of Islam guards were a  circle 
surrou nding hi m. He carried his Holy Bible , his h oly Quran. The small, dark p illbox  atophis h ead 
was gold-em broidered with Islam's flag, th e sun, moon, and stars. The Muslims were cry ing out 
their adoration and their welcom e. "Little Lamb!" "As-Sal aikum-Salaam!" "Praise b e to Allah!"
 
Tears would be in more eyes than m ine. He h ad rescu ed m e when I was a convict; Mr . 
Muhammad had trained me  in his h ome, as if I was his son. I think that my li fe's p eaks of 
emotion, u ntil rec ently, at least, were when, suddenly, the Fruit o f Islam guar ds would st op stiffly 
at attention, and the platform's s everal s teps would be  mounted al one by Mr. Muh ammad, and his 
minist ers, inclu ding me, sprang  around him, embraci ng him, wringing both his hands . . . .
 
I would t urn right b ack t o the m icrop hone, n ot to keep waiting  those wor ld's b iggest b lack 
audiences who h ad come to hear h im.
 
"My black bro thers and sisters-_n o_ one will know  _who_ we are . . . until _we_ k now who we 
are! We never wi ll be able to _go_ anywhere until we kn ow _where _ we  are! The Ho norable 
Elijah Mu hammad is giving us a true identity , and a true positio n-the first time they have ever 
been _known_ to the American b lack m an!
 
"You can be around this man and never dre am from his a ctions th e power a nd the authority he 
has-" (Behind me, believe me when I  tell you, I could _ feel_ Mr . Muha mmad's _power_ .)
 
"He does not _display_, and _parade_, his _power_! But no other b lack le ader in Americ a has 
followers  who will lay down th eir lives if  he says so! And I don't mean all o f this non-violen t, 
beggin g-the-white-ma n kind of dying  . . . all o f this sitting- in, sliding- in, wading -in, e ating-in, 
diving- in, and all the rest-
 
"My black bro thers and sisters, you have c ome from your ho mes to hear-now you a re _goi ng_ to 
hear-America's _wisest _ black ma n! America's _boldes t_black ma n! America's most _fearless _ black man! This wilderness of North America's m ost _powerful_ black man!"
 
Mr. Muhammad would c ome quickl y to the stand, looki ng out over the vacuu m-quiet audience, his 
gentle-lo oking  face set, for just a  fleeting mo ment. Then, "As-Sal aikum-Salaam-'
 
" WA-ALAIKUM-SA LAAM! "
 
The Muslims ro ared it , as they settled to listen. From exp erienc e, they knew that for the next two 
hours M r. Muhammad would wield his two-edge d sword  of truth. In fact, every  Muslim worried 
that he overt axed himsel f in the length o f his s peeches , considering his br onchial asthmatic 
conditio n.
 
"I don't have a degree like ma ny of you o ut there b efore me have. B ut history  don't care anything 
about your  degrees .
 
"The white m an, he has filled you w ith a fear of him from ever sinc e you were  little bl ack ba bies. 
So over you is the great est e nemy a man can have-an d that is fear. I know some of you are a fraid 
to listen t o the truth-you h ave b een raise d on fear an d lies . But I am going  to preach to you t he 
truth until you are free of that fear . . . .
 
"Your sl avemast er, he brought you over  here, and of your p ast everything  was destroyed. Today, 
you do  not know your tru e language. W hat tribe are you from? You would not recognize your 
tribe's n ame if you he ard it . You don't know no thing about your tru e culture. You don't even k now 
your family's  real na me. You are wearing  a _white man's_ name! The white slave-m aster, who 
_hates_ you!
 
"You are a  people who t hink you k now all about the Bible, a nd all ab outChristianity . You eve n are 
foolish en ough to believe t hat nothing is _right_ but Christianity!
 
"You are the planet Earth's on ly group of people ignora nt of yoursel f, ignorant of your own ki nd, o f 
your true history , ignoran t of your  enemy! You know nothing at _all_ b ut what your  white 
slavemaster ha s chosen to tell you. And he has told you only  that which wi ll benefit hims elf, and 
his own kin d. He has taught you, f or his b enefit, that you are a  neutral, shi ftless, h elpless so-
called 'Negro.'
 
"I say _'so-calle d'_ b ecause you are _ not_ a _'Negro.'_ There is no  such thing as a race of 
_'Negroes.' _ You ar e members o f the Asiatic na tion, from the tribe o f _Shabazz_! 'Negro' is a 
false lab el
 
forced on you by your  slavemaster! He has been pushing things o nto you an d me and our kin d 
ever since h e brought the first slave s hiploa d of us black p eople h ere-"
 
When Mr. Muhammad paused, the Muslims before him cried out, "Little L amb!" . . ."All praise is 
due to Allah! " . . ."_Teach_, Messenger! " He would c ontinue.
 
"The _ign oranc e_ we o f the black race here in America h ave, an d the _self-hatred_ we have, th ey 
are fine exam ples o f what t he white sl avemast er has seen fit to teach t o us. Do we show the plain 
common sense, like every  other people on this p lanet Earth, to unite among ours elves? No! W e 
are h umbling ours elves, sitting- in, and begging- in, trying to _unite_ with the slavemaster! I don't 
seem a ble to imagine any more ridiculo us sight. A thousand ways every  day, the white m an is 
telling  you 'Y ou can't live  here, you c an't e nter her e, you c an't eat here, dri nk her e, walk  here, 
work her e, you c an't ride h ere, you can't pl ay her e,you can't study here.' Haven't we yet se en 
enough t o see that he has no plan to _unite_ with you ?
 
"You have tille d his f ields! Co oked his f ood! Washed his clot hes! You have cared for his wife and 
childre n when h e was away . In many c ases, you have even suckle d him at your  _breast_! You have b een far and away  better Christians than this slave- master who _t augh t_ you his 
Christianity!
 
"You have sweat ed blood to help him build a  country  so rich t hat he can today afford to give awa y 
millions-even t o his _enemies _! And when t hose enemies h ave gott en enough f rom him to then 
be able to attack him, you have b een his brave sol diers, dyin g for him . And you h ave been always 
his m ost faithful servant duri ng the so-called 'peaceful' times-
 
"And, _still_, this C hristian American white m an has not go t it in h im to find the human _decency_, 
and enough se nse o f _justice _, to rec ognize us , and accept us, the black p eople who h ave do ne 
so m uch for him, as fellow  human beings!"
 
"YAH, M an!" . . ."_Um-h uh_!" "_Teach_, Messe nger!" . . ."_Yah_!" . . ."_Tell 'em_!" . . ."You 
_right_!" . . ."Take your  _time_ up there, littl e Messe nger!" . . ."Oh, _yes_! "
 
Others be sides the Muslims would be shouting now . We Muslims were less extroverte d than 
Christian N egroes . It would so und now like an  old-fashioned camp meeting.
 
"So let us, the black pe ople, _separat e_ ourselves fr om this white man slave mast er, who 
despises u s so much! You are out here begging him for some so-calle d '_in tegration _!' But what 
is this sl avemast er white, _rapist_, going  about saying! He is s aying _he_ won't integrate because 
black blood wi ll_mongreli ze_ his race! _He_ says  that-an d look at  _us_! Turn around in your 
seats a nd look a t each other! This slavemast er wh ite ma n already has '_in tegrate d_' u s until you 
can har dly find among u s today any mor e than a very few who are the black color o f our 
foreparents!"
 
"God-a-mighty , the man's right!" . . ."_'Teach_, Messe nger- " "_Hear_ him! _He ar_ hi m!"
 
"He has left such a little black in us ," Mr. Muh ammad would go o n, "that now he despises u s so 
bad-me aning he despises _ hims elf_, for what h e has _done_ to us-that he tells u s that _legally _ if 
we have got _ one drop_ of black b lood in us, that means you ar e all-black a s far as his laws ar e 
concerne d! Well, if that's all we' ve got l eft, we want t o _reclaim _ that one drop!"
 
Mr. Muhammad's frail str ength c ould be seen to be waning. Bu t he would t each on:
 
"So let us _separate_ from this white m an, and for the same reaso n _he_ says- in time to save 
ourselves f rom any more '_integration_! '
 
"Why _shouldn't_ this white m an who likes t o think a nd call him self so goo d, and so gen erous , 
this white m an who f inances even his en emies-w hy _shouldn' t_ he subsidize a s eparate state, a 
separat e territory , for we black pe ople who h ave been such faithful slaves a nd servants? A 
separat e territory  on which we  can lift _ourselves_ o ut of these white m an's _slu ms_ for us, and 
his _ breadlines _ for us. And eve n for _those_ he is c omplaining  that we cos t him  too much! We 
can do something f or _ourselves_ ! We never h ave do ne what we  _could_-b ecause we have been 
brainwash ed so we ll by the slavem aster white m an that we m ust come to him, begging hi m, for 
everything we  want , and need-"
 After per haps nin ety minutes, behind Mr. Muhammad, every minister would have t o restr ain 
hims elf from bolting up  to his si de, to urge him that it was en ough . He would be pressing his 
hands tightl y against the edg es of the speak er's stand, to support h imself.
 
"We black p eople d on't _know_ what we  can do. You never can know what _a nything_ c an do-
until it is set _free_, to act by itself! If you have a cat in your h ouse that you pa mper and pet, you 
have t o free that cat, set it on its _ own_, in the woods , before you ca n see that the cat had it in 
him to shelt er an d feed itself!
 
"We, the black pe ople her e in America, we never have b een _free_ to find _out_ what we really can _do_! We have knowledge a nd experienc e to pool to do for ourselves! All of our lives  we 
have f armed-we  can gro w our own f ood. We can set up factories t o manufacture our own 
necessities! We can buil d other kin ds of business es, to establish tra de, and commerce-an d 
become independent, as other civilized people are-
 
"We can _throw off_ our brai nwashi ng, and our self-hate, and live  as _brothers_ toget her . . .
 
". . . some land of our _ own_! .  . . Something f or _oursel ves_! . . . leave this white slavemast er to 
_himsel f_. . . ."
 
Mr. Muhammad alwa ys stopped abruptly when he was unable to speak any longer .
 
The standing ovatio n, a solid wall of sound, would go on  unabating.
 
Standing up there, flailing my  arms , finally I could quiet the audiences as Fruit o f Islam ushers 
bega n to pass along the seating row s the large, waxed p aperbuck ets we us ed to take up the 
collectio n. I would sp eak.
 
"You _know_, from what you h ave just heard, t hat no white m oney finances The Hon orabl e Elijah 
Muhammad and his program-t o 'advise' hi m and 'contain' h im! Mr. Muh ammad's progra m, and his 
followers, are not 'integrated.' Mr. Muh ammad's pr ogram an d orga nizatio n are _all_-bl ack!
 
"We are the _only_ bl ack organization that _only_ black people support! These so-calle d 'Negro 
progress' organizations-W hy, they insult your int elligenc e, clai ming  they are fighting in your 
behalf, to get you t he equal rights you ar e asking f or . . . claiming  they are _fighting_ t he white 
man who re fuses to give you your rights. W hy, the white ma n _supports_ t hose organizations! If 
you bel ong, you p ay your two, or t hree, or f ive d ollars a year-bu t _who _ gives th ose organi zatio ns 
those two, and three, and five _t housand_ doll ar donations? The _whit e_ m an! He _feeds_ those 
organizations! S o he controls those o rganizatio ns! He _advises _ them-s o he _contains_ them! 
Use your co mmon sens e-aren't you going  to advise an d control a nd contain anyo ne that you 
support , like your  child?
 
"The white m an would love to  support Mr. Elijah Muhammad. Because i f Mr. Muh ammad had to 
rely on his s upport, h e could _advise_ Mr. Muhammad. My black br others an d sist ers, it is _ only_ 
becaus e _your_ money, _black _ money, supports Mr. Muh ammad, that he can hold these all-
black meetings f rom city  to city , telling  us black me n the _truth_! That's wh y we are aski ng for 
your all-black _s upport_! "
 
Nearly  all bills- and far from all on e-doll ar bills, either, filled the waxed b ucke ts. The buckets were 
swiftly em ptied, then re filled, as the Fruit of Islam ushers covered the entire a udience.
 
The audience a tmosphere was al most as if the people had gone li mp. The collections always 
covered t he rally expens es, a nd anything b eyond that helped to continue building th e Na tion of 
Islam.
 
After several big  rallies, M r. Muhammad directe d that we would a dmit the white pr ess. Fruit of 
Islam me n thoroughly  searche d them, as ever yone els e was  search ed-th eir notebooks , their 
cameras, camera c ases , and what ever els e they carried. Later, Mr. Muhammad said that _any_ 
whites who wante d to hear the truth c ould attend our pu blic rallies, u ntil a small separate sectio n 
for whites was fi lled.
 
Most whites who c ame we re students a nd schol ars. I would watch their congeal ed and reddened 
faces st aring up at Mr. Muha mmad. "The white m an _knows_ th at his ac ts have b een those of a 
devil!" I would watch als o the faces o f the profession al black men, the so-calle d intellectu als who 
attacke d us. They po ssess ed the academic kn ow-how, they possessed the technic al and the 
scien tific skills that could hel p to lead their m ass o f poor, black bro thers out of our c ondition . But all th ese intellec tual a nd professio nal bl ack me n could seem to think of was h umbling  themselves, 
and begging, tr ying to "integrate " with the so-calle d "lib eral" white m an who was  telling  them, "In 
time . . . everything's  going t o work  out one day . . . just wait an d have p atience." These 
intellectu al and professio nal Negroes couldn't u se what they knew for the benefit of their own 
black kind si mply  because eve n among themselves t hey were dis united. U nited among 
themselves, united with t heir own kind , they could h ave b enefited black pe ople all over th e world!
 
I would watch the faces of those intellectu al an d professional N egroes growing gra ve, and set-as 
the truth hit home to them. We were watche d. Our tel ephones were  tapped. Still right today, on 
my home telephone, if I said , "I'm going t o bomb the Empire State Buildi ng," I gu arant ee you in 
five m inutes it would be  surro unded. When I was sp eaking p ublicly  sometimes I'd gu ess wh ich 
were F.B.I. faces in the audience, or o ther types of agen ts. Both thepolice an d the F.B.I. intently 
and persiste ntly visited and ques tioned us. "I do not fear them," Mr. Muhammad said . "I have all 
that I need-the truth."
 
Many  a night , I dri fted off to sleep, filled with won der at  how th e two- edged-sword te achings s o 
hurt, confused, concern ed, a nd upset the governme nt full of men trained highly  in all of the 
modern scienc es. I felt that it never co uld h ave been unless The Most L earned One, Allah 
Himsel f, had given the little f ourth-grade-trained Messe nger something.
 
*     *     *
 
Black ag ents were s ent to infiltrate us. But the white m an's "secret " spy  often proved, f irst of all, a 
black man. I can't say _all _ of them, of course, t here's no way to know-but some of them, after 
joining us , and hearing, s eeing an d _feeling_ th e truth for every  black ma n, revealed their roles to 
us. Some resigned from the wh ite ma n's ag encies and came to work in t he Natio n of Islam. A few 
kept their jobs to counters py, telling  us the white m an's statements a nd plans about our Nati on. 
This was  how we learned that after wanting  to know  what happened within o ur Temples, the white 
law age ncies' sec ond ma jor co ncern was the thing t hat I believe still ranks t oday as a big wor ry 
among America's p enologists: th e steadily increasing rat e at which black c onvicts  embrace Islam.
 
Generally , while still in pris on, our c onvict-co nverts pr econditio ned themselves t o meet our 
Natio n's mo ral laws.  As it had happened with me, when t hey le ft prison , they entered a  Temple 
fully quali fied to become registere d Muslims. In fact, convict-converts u sually  were be tter 
prepared than were n umerous pros pective Muslims who n ever had been insid e a prison .
 
We were not nearly so e asy to enter as a Christia n church. O ne did n ot merely declare hi msel f a 
follower  of Mr. Muh ammad, then continue le ading t he same old, sin ful, immoral life. The Muslim 
first had to change his p hysical a nd moralself  to me et our strict rules. To remain a Muslim he had 
to maintain those rules.
 
Few temple m eetings we re held, for insta nce, without the minist er looki ng down upon some 
freshly  shaved b ald domes of new Muslim br others in the audience. They ha d just b anished from 
their lives  forever th at phony, lye-conked, metallic-looking h air, or "the process ," as some call it 
these d ays. It grieves me that I don't care where you go , you se e this symbol o f ignoranc e and 
self-hate on so m any Negroes' h eads. I know it's b ound to hurt the feelings of some of my good 
conked non-Muslim fr iends-bu t if you st udy closely  any conke d or " processe d" Negro, you usually 
find he is an  ignoran t Negro. W hatever "show"  or "front" he affects, his hair lye- cooked to be 
"white-looking" fairly shouts to everyone who l ooks a t his head, "I'm ashamed to be a Negro." H e 
will disc over, just as I did, that he will be much-im proved mentally whenever he  discovers en ough 
black self-pride to have t hat mess clipp ed off, and then wear  the natural h air th at God gives black 
men to wear .
 
No Muslim smokes-th at was an other o f our rules. S ome prospective  Muslims f ound it m ore 
difficult to quit tobacc o than others f ound quitting t he dope habit. But black m en and wom en quit 
more easily when we  got th em to consider s eriously how th e white m an's government car ed less about the public's h ealth than about continuing the tobacc o industry 's _billions_ i n tax revenu e. 
"What does a servicem an pay for a carto n of cigarett es?" a prospective  Muslim co nvert would be 
asked. It helped hi m to see that ever y regularl y priced c arton he bought m eant that the white 
man's governm ent took aro und two doll ars of a black ma n's h ard-e arned money for taxes, n ot for 
tobacc o.
 
You m ay have re ad somewhere-a  lot h as been wr itten concerning  it-about the Natio n of Islam's 
phenomenal record o f dope-addictio n cures of longtime junkies . In fact, the _New  York Times_ 
carried a  story about how some o f the social age ncies h ave ask ed re prese ntatives o f the M uslim 
program for clinical s uggestio ns. 
The Muslim pr ogram beg an with recogniz ing th at color an d addiction h ave a distinc t connec tion. It 
is no accid ent that in the entire W estern He misph ere, t he greatest localized co ncentratio n of 
addicts is in _Harle m_.
 
Our c ure pr ogram's firs t major ingredie nt was th e painfully patient work of Muslims who pr eviously 
were junkies t hemselves.
 
In the ghet to's d ope jungle, the Muslim ex-junki es would f ish out addicts who knew  them b ack in 
those d ays. Then with an agoniz ing pa tience t hat might span anywhere fr om a few months to  a 
year, our ex- junkie Muslims would conduc t the addicts thr ough t he Musli m six-point therapeutic 
process.
 
The addict f irst was bro ught t o admit to hims elf that he was an addict. Secondly, he was taught 
_why_ he used narcotics. Third, he was shown  that there was a _wa y_ to stop addiction . Fourth, 
the addict's s hattered sel f-image, a nd ego, were b uilt up  until the addict realized  that he had, 
_within_, the sel f-power t o end his ad dictio n. Fifth, the addict volunt arily underwent a cold t urkey 
break with drugs. Sixth, f inally cure d, now an ex-ad dict c ompletes the cycle by " fishing" u p other 
addicts who m he  knows, a nd supervising their salvag ing.
 
This sixth st age always  instantly elimi nated what so often defeats the average soci al agencies-
the charact eristic  addict's hostility and sus picion. The addict who is " fished" up knew  personally 
that the Muslim a pproaching hi m ver y recen tly had the same fifteen to thirty dollar a  day h abit. 
The Muslim m ay be this a ddict's buddy; they had plied the same dope jungle. They even may 
have b een thieves toge ther. The addict h ad _seen_ the Muslim dri fting o ff to sle ep le aning 
against a building, or s tepping as h igh over a matchstick a s if it were a dog. And the Muslim, 
approac hing the addict , uses th e same old junkie jungle la nguage. 
Like the alco holic, t he junkie can never st art to cure h imself until he recognizes  and acc epts his 
true conditio n. The Muslim s ticks like a leech , drumming at his old junkie buddy, "You're h ooked, 
man!" It might t ake mo nths before the addict comes t o grips w ith this. The curative program is 
never really  underway until this happens.
 
The next c ure-phase is t he addict's re alization of why  he takes d ope. Still working  on his m an, 
right in the old jungle locale, in dives t hat you wouldn't b elieve existed , the Muslim often collects 
audiences o f a dozen junkies . They listen only because they know the cl ean-c ut proud Muslim 
had earlier  been like them.
 
Every addict takes ju nk to esc ape something, t he M uslim explains. He explains that most black 
junkies really  are trying to narcotize th emselves  against b eing a  black man in the white m an's 
America. B ut, actually , the Muslim says, the black man taking do pe is only helping the white man 
to "prove" that the black man is n othing.
 
The Muslim t alks co nfidentially , and straight. "Daddy , you k now I know how you f eel. W asn't I right 
out here with you? S cratchi ng like a  monkey, smelling all b ad, living mad, hungry , stealing  and 
running and hiding from Whitey. Man , what's a  black man buying W hitey's dope for but to make 
Whitey richer-killing yoursel f!"
 The Muslim c an tell when his qu arry is re ady to be shown th at the way for him to quit do pe is 
through joining t he N ation of Islam. The addict is b rought into the loc al Muslim rest aurant, he may 
occasion ally be exp osed to some o ther social sit uations-am ong pr oud, cle an Musli ms who sh ow 
each other mutual affection and respec t inst ead of the familiar ho stility of the ghet to streets . For 
the first ti me in years, th e addict hears hi msel f called, genuin ely, "Brother,""Sir" a nd "Mr." No one 
cares a bout his p ast. His addiction m ay casually be mentioned, but if so, it is s poke n of as merely 
an especially  tough c hallenge t hat he must face. Everyone whom this a ddict meets is co nfident 
that he will kick his h abit.
 
As the addict's n ew image o f himself builds, i nevitably he begins  thinking  that he can break t he 
habit. F or the first ti me h e is feeling the effects o f black sel f-prid e.
 
That's a powerf ul co mbinatio n for a man who h as been existing  in the mud of socie ty. In fact, 
once he is m otivate d no one can change m ore c ompletely than the man who h as been at the 
bottom. I call mysel f the best exa mple of that.
 
Finally , vitally, this a ddict will decide for himself that he wants to go on cold turkey . This m eans to 
endure the physical ago nies o f abruptly quitting  dope.
 
When this time comes, ex-addict M uslims w ill arrange to  spend the necess ary days in ar ound-
the-clock shi fts, attending t he addict who int ends to purge hi msel f, on the way  to becoming  a 
Muslim.
 
When the addict's withdrawal sets in, and he is screa ming, c ursing, a nd begging,  "Just one shot, 
man!" the Musli ms are right t here talking ju nkie jargon t o him. "Baby, knock t hat monkey off your 
back! Kick t hat habit! Kick W hitey off your back!" The addict, writhing  in pa in, his no se and eyes 
running,  is pouring  sweat from head to foot. He's tr ying to knock his h ead agains t the wall,  flailing 
his ar ms, try ing to fight his attendants, h e is vomiting,  suffering diarrhe a. "D on't hold nothing b ack! 
Let Whitey go, b aby! You're going to stand tall, m an! I can see you now in the Fruit of Islam!"
 
When the aw ful or deal is ended, when the grip of dope is br oken, the Musli ms co mfort the weak 
ex-addict, feeding hi m so ups and broths, to get hi m on his feet again. He wi ll never f orget t hese 
brothers who st ood by him during this time. He will never f orget that it was the Natio n of Islam's 
program which resc ued him from the special h ell of dope. And that black br other (or th e sist er, 
whom Muslim sisters a ttend) rarely  ever wi ll return to the use of narc otics. I nstead, the ex-ad dict 
when h e is pr oud, cle an, renewed, can scarcely  wait to  hit the same junkie j ungle he  was in, to 
"fish" out some b uddy and salva ge _him_!
 
If some white m an, or " approved " black man, creat ed a narcotics c ure pr ogram as success ful as 
the one conducted under the aegis of the Muslims, why, there would b e government subsidy , and 
praise and spotlights, a nd headlin es. B ut we were at tacked ins tead. W hy shouldn't th e Muslims 
be subsidized to save  millions o f dollars a year for the governm ent and the citi es? I  don't know 
what ad dicts' crim es cos t nationally, but it is sai d to be _billio ns_ a  year  in New  York City . An 
estimated $12 million a year is lost to thieves in Harlem a lone.
 
An addict d oesn't work  to supply his h abit, which may cos t anyw here from ten to fifty doll ars a 
day. How could h e earn that much? No! The addict steals, h e hustles in o ther ways; he preys 
upon other h uman beings like a  hawk or a  vulture-as I  did. Very likely , he is a sc hool drop-out, the 
same a s I was, a n Army reject , psychologicall y unsuited to a job eve n if he was o ffered one, the 
same a s I was.
 
Women addicts "boost" (shopli ft), or they prostitu te themselves. Muslim sisters talk hard to black 
prostit utes who are strug gling  to quit u sing dope in ord er to qualify mo rally to become registere d 
Muslims. "Y ou ar e helping th e white m an to regard your bo dy as a garbage c an-"
 
Num erous "exposes" of the Nati on of Islam h ave im plied t hat Mr. Muhammad's f ollowers were chiefly ex-cons an d junkies. In the early  years, yes, t he converts f rom society's  lowest levels we re 
a sizable p art of the Natio n's bro ad base ofmembership. Alwa ys M r. Muhammad instruct ed us, 
"Go after the black man in the mu d." Often, he said, those c onverted made the best M uslims.
 
But gradu ally we recruit ed other black people-t he "g ood Christians " whom we "fished" from their 
churches. Then, an incre ase b egan in t he membership p ercentage of educated and train ed 
Negroes. F or each rally  attracted to the local t emple a  few more of that particul ar city's  so-called 
"middle-class " Negroes, the type who pr eviously had sco ffed at us "Black Muslims" as 
"demagogues, " and "hate-teachers, " "black racists " and all the rest of the names. The Muslim 
truths-listened to, thought a bout-rea ped for us a growing quot a of young black men and wome n. 
For th ose with training  and talents, the N ation of Islam ha d plenty of positions where those 
abilities were n eeded.
 
There we re some registere d Muslims who would n ever reveal their membership, except t o other 
Muslims, b ecause of their positio ns in t he white ma n's world. There we re, I know, a few, who 
becaus e of their positions were kn own o nly to their mi nisters a nd to Mr . Elijah M uhammad.
 
*     *     *
 
In 1961, our Natio n flourish ed. Our n ewspap er _Muhammad Speaks'_ f ull back pag e carried a n 
archit ect's dr awing of a $20 million Isla mic Ce nter pr oposed to be built i n Chicago. Every Muslim 
was making p erson al financial c ontrib ution toward t he C enter. It would incl ude a beautiful 
mosque, sc hool, library , and hospit al, an d a museum documenting the black man's glorious 
history.
 
Mr. Muhammad visited the M uslim co untries, and upon his return he direct ed that we would begin 
calling  our temples " mosques. "
 
There was  a sharp clim b now , too, in the number o f Muslim-owne d sm all businesses . Our 
business es so ught to  demonstra te to the black p eople what black people could do  for 
themselves-if  they would o nly unify, trade with e ach other-exclusivel y where p ossibl e-and hire 
each other, and in so doing, ke ep black m oney within t he black c ommunities, jus t as other 
minorities di d.
 
Recordi ngs of Mr. Muhammad's speeches we re now regularl y being bro adcast a cross Americ a 
over small radio st ations. In De troit an d Chicago, sch ool-age Muslim children attended our two 
Universities o f Islam-thr ough high sc hool in Chicago, and through j unior high in Detroit. Starting 
from kind ergarten, they learned of the black ma n's glorious h istory  and from the third grade they 
studied the black ma n's original la nguage, Arabic.
 
Mr. Muhammad's eight children now were all deeply invol ved in k ey capacities in the Na tion of 
Islam. I took a deep personal pri de in having  had something to  do with that-at least i n some 
cases, years be fore. When Mr. Muhammad had sent me out in h is serv ice a s a minist er, I began 
to feel it was  a shame that his c hildren worked a s some of them then did for the white m an, in 
factories, c onstr uction work, driv ing taxis, thi ngs like that. I felt that I should work for Mr . 
Muhammad's family as si ncerely  as I worked f or him. I urged Mr . Muhammad to let m e put on a 
special drive within o ur few small mosqu es, to raise funds which would e nable those of his 
childre n wo rking  for the white man to be ins tead employed within our Na tion. Mr. Muhammad 
agreed , the special f und drive  did p rove successful, and his c hildren grad ually did begin working 
for the Natio n. Emanuel, th e oldest, today runs the dry-clea ning plant. Sis ter Et hel (Muh ammad) 
Sharrieff is th e Muslim Sisters' S upreme Ins tructor . (Her hu sband, Raymon d Sharrief f, is 
Suprem e Ca ptain of the Fruit o f Islam .) Sister L ottie Muh ammad supervises t he two Universities 
of Islam. Na thaniel Muh ammad assists Em anuel in the dry -clea ning plant. H erbert Mu hammad 
now publishes _Muh ammad Speaks_, the Nati on's n ewspaper that I bega n. Elija h Muh ammad, 
Jr., is the Fruit o f Islam Assist ant Suprem e Ca ptain . Wallace Mu hammad was the Philadelphia 
Mosque Minist er, until finally he was suspended from the Nati on al ong w ith m e-for reasons I  will go int o. The youngest child, Akbar Muh ammad, the family student, attends th e Univers ity of Cairo 
at El-Azhar. Akbar also has broken with his f ather.
 
I believe  that it was too strenuous a marathon of long speeches that Mr . Muhammad ma de at our 
big rallies which, abruptly, badly agg ravat ed his long- botherso me bronc hial as thmatic c ondition.
 
Just in co nversa tion, Mr. Muhammad would s uddenly begin c oughing, an d the coughing  tempo 
would incre ase u ntil it rack ed his slight body.
 
Mr. Muhammad almost doubled up sometimes. S oon, he had to take to his bed. As hard as he 
tried n ot to, as deeply as it grie ved him, he had to cancel several  long- scheduled appearanc es at 
big-city rallies. Thousands we re disappointed to have t o hear me instead, or o ther poor 
substitut es for Mr. Muhammad in person.
 
Mem bers o f the N ation were d eeply concern ed. Doctors rec ommended a dry climate. The Natio n 
bought Mr . Muhammad a h ome in Ph oenix, Arizona. One of the first times I  visited Mr. 
Muhammad there, I stepped off a plane into flashing and whi rring cameras u ntil I wondered who 
was behind m e. Then I saw the cameramen's guns; t hey were from the Arizona Intelligenc e 
Division.
 
The wire of our N ation of Islam  brought all Muslims the joyf ul news th at the Arizona cli mate did 
vastly relieve the Messenger's s uffering. Si nce t hen he has spent most of each year  in Ph oenix. 
 
 
Despit e the fact that Mr. Muhammad, convalescing, c ould no longer work  the daily long hours he 
had previously  worked i n Chicago, he was now more than ever b urdened with heavy decision-
making and administrati ve duties. In every  resp ect, the Nati on was expa nded both internally  and 
externally . Mr. Muhammad si mply  could n o longer allot as m uch tim e as previously  to considering 
and deciding which pu blic-speaki ng, radio, and television requests he felt I should accept-as well 
as to some organization al matters which I  had alwa ys br ought t o him for advice or d ecisio n.
 
Mr. Muhammad evide nced the depth of his trust i n me . In those areas I've d escribe d, he told m e 
to make the decisio ns mysel f. He sai d that my guid eline s hould be whatever I f elt was w ise-
whatever  was in the gen eral good interes ts of our Natio n of Islam.
 
"Brother Malcolm, I want you to become wel l known," Mr. Muha mmad told me  one day. "Becaus e 
if you ar e we ll known, it will make _m e_ better known, " he went o n.
 
"But, Brother Malcol m, there is something you need to know. You will grow to be hated when you 
become well  known. Be cause u sually  people get jealo us of public fig ures. "
 
Nothing that Mr. Muhammad ever s aid to me was mo re prophetic.
 
 
 
CHAPT ER FIF TEEN
ICARUS
 
The more places I  repres ented Mr. Muh ammad on television and radio, a nd at colleges a nd 
elsewhere, the mo re letters c ame from people who h ad heard m e. I'd say that ninety-five per c ent 
of the letters we re from white people.
 
Only a few o f the letters f ell into the "Dear Ni gger X" category, or the death-threats. Mos t of my 
mail exp osed to me the white m an's two ma jor dre ads.The first one was his own private b elief 
that God wrathfully is going  to destroy  this civ ilizatio n. And the white m an's sec ond mo st 
pervading dre ad was his image o f the black m an entering the body o f the white wom an. 
An amazing perc entage o f the white le tter-w riters  agreed entirely with Mr . Muhammad's analysis 
of the pro blem-but not with his sol ution . One odd ambivalence was how some letters, o therwise 
all bu t champio ning Mr. Muh ammad, would rec oil at the expressio n "white d evils." I tried to 
explain t his in s ubsequen t speech es:
 
"Unless we  call one white m an, by name, a 'devil,' we are not speaking o f any _individual_ white 
man. We are speaking  of the _collecti ve_ wh ite ma n's _ historical_ record . We are speaking o f the 
collective wh ite ma n's cru elties, and evils,  and greeds , that have se en him _act_ like a  devil 
toward t he non-white m an. Any intelligent , honest, objective pers on cannot fail to realize that this 
white man's slave tr ade, and his subseque nt devilish ac tions are dir ectly _res ponsible_ for not 
only the _pr esence_ of this bl ack m an in America, b ut also for the _conditio n_ in wh ich we find 
this b lack m an here. You cannot find _one_ black m an, I do not care who he is, who ha s not been 
personally  damaged in so me way by th e devilish ac ts of the collecti ve white m an!"
 
Nearly  ever y day , some attack on  the "Black M uslims" would appear in so me newspa pers. 
Incre asingl y, a focal target was something t hat I had said, "Malcol m X" as a "demagogue." I would 
grow furious readi ng any harsh attack u pon Mr. Muhammad. I didn't care what they said about 
me.
 
Those social workers a nd sociologists- they tried t o take me apart. Especiall y the black on es, for 
some re ason. Of course, I  knew the reason: the white m an signed their paychecks. If I wasn't 
"polariz ing the community," accor ding to this bu nch, I had "erron eously  appraised the racial 
picture." Or in s ome statement, Ihad "over-generalized." Or when I had made some a bsolutely 
true point, "Malcol m X convenie ntly ma nipulated. . . ."
 
Once, one of my Mosque S even Muslim b rothers who wo rked with teenagers in a well -known 
Harlem community center showed m e a confidential rep ort. S ome black se nior soci al worker ha d 
been given a month off to investi gate the "Black Muslims " in the Harlem ar ea. Ever y paragrap h 
sent me back t o the dictio nary-I guess t hat's wh y I've never forgott en one line a bout me. Listen to 
this: "The dyna mic int erstices o f the H arlem sub-cult ure have b een oversim plified and distorted by 
Malcolm X to me et his own n eeds."
 
Which of us, I wonder, knew mor e about that Harlem ghett o "sub-c ulture "? I, who ha d hustled f or 
years  in those stree ts, or t hat black sn ob status-symb ol-educated social wo rker?
 
But that's n ot importa nt. W hat's importan t, to my wa y of thinking ab out it, is that among America's 
22 million b lack p eople s o rela tively few have b een lucky  enough t o attend a college- and here 
was one of those who h ad been lucky . Here was, t o my wa y of thinki ng, one of those "educated" 
Negroes who n ever h ad underst ood the true in tent, or purpose, or a pplica tion o f educatio n. Her e 
was one of those s tagna nt educatio ns, n ever used excep t for parading a lot of big wo rds.
 
Do you re alize this is one of the major re asons wh y America's white m an has so easily contained 
and oppressed America's b lack m an? Because until just la tely, among t he few e ducated Negroes 
scarcely  any applie d their ed ucation , as I am forced to say the white man does-in searc hing and 
creative thi nking, to
 
further themselves  and their own kind in this co mpetitive, materialistic, d og-eat-dog white m an's 
world. F or genera tions, the so-c alled " educated" Negroes h ave "l ed" their black b rothers by 
echoing th e white m an's thinking -which naturally  has been to the exploitive wh ite ma n's 
advan tage.
 
The white man-give him his d ue-has an extra ordinary  intelligenc e, an extra ordinary  cleverness. 
His world is f ull of proof of it. You can't name a thing th e white m an can't m ake. You can hardly 
name a sci entific pr oblem he can't solve. Here h e is n ow solving the problems of sending men 
exploring  into o uter sp ace-an d returning th em safely to earth. 
But in the arena of dealing wi th human beings, t he white m an's wo rking int elligenc e is ho bbled. 
His intelligence wi ll fail him altoget her if  the humans happen to be non-wh ite. The white ma n's 
emotions s upers eded his i ntelligence. He wi ll commit ag ainst n on-whites t he most incre dible 
spontaneous emotional a cts, s o psyche-de ep is his "whit e superiorit y" complex.
 
Where was the A-bo mb dropped . . ."to save American lives"? Can the white ma n be so naive as 
to think the cle ar import of this ever wi ll be lost u pon the non-white two-thirds of the ear th's 
population ?
 
Before that bomb was  dropped-right over h ere in the Unit ed States, what about the one hundred 
thousand loyal n aturalized a nd native-bor n Japanese-America n citizens who we re herded into 
camps, behind barbed wire? B ut how many G erma n-born naturalized America ns were her ded 
behind bar bed wire? They were  _white_!
 
Historicall y, the non-white c omplexion has evoke d and expose d the "devil" in t he very nature o f 
the white m an.
 
What else but a controlling e motional "devil" so blin ded Americ an white in telligence t hat it co uldn' t 
foresee that millio ns of black slaves, "freed," then permitt ed even limit ed educatio n, would o ne 
day rise up  as a terrifyin g monster within wh ite Americ a's mids t? 
The white man's br ains t hat today explore sp ace should h ave tol d the slavem aster that any slave, 
if he is educated, will no longer f ear his master. History  shows th at an educated slave always 
begins t o ask, a nd next d emand, eq uality  with his m aster.
 
Today, in m any wa ys the black man sees t he collective wh ite ma n in Americ a better than that 
white man can see hims elf. And the 22 million bl acks re alize increasi ngly that physicall y, 
politically , economically , and eve n to some d egree s ociall y, the aroused black man can cre ate a 
turmoil in white America's vitals -not to mention America's intern ational im age.
 
*     *     *
 
I had not intended to stray  off. I had been telling  how in 1963, I was try ing to  cope with th e white 
newspa per, radio , and televis ion rep orters who were de termine d to defeat Mr. Muhammad's 
teachings.
 
I develop ed a mental im age o f reporters as human ferrets-steadily sniffing, d arting, pr obing f or 
some way  to trick me , somehow to corner me in our int erview excha nges.
 
Let some civil rights "l eader" m ake some statement, dis pleasi ng to the white p ublic p ower 
struct ure, a nd the reporters, in an  effort to whip hi m back in to lin e, would try  to use m e. I'll give an 
exam ple. I 'd get a ques tion like this: "Mr. Malcolm X, you' ve often gone o n record a s disapproving 
of the sit-ins a nd similar  Negro protest a ctions-what is your o pinio n of the Mo ntgom ery boycot t 
that Dr . King is lea ding?"
 
Now my f eeling was that although t he civil rights "l eaders" k ept attacking us Muslims, s till they 
were black p eople, still they were o ur own kin d, and Iwould b e most foolish to let the white ma n 
maneuver me against the civil rights m ovem ent.
 
When I was ask ed about the Mon tgom ery boycott, I'd carefully review what le d up to it. Mrs. R osa 
Parks was riding  home on a bus and at some bus stop the white crack er bu s driver or dered Mrs. 
Parks t o get up and give her se at to some wh ite passenger who h ad just got on the bus. I'd say, 
"Now , just _imagine _ that! This good , hard-working,  Christian-believing  black woma n, she's p aid 
her m oney, she's in her s eat. Jus t because s he's _ black _, she's a sked to get up ! I mean, 
sometimes eve n for _me_ it's har d to believe the white man's arroga nce!"
 Or I m ight say , "No o ne will ever kn ow exactly  what emotional ingredie nt made this rela tively 
trivial incide nt a fuse for those Montgo mery  Negroes. There had been _centuries_ o f the worst 
kind of outrages  against Southern bl ack p eople-lynchings, ra pings, sh ootings, b eatings! Bu t you 
know history has been triggered by tri vial-seemi ng incide nts. O nce a little nobody Indian law yer 
was put off a train, a nd fed up with injustic e, he twisted a  knot in the British Lion's tail. _ His_ 
name was Mahatma Ga ndhi!"
 
Or I m ight co py a trick  I had seen law yers use, both in life and on television. It was a way that 
lawyers would slip i n before a jury something otherwise ina dmiss able. (Sometimes I  think I r eally 
might h ave ma de it as a lawyer, as I  once told that eight h-grade teacher in Mas on, Michi gan, I 
wante d to be, when h e advised m e to become a carpenter.) I would slide right over th e reporter's 
questio n to dro p into his lap a  logical- extensio n hot potato for him.
 
"Well, sir, I see the same boycott reasoni ng for Negroes a sked to join t he Army, Navy, and Air 
Force. Why should we go o ff to die somewhere to preserve a s o-called 'democracy'  that gives a 
white immigrant of one day more than it gives the black man with f our hu ndred years o f slavin g 
and serving in this c ountry?"
 Whites would prefer fifty local b oycotts to having  22 million N egroes start thinki ng about what I 
had jus t said . I don't have to tell you t hat it never got printe d the way  I said it . It would be turned 
inside out if it got print ed at all. And I could d etect whe n the white re porters h ad gotten their h eads 
toget her; t hey quit asking m e certain questio ns.
 
If I had develop ed a good point, though, I'd bait a hook to get it s aid when I  went o n radio or 
television. I 'd seem to slip a nd mention some recent so-called civ il rights "advance." You know , 
where so me gian t industry  had hired ten showpiec e Negroes; s ome rest aurant chain had begun 
making more mo ney by  serving Negroes; s ome Southern u nivers ity had enrolled a  black 
freshman withou t bayon ets-like th at. When I "slipped," the program h ost would lea p on that bait: 
"Ahhh! Indeed, Mr . Malc olm X- you c an't d eny _t hat's_ a n advanc e for your rac e!"
 
I'd jerk the pole then. "I can't t urn a round witho ut hearing ab out some 'civil rights adva nce'! W hite 
people seem to think t he black man ought t o be shouting 'h allelujah'! Four h undred years  the 
white man has had his f oot-long knife in the black m an's ba ck-and now th e white m an starts to 
_wiggle_ t he knife out, maybe six inches! The black ma n's suppose d to be _grat eful_? W hy, if the 
white man jerked t he knife _out_, it's s till going  to leave a _scar _!"
 
Similarly , just le t some mayor or s ome city council s omewhere boast o f having "no Negro 
problem ." That would get o ff the newsroom teletypes and it would s oon be jammed right in my 
face. I'd say they didn't need to tell me  where t his was,  because I knew that all it m eant was that 
relativel y very  few Negroes were  living there. That's tru e the wor ld over, you k now. Take 
"democratic " Engla nd-when 1 00,000 black W est Indians got there, E ngland stopped the black 
migration . Finla nd welcom ed a Negro U.S . Ambassa dor. Well, let enough Negroes follow  him to 
Finlan d! Or i n Russia, when Khrushc hev was in p ower, he threatened to canc el the visas  of black 
African stu dents whose anti-discrimin ation demonstration said t o the world, "Russia, too. . . ."
 
*     *     *
 
The Deep South white pr ess gener ally blacke d me  out. But they front-paged what I felt about 
North ern white an d black Fre edom Rid ers going  _South_ to "demonstrat e." I called it "ridiculo us"; 
their own N orthern ghett oes, right at home, had enough rats and roaches to kill to keep all of the 
Freedom Riders b usy. I said that ultra-liberal New  York h ad more integration p roblems t han 
Mississippi. If the North ern Free dom Riders want ed m ore to do, they could work on  the roots o f 
such ghet to evils  as the littl e childre n out in the stre ets a t midnight, with apartment keys on strings 
around their necks to let themselves  in, and their mothers and fathers dru nk, dr ug addicts, 
thieves, prostit utes. Or t he N orthern Freed om Riders co uld light so me fires under North ern cit y 
halls, unions, a nd major in dustries t o give m ore jobs t o Negroes to remove so many of them from 
the relie f and welf are rolls, which crea ted laziness, a nd which d eteriorate d the gh ettoes in to steadily worse places for humans to live. It was  all-it is all-the absolute trut h; but what did I want 
to say it for? Snakes c ouldn't have tur ned on me faster than the liberal.
 
Yes, I will pull off that liber al's halo that he spends s uch e fforts cultivating!  The North's liber als 
have b een for so l ong pointing acc using  fingers at the South and getting away with it t hat they 
have f its when t hey are exp osed as t he world's worst  hypocrites.
 
I believe  my own life _m irrors_ this hyp ocris y. I know  nothing ab out the South. I am a creation of 
the Nort hern white m an and of his hypocritical at titude toward the Negro.
 
The white Southerner was alwa ys given his d ue by Mr. Muh ammad. The white S outherner, you 
can say  one thing-he is ho nest. He bar es his t eeth to theblack m an; he tells the black ma n, to his 
face, that Southern whites n ever will accep t phony "in tegration ." The Southern wh ite goes f urther, 
to tell the black m an that he means to fight him ever y inch of the way-against even t he so-called 
"tokenism. " The adva ntage o f this is th e Southern black man never has been under a ny illusio ns 
about the opposition he is de aling  with.
 
You can say for many Southern wh ite people that, individually, they have b een paternalistically 
helpful to many in dividual N egroes . But the Norther n wh ite ma n, he grins with his t eeth, and his 
mouth has alwa ys be en full of tricks a nd lies of "equality" and "integration ." When one day all over 
America, a  black ha nd touched the white man's shoulder , and the white man turned, and there 
stood the Negro  saying "M e, too . . ." why , that Nort hern lib eral shra nk from that black man with 
as m uch guilt an d dread as any Southern white m an.
 
Actually, America's m ost dangerous and threatening black m an is th e one who has been kept 
sealed u p by t he N orthern er in t he black gh ettoes-th e North ern white p ower s tructure's system to 
keep talking  democracy  while k eeping the black m an out of sight s omewhere, ar ound the comer.
 
The word "integration" was  invented by a Nort hern lib eral. The word has no real m eaning. I ask 
you: in t he racial se nse in which  it's us ed so much today, what ever "i ntegratio n" is s uppose d to 
mean, can it pr ecisely  be defined? The truth is th at "integration" is an  _image_ , it's a  foxy 
North ern liberal's s mokescree n that confuses the true wants o f the America n black man. Here in 
these f ifty racist and neo-racist s tates of North America, this word "i ntegratio n" has millions o f 
white people confused, and angry, believing wrongl y that the black m asses want t o live  mixed up 
with the white man. That is the cas e only with the relative ha ndful of these "integration "-ma d 
Negroes.
 
I'm talking ab out these "token-integrat ed" Negroes who f lee from their p oor, downtro dden black 
brothers-fr om their own self-hate, which is what they'rereally  trying to esca pe. I'm talking a bout 
these N egroes you w ill see who c an't get en ough of nuzzling u p to the white m an. These "chosen 
few" Negroes ar e more white-mi nded, more anti-black, t han even the white ma n is.
 
Hum an rights! R espec t as _human beings_! That's what America's black masses want . That's th e 
true problem . The black masses want n ot to be shru nk from as though t hey are p lague-ridd en. 
They want no t to be walled u p in slums , in the ghett oes, like an imals. They want to live in a n 
open, free socie ty where t hey can walk w ith their h eads up, like men, and wome n!
 
Few white p eople re alize th at many black p eople today dislike a nd avoid sp ending any more tim e 
than they mu st around white p eople. This "in tegration " image, a s it is p opularly interprete d, has 
millions o f vain, s elf-exalted white people convince d that black p eople want to sleep in b ed with 
them-a nd that's a lie! Or you c an't _tell_ th e average white m an that the Negro  man's pri me 
desire isn't t o have a white wom an-an other lie! L ike a  black brother rec ently  observed t o me, 
"Look, you ever sm ell one of them wet?"
 
The black masses pr efer the company of their own kind . Why, even t hese fancy, bourgeois 
Negroes-when they get back home from the fancy "integrated" cocktail p arties, what do they do but kick o ff their sh oes a nd talk a bout those white lib erals th ey just left as if the liberals were 
dogs. And the white liberals pr obably do the ver y same thing. I can't be sure about the whites, I 
am never ar ound them in private-but the bourgeois Negroes k now I'm not lying.
 
I'm telling  it like it _ is_! You _never_ have t o wor ry about me biting my  tongue i f something I know 
as truth is on my mind. Raw , naked truth exch ange d between the black m an and the white ma n is 
what a whole lot m ore of is needed in this country-to cle ar the air o f the racial mirages, clichs, 
and lies t hat this country's ver y atmosphere has been filled with f or four hundred years. 
In many communities, e speciall y small communities, white p eople h ave cre ated a benevolen t 
image of themselves as having  had so much "g ood-wi ll toward our Negroes," every time any 
"local Negro" b egins su ddenly letting the local whites k now the truth-that the black p eople ar e sick 
of being hind-tit, second-class, disfranchise d, that's when you h ear, uttered so sadly, 
"Unfortunately now be cause o f this, o ur wh ites of good-wi ll are starting  to turn against t he 
Negroes. . . . It's s o regrett able
 
. . . progress was b eing made . . . but now our c ommunicatio ns between the races have br oken 
down! "
 
What are they talking a bout? There never was  any _communica tion_. Un til after World War II, 
there wasn't a  single co mmunity  in the entire Unite d States where th e white m an heard from any 
local Negro "l eaders" the trut h of what Negroes felt about the conditio ns that the white co mmunity 
imposed upon Negroes.
 
You need some pro of? Well, then, why was it that when Negroes di d start revolting  across 
America, vi rtually all of white America was caught u p in surprise and even shock ? I would hate to 
be gener al of an army  as badly informed as the America n wh ite ma n has been about the Negro in 
this c ountry.
 
This is t he sit uation which p ermitt ed N egro combusti on to slowl y build u p to the revolution-poi nt, 
without the white man realizing it. AH over America, the local N egro "leader," in ord er to survive 
as a "leader," kept reassuring th e loc al wh ite ma n, in effect, "Everything's  all right, everything's 
right in hand, boss!" When the "leader" wanted a little something for his people: "Er, boss , some 
of the people talking  about we sur e need a better sch ool, boss ." And if the local N egroes ha dn't 
been causi ng any "trouble, " the "benevolent" white ma n might n od and give them a scho ol, or 
some jobs. 
The white men belonging to the power  structures in thousan ds of communities across America 
know that I'm right! They kn ow that I am describing what h as been the true pattern of 
"communicatio ns" b etwee n the "local whites o f good-will" and the loc al Negroes. I t has been a 
pattern crea ted by domineering, eg o-ridden whites. Its characteristic de sign permitte d the white 
man to feel "noble" about throwing crum bs to the black m an, inst ead of feeling guilty about the 
local c ommunity's system o f cruelly exploiting  Negroes.
 
But I want to tell you s omething. This p attern, this " system" that the wh ite ma n creat ed, of 
teaching Negroes t o hide the trut h from him behind a facade of grinning, "yessir -bossing," f oot-
shuffling and head-scra tching- that system h as done the America n white m an more harm t han an 
invading army  would do to him.
 
Why do I say this? B ecause all this h as steadily helped this America n wh ite ma n to build u p, deep 
in his psyche, absolute conviction t hat he _is_ "superior." In how many, many communities h ave, 
thus, white m en who di dn't f inish high sc hool regarde d condesc endingl y university -educated local 
Negro "leaders," princi pals o f schools, t eachers, doctors, o ther profession als?
 
The white man's system  has been impose d upon non-wh ite peoples all over th e world. This is 
exactl y the reason wh y wherever  people who are anything bu t white live  in this world to day, the 
white man's governm ents are finding t hemselves  in deeper a nd deeper trouble a nd peril.
 Let's just face truth. Facts! W hether or n ot the white ma n of the wo rld is a ble to face truth, and 
facts, about the true reasons f or his tr oubles-that's what ess entially will determine whet her or n ot 
he will now survive.
 
Today we are seeing this revolution of the non-wh ite peoples, who jus t a few years ago would 
have f rozen in horror  if the mighty white nations so m uch aslifted an eyebro w. What it is, si mply, is 
that black a nd brown  and red and yello w pe oples have, after hundreds of years o f exploit ation 
and impos ed "inferiority" and general m isuse , become, finally, do-o r-die sick a nd tired o f the white 
man's h eel on their necks.
 
How can the white America n government figure o n selling "democr acy" and "brotherhood" to non-
white peoples-if they rea d and hear every day what's going  on right h ere in America , and see the 
better-th an-a-t housan d-words p hotographs of the Americ an white m an denying "d emocracy" a nd 
"brotherhood" even t o America's n ative- born n on-whites? The world's no n-wh ites kn ow how this 
Negro here has loved t he America n wh ite ma n, and slaved for him, tended to him, nursed him . 
This Negro ha s jumped in to uniform and gone off and died when this America was at tacked by 
enemies bo th white and non-white. S uch a faithful, loyal n on-white as _this_-an d _still_ America 
bombs him , and sets d ogs on  him, and turns fir e hoses on him, and jails him by t he thousands, 
and beats him bloody , and inflicts u pon him all m anner o f other crimes.
 
Of course these t hings, k nown and refreshed ever y day f or the rest o f the world's no n-wh ites, ar e 
a vital f actor in these b urnings o f ambassadors' limo usines , these stonings, de filings, a nd 
wreckings  of embassies and legati ons, these s houts o f
 
"White ma n, go ho me!" these a ttacks o n white Christia n missio naries, a nd these bombings and 
tearing  down of flags.
 
Is it cl ear wh y I have said t hat the American white man's m alignan t superiorit y complex has done 
him more harm t han an invading ar my?
 
*     *     *
 
The America n black ma n should b e focusing his every effort toward b uildinghis _own_ 
business es, a nd decent homes for himself. As other ethnic groups have d one, let the black 
people, where ver p ossible , however  possi ble, p atronize their own kin d, hire their own kin d, and 
start in those ways to build u p the black r ace's a bility to do for its elf. That's the only way the 
American black m an is ever going  to ge t resp ect. O ne thing the white man never can give the 
black man is s elf-res pect! The black man never can become independent and recogni zed as a 
human being who is truly  equal with other hu man beings u ntil he  has what t hey have, a nd until he 
is doing for himsel f what others ar e doi ng for themselves.
 
The black man in the ghet toes, for insta nce, has to start self-correcting his own m aterial, m oral, 
and spiritual de fects an d evils. The black man needs to start his own pr ogram to get rid o f 
drunken ness , drug ad dictio n, prostitu tion. The black m an in America h as to lift up his own s ense 
of values.
 
Only a few th ousands of Negroes, rel atively a very tiny number, are taking a ny part in 
"integration ." Here, agai n, it is t hose few bo urgeois Negroes, rushing to  throw awa y their little 
money in t he white man's luxur y hotels, his swanky nightclu bs, a nd big, fi ne, exclusive 
resta urants. The white pe ople patronizing those places c an afford it. B ut these Negroes you see 
in those plac es can't a fford it, c ertainly  most of them can't. Why, what d oes some Negro one 
installmen t paym ent away from disas ter lo ok like so mewhere downtown ou t to dine, grinning at 
some h eadwaiter who has mor e money than the Negro? Those bourgeois Negroes o ut draping 
big tableclot h-sized n apkins over  their knees an d ordering quail un der glass a nd stewed s nails-
why, Negroes d on't even _like_ snails! W hat they're doing is pr oving they're int egrated.
 If you want to get ri ght down t o the real ou tcome of this s o-called " integration," what you've got t o 
arrive at  is int ermarriage.
 
I'm right _with _ the Southern wh ite ma n who b elieves th at you can't haves o-called " integration," 
at least not for long, withou t intermarriage incre asing.  And what good is this f or anyo ne? Let's 
again f ace reality . In a world as color- hostile as this, m an or wom an, black or white, what d o they 
want w ith a mate of the other race ?
 
Certainly  white p eople h ave served e nough n otice of their h ostility  to any bl acks in t heir f amilies 
and neighbor hoods. And the way most Negroes feel today, a mixed couple pr obably finds that 
black families, bl ack co mmunities , are even m ore hostile th an the wh ite ones. So what's bo und to 
face "integrat ed" marriages, except b eing u nwelco med, unwant ed, "misfits" in wh ichever wor ld 
they try to live  in? W hat we arri ve at is th at "integration," sociall y, is n o good for either sid e. 
"Integratio n," ultimately, would destroy the white rac e . . . and destroy  the black race.
 
The white man's "integrating" with bl ack wome n has alre ady changed t he complexion a nd 
characteristics o f the black rac e in America. W hat's been proved by the "blacks" whose 
complexions ar e "whiter" than m any "white " people? I'm told that there are in Americ a today 
between two a nd five m illion "white N egroes," who are " passing" in white s ociety . Imagine their 
torture! Living  in constant fear that some b lack p erson they've known might meet and expos e 
them. Imagine every  day living a lie. _Imagine _ hearing th eir own white husbands, their own 
white wives, eve n their own white childre n, talking  about "those Negroes."
 
I would d oubt if anyon e in America h as heard Negroes m ore bitt er against the white m an than 
some o f those I have h eard. But I will tell you that, witho ut any ques tion, the _most_ b itter anti-
white diatribes that I have ever heard h ave come from "passing" Negroes , living as whites, 
among whites, exp osed ever y day to  what white p eople s ay am ong t hemselves regarding 
Negroes-things th at a rec ognized N egro n ever would hear. Why, if there was a racial 
showdown,t hese Negroes "p assing" within white circles would b ecome the black sid e's mo st 
valuable "spy" and ally.
 
Europe's "brown b abies," now young men and women who are s tarting to marry , and produce 
families o f their own . . . have their experiences througho ut their li ves, sc arred a s racial f reaks, 
proved a nything  positive for "integration "?
 
"Integratio n" is called "assimilatio n" if white ethnic groups alone ar e invol ved: it's f ought against 
tooth and nail by  those who want t heir h eritage pr eserved. L ook at how the Irish t hrew  the English 
out of Irela nd. The Irish kn ew the English would engul f them. Look at the French-Ca nadians, 
fanatically fighting to keep their identity.
 
In fact, hist ory's most tragic result of a mixed, therefore dil uted and weak ened, ethnic ide ntity has 
been experienc ed by a white ethnic grou p-the Jew in Germ any.
 
He h ad made greater c ontrib utions to Germ any than G ermans t hemselves ha d. Jews had won 
over half of Germ any's  Nobel Prizes. Every  culture in G ermany was le d by the Jew;  he publishe d 
the great est n ewspaper. Jews we re the greatest artists, the great est p oets, composers, stage 
direct ors. Bu t those Jews  made a fatal m istake-assimilati ng.
 
From World War I to Hitler's  rise, the Jews in Germa ny had been increasingly  intermarry ing. Many 
changed t heir n ames and many took other relig ions. Their own Jewish religion, t heir own rich 
Jewish e thnic an d cultural ro ots, they anesthetized, and cut off. . . until they began thinking  of 
themselves a s "Germans." And the next thi ng they kn ew, there was  Hitler, rising  to power  from 
the beer h alls-with his e motional "Aryan m aster rac e" theory. And right a t hand for a scapego at 
was the self-weaken ed, self-deluded "German" Jew.
 Most myst erious is h ow did those Jews-with all o f their brilliant m inds, with  all of their power  in 
every aspect o f Germany's affairs-how did those Jews  stand al most as if mesmerized, watching something which d id not spring  upon them overnight, but which  was grad ually develo ped-a 
monstro us pl an for their own _murder_.
 
Their s elf-br ainwashing had been so complete that not long after, in the gas ch ambers, a  lot of 
them were s till gasping, " It can't be true!"
 
If Hitler h ad conquered the wo rld, as he meant to-that is a shuddery  thought f or every Jew alive 
today.
 
The Jew never will forget that less on. Jewish intelligence eyes watch ever y neo-Na zi 
organization. Right a fter the wa r, the Jews' Hagan ah m ediating bo dy stepped up the longtime 
nego tiatio ns with the British. B ut this ti me, the Stern gang  was sh ooting the British. And this tim e 
the British a cquiesce d and helped them to wrest Pal estin e awa y from the Arabs, the rightful 
owners, a nd then the Jews set up Israel, t heir own co untry -the one thing t hat every race o f man in 
the wor ld respec ts, and underst ands .
 
*     *     *
 
Not long ago, t he black man in America was fed a dose of another form of the weake ning, lulling 
and deluding effects o f so-c alled "i ntegratio n." It was that "Farce on  Washingto n," I call it.
 
The idea of a mass of blacks marc hing on Washington was originally  the brainchild o f the 
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Por ters' A. Philip Ran dolph. For twenty or m ore years  the March o n 
Washingto n ide a had floated aro und am ong Negroes . And, spontaneously, suddenly  now, that 
idea caught o n.
 Overalled rural S outhern Negroes, s mall t own N egroes, Nort hern gh etto Negroes, eve n 
thousands of previously Uncle Tom Negroes bega n talking  "March! "
 
Nothing since J oe Louis had so coalesce d the masses of Negroes. Gr oups of Negroes we re 
talking o f getting t o Washingto n any way  they could-in rickety  old c ars, on  buses , hitc h-hiking-
walking, even, if they had to. They envisione d thousan ds of black bro thers c onver ging toget her 
upon Washingto n-to lie d own in the streets , on airport runwa ys, o n governm ent lawns-de manding 
of the Co ngress a nd the White Hous e some concrete civil rights ac tion.
 
This was  a national b itterness; m ilitant, unorganized, a nd leaderless. Pred ominantly, it was young 
Negroes, d efiant o f what ever m ight be the consequences, sick a nd tired o f the black m an's neck 
under the white man's h eel.
 
The white man had plenty of good re asons for nervous wor ry. The right s park- some unpredicta ble 
emotional c hemistr y-could s et off a black uprising. The government knew that thousands of 
milling,  angry  blacks not only could co mpletely  disrupt W ashington-b ut they could eru pt in 
Washingto n.
 
The White House speedily  invited i n the major civ il rights Negro "leaders. " They we re aske d to 
stop the planned March. They truthfully said they hadn't begun it , they had no control over it- the 
idea was  national, sp ontaneous , unorganized, a nd leaderless. I n other wo rds, it was  a black 
powder k eg.
 
Any student of how "integratio n" can weaken the black man's m ovem ent was about to observe a 
master less on.
 
The White House , with a fanfare of internation al pu blicity, "approved, " "endorse d," and 
"welcom ed" a March on  Washingt on. The big civ il rights o rganizatio ns right at this ti me had been 
publicly squabbling about donations.The _N ew York Times_ h ad brok en the story . The N.A. A.C.P . 
had charged t hat other age ncies' d emonstratio ns, highly  publicized, ha d attracted a m ajor part of 
the civil rights d onations-w hile t he N. A.A.C.P. got left holding the bag, s upplying costly bail and legal  talent for the other organizations' jaile d demonstrators.
 
It was like a  movie. The next sce ne was t he "big six" civ il rights Negro "leaders" me eting in New 
York City with t he white h ead of a big phila nthropic age ncy. They were t old that their money-
wranglin g in public was damaging their im age. And a reported $800,000 was  donated to a United 
Civil Rights Le adership c ouncil that was  quick ly orga nized by t he "big six."
 
Now, what h ad insta ntly achieved bl ack u nity? The white m an's mo ney. What string  was a ttached 
to the mo ney? Advice. N ot only was  there this donation, but another c omparable su m was 
promised , for sometime later on , after the March . . . obviously  if all went well.
 
The original "angry" March o n Washington was now ab out to be entirely  change d.
 
Massi ve in ternation al pu blicity proj ected the "big six" as March o n Washington leaders. I t was 
news  to those a ngry grassro ots Negroes s teadily adding steam to their March plans. They 
probably  assumed that now those f amous "leaders" we re endorsing an d joining them.
 
Invited next t o join the March were f our famous white p ublic f igures: one Ca tholic, o ne Jew, one 
Protestant, and one labor boss .
 
The massive publicity  now gen tly hinted that the "big te n" would "s upervise" t he March o n 
Washingto n's "m ood," and its "d irection ."
 The four white figures beg an nodding. The word spread fast among so-calle d "lib eral" Ca tholics, 
Jews,  Protestants, a nd laborites: it was  "democratic" to join this black March.
 
And suddenly, the previously  Marc h-nervous wh ites beg an announcing  _they_  were going.
 
It was as if electrical  current shot through t he ranks o f bourgeois N egroes-the very so-calle d 
"middle-class " and "upper-class " who h ad earlier be en deploring  the March o n Washington talk by 
grass-roo ts Negroes. B ut white people, now, were going t o march. Why, some d owntrod den, 
jobless , hungry Negro might h ave gotte n trampled. Those "integration "-ma d Negroes practic ally 
ran over e ach other try ing to  find out where t o sign u p. The "angry  blacks" March suddenly had 
been made chic. S uddenly it h ad a Kentucky  Derby image. For t he status-seeker, it was a status 
symbol. " Were you _ there_?" You can hear that right t oday.
 
It had become a n outing, a picnic.
 
The morning of the March, any ricket y carlo ads o f angry, dusty, sweating sm all-town Negroes 
would have go tten lost among t he chartered je t planes , railroad cars, a nd air-conditi oned buses . 
What originally was pla nned to be an angry riptide , one English newspa per ap tly describe d now 
as "the gen tle flood." Talk about "integrate d"! It was like s alt an d pepper. And, by now , there 
wasn't a single logistics a spec t uncontrolled.
 
The marc hers h ad been instruct ed to bring no signs-si gns were pr ovided. They ha d been told to 
sing one song: "We Shall Overco me." They h ad been told _how_ to arrive, _when _, _wher e_ to 
arrive, _where _ to ass emble, when to _start_ marc hing,  the _route_ to march. First- aid stations 
were strategicall y located-even where to _faint_! 
Yes, I was there. I observed t hat circus. W ho ever he ard o f angry revolutionists a ll harmoniz ing 
"We Shall Overco me . . . Suum Day . . ." while tripping a nd swaying alo ng arm-in-arm with the 
very people they were s upposed to be angril y revolting agains t? W ho ever he ard of angry 
revolutionists swinging th eir bare feet together w ith their o ppressor in lily -pad park p ools, with 
gospels a nd guitars a nd "I Have, A Dream" speeches?
 
And the black m asses in America were- and still are-having  a night mare.
 
These "angry  revolutionists " even followed t heir f inal instruc tions: to leave early . With all of those thousands upon thousands of "angry revolutio nists, " so f ew stayed over th at the next m orning the 
Washingto n hotel associa tion r eport ed a costly loss in empty rooms.
 
Hollywood couldn't have t opped it.
 
In a subsequent press p oll, n ot one Co ngressman or S enator with a previous rec ord o f oppositi on 
to civil rights sai d he had changed his views. What did anyone exp ect? How was  a one-day 
"integrate d" picnic going  to counter-in fluence these repres entatives o f prejudic e roo ted deep in 
the psyche of the America n white m an for four hundred years?
 
The very fact that millions , black and white, b elieved in this m onumental farce is a nother exam ple 
of how much this co untry  goes in f or the surface glossing over , the esc ape ruse , surfaces, inste ad 
of truly dealing w ith its deep-roo ted pro blems .
 
What that March on Washingto n did do was lull Negroes for a while. But inevitably , the black 
masses s tarted realizing they had been smoothly hoaxed agai n by the wh ite ma n. And, inevitably , 
the black ma n's a nger rekin dled, deeperthan ever , and there bega n bursting  out in d ifferent citi es, 
in the "long, hot summer" o f 1964, unpreced ented racial crises.
 
*     *     *
 
About a m onth before the "Farce o n Washington, " the _New York Times_ reported me, according 
to its poll c onducted on college an d univers ity campuses, a s "the second most sought a fter" 
speaker a t colleges and universities. The only speak er ah ead of me was Se nator B arry 
Goldwater.
 
I believe  that what had gen erate d such c ollege popularity  for me was D r. Lincoln's book, _ The 
Black M uslims in America_ . It had been made required readi ng in numerous c ollege  courses. 
Then a long, c andid int erview with m e was carried by _Playboy_ mag azine, whose circula tion o n 
college c ampuses is the biggest o f any mag azine's. And many students, having  studied first the 
book and then the _Playboy_ in terview, wante d to hear in p erson this so-calle d "fiery Black 
Muslim. "
 
When the _N ew York Times_ p oll was  publishe d, I had spoke n at well over fi fty colleges a nd 
universities, like Br own, Harvard, Yale, Colu mbia and Ru tgers,  in the Ivy  Leagu e, and others 
througho ut the country. Right n ow, I have invitatio ns from Corn ell, Prince ton and probably a 
dozen others, a s soon as my tim e and their availa ble d ates ca n be scheduled toget her. Among 
Negro institu tions , I had then been to Atlanta Univers ity and Clark
 
College down in Atlanta, to Howard Universit y in Washingt on, D.C. , and to a number o f others 
with small st udent b odies.
 
Except for all-black audienc es, I liked t he college a udiences best. The college s essions 
sometimes ra n two to  four hours-they o ften ran overtime. Challe nges, queries, a nd criticisms 
were fired at me by th e usually objective and alwaysal ive and searching mi nds o f undergraduate 
and grad uate students, and their f aculties. The college sessio ns never failed to be exhilarating. 
They never f ailed in helping me to further my own ed ucation. I never experienc ed one college 
sessio n that didn't sh ow me  ways to improve upon my pr esen tation and defense of Mr. 
Muhammad's te achings. S ometimes i n a p anel or d ebate appearance, I'd find a jam-pack ed 
audience t o hear m e, alone, facing six or eight st udent and faculty scholars-he ads of departments 
such as s ociology , psychology, philoso phy, history, and relig ion, and each of them co ming at  me 
in his speci alty.
 
At the outset, alwa ys I'd confront suc h panels with something suc h as: "Gentlemen, I finished the 
eighth grade in Maso n, Michigan. My  high scho ol was  the black ghett o of Roxbury , 
Massac huse tts. My  college was  in the stre ets o f Harle m, and my master's was tak en in priso n. Mr. Muhammad has taught me that I never n eed fear any man's intellect who tries t o defend or to 
justify the white man's crimin al record against the non-wh ite ma n-especially  the white m an and 
the black ma n here in Nort h Americ a."
 
It was like b eing on  a battlefield-with int ellectu al an d philoso phical b ullets . It was an exciting 
battling  with id eas. I got so I could feel my au diences' t emperaments. I've talke d with other p ublic 
speakers; they agree t hat this ability  is native to  any pers on who h as the "mass appeal" gif t, who 
can get t hrough t o and move people. It's a psychic ra dar. As a doctor, with his finger against a 
pulse, is a ble to feel the heart ra te, whe n I am up there s peaki ng, I can _feel_ the reactio n to what 
I am saying. 
 
I think I  could b e speaki ng blindfolded and after five m inutes, I could t ell you if  sitting out there 
before me was an all-black or a n all-wh ite audience. Black a udiences an d white a udiences feel 
distinguish ably different. Bl ack a udiences feel warmer, there is almost a  musical rhythm , for me, 
even in their silent res ponse. 
Questio n-and-answer  periods are a nother area where, by now , again bli ndfolded, I can often tell 
you th e ethnic sourc e of a  questio n. The most easily recognizable o f these to me are a Jew in 
any au dience sit uation, a nd a bourgeois Negro  in "integrat ed" audiences.
 
My clue t o the Jew's ques tion and challenges is t hat among a ll other et hnic grou ps, his expresse d 
thinking,  his express ed concer ns, ar e the most subjective. And the Jew  is usually hypersensitive. 
I mean, you can't even s ay "Jew"  without him accusing you o f anti-Se mitism. I don't care what a 
Jew is pr ofessionally , doctor, merchant, housewif e, student, or what ever-first he, or s he, thinks 
Jew.
 
Now, of course I c an understa nd the Jew's  hypersensitiv ity. For two th ousand years, relig ious an d 
personal p rejudices agains t Jews  have b een vent ed and exercised, a s stro ng as white pr ejudices 
against the non-wh ite. But I know that America's f ive a nd a half million Jews  (two million of them 
are c oncentra ted in New  York) look at it very practically , whether t hey know  it or n ot: that all of the 
bigotr y and hatred focused upon the black m an keeps off the Jew  a lot of heat that would b e on 
him otherw ise.
 
For an  example o f what I am talking  about-in every black gh etto, Jews  own the ma jor bu siness es. 
Every night th e owners o f those business es go h ome with th at black c ommunity's mo ney, which 
helps th e ghetto to stay poor. But I doubt that I have ever ut tered this absolute truth before an 
audience withou t being hotly challe nged, and acc used by a Jew of anti-Semitism. W hy? I will bet 
that I have t old five h undred such challengers  that Jews as a  group would never watch s ome 
other mi nority  system atically  siphoning out their community's reso urces withou t doing something 
about it. I have t old them that if I tell t he simple truth, it d oesn't mean that I am anti-Semitic; it 
means mer ely that I am anti-exploita tion.
 The white liberal m ay be a little taken aback to know that from all-Negro au diences I  never h ave 
had one challenge, n ever one questi on that defended the white man. That has been true even 
when a  lot o f those "black b ourge oisie" a nd "integration "-ma d Negroes were a mong th e blacks. 
All Negroes, a mong th emselves, admit the white man's crimin al record . They may n ot know as 
many details as I do, but they kn ow the gen eral pict ure.
 
But, let me tell you something significant: This very same bourgeois Negro who, a mong Negroes, 
would never m ake a fool of himself in try ing to defend the wh ite ma n-watch t hat same N egro in a 
mixed bl ack a nd white audienc e, knowing he 's overhe ard by his b eloved " Mr. Charlie." Why, you 
should h ear those Negroes attack m e, trying to justify , or forgive  the white man's crim es! These 
Negroes ar e people who bring me  neares t to breaking  one of my princip al rules, which is n ever to 
let mysel f become over- emotional a nd angry. Why, sometimes I've f elt I ought to jump down o ff 
that stand and get _p hysical_ with some of those brainwashe d white m an's tools, p arrots, 
puppets. At the colleges, I've develo ped some s tock p ut-downs for them: "Y ou m ust be a law 
student, ar en't you?" They have t o say  either yes, or n o. And I say, "I thought you were. You 
defend this crimin al white man harder than he defends his guilty  self!" One particular universit y's "token-integrate d" black P h.D. associ ate professor I never w ill forget; he got me so m ad I couldn't 
see straight. As badly as o ur 22 millions of education ally deprived b lack p eople n eed the help of 
any brains he has, there he was lo oking  like so me fly in the buttermilk a mong white 
"colleagues "-and he was trying to _eat me up_! He was ran ting about what a "divis ive 
demagogu e" and what a  "reverse racist " I was. I was racking  my h ead, to spear that fool; finally I 
held up my ha nd, and he stopped. "Do you k now what white racists call bl ack P h.D's? " He s aid 
something like, " I believe that I happen not to be aware o f that"-you k now, one of these ul tra-
proper-talking  Negroes. And I laid t he word d own on him, loud: "Nigger!"
 
*     *     * 
Speaking in these c olleges  and universities was goo d for the Natio n of Islam, I would re port t o Mr. 
Muhammad, because t he devil ish white man's b est minds we re develo ped and influenced in the 
colleges a nd universities. B ut for some reaso n that I could n ever underst and until much la ter, Mr. 
Muhammad never re ally want ed m e to speak at these colleges a nd universities.
 
I was to learn later, from Mr . Muhammad's own sons, that he was envious because h e felt 
unequipp ed to speak at  colleges hi msel f. But nevertheless , in Mr . Muhammad's behalf at this 
time, I was finding th ese highl y intelligent audienc es amazing ly open-minded and objective in 
their recep tions o f the raw, naked truths th at I would t ell them:
 
"Time and time again, the black , the brown, the red , and the yellow races have witness ed and 
suffered the white ma n's small ability to underst and the simple n otes of the spirit. The white man 
seems t one deaf to the total o rches tratio n of humanity. Ever y day, his newspa pers' f ront pages 
show us the world that he has crea ted.
 
"God's wrath ful judgm ent is close upon this white m an stumbling a nd groping blindly in 
wicked ness a nd evil and spiritual d arkness.
 
"Look-re maini ng today are only two gian t white nations, America an d Russia, e ach of them with 
mistrus tful, nervous s atellites. America is propping up  most of the remaining  white world. The 
Frenc h, the Belgians, t he Dutch, the Portugu ese, the Spanish and other wh ite nations have 
weaken ed steadily as non-white Asians an d Africans have recovered t heir la nds.
 
"America is subsi dizing what is l eft of the prestige a nd strengt h of the once might y Brit ain. The 
sun has set forever on  that monocled, pith-h elmeted resid ent colonialist, sip ping tea with his 
delica te lady in the non-wh ite colo niesb eing systematically robbed of every  valua ble res ource. 
Britain's s uperfluous ro yalty and nobility  now exist by  charging  tourists t o ins pect the once 
baronial c astles, and by selling  memoirs, p erfumes, autographs, ti tles, a nd even t hemselves.
 
"The whole world kn ows th at the white man cannot survive another war. If either o f the two gian t 
white nations pushes the button, white civilization wi ll die!
 
"And we see ag ain th at not ideologies, b ut race, a nd color, is what b inds human beings. Is it 
accid ental that as Red Chin ese vis it African and Asian countries, Russia and America draw 
steadily closer to each other?
 
"The collecti ve white m an's hist ory has left the non-wh ite peoples no  alternative, e ither, but to 
draw  closer to  each other. Charact eristicall y, as always,  the devilish wh ite ma n lacks th e moral 
strengt h and courage t o cast o ff his arrogance . He wants , today, to 'buy' friends a mong the non-
whites. He tries , charact eristically , to cover  up his p ast rec ord. H e does not possess t he humility 
to admit his guilt, to try and atone for his crimes. The white m an has perverte d the si mple 
message o f love t hat the Pro phet Jesus lived an d taugh t when He walked upon this e arth."
 
Audienc es seemed surprised when I spok e about Jesus. I would explai n that we Muslims b elieve 
in the Pr ophet Jesus . He was on e of the three most important Pro phets o f the religion o f Islam, 
the others being Mu hammad and Moses . In Jerus alem there ar e Muslim s hrines b uilt to  the Prophet Jes us. I would explain t hat it was our belie f that Christianit y did not perform what Christ 
taught. I  never f ailed t o cite that even Billy  Graham, challenge d in Africa, had himsel f made the 
distinc tion, "I believe in Christ, no t Christia nity."
 
I never will forget one little b londe co-ed after I h ad spoken at her New Engla nd college. Sh e must 
have c aught t he next pl ane behind that one I took to  New  York. S he found the Muslim res taurant 
in Harle m. I just h appened to be there whe n she came in. Her clo thes, h er carriage, h er acc ent, 
all sh owed Deep South white br eeding and money. At that college, I told how the antebellu m 
white slavemaster even devilishly  manipulated his own woma n. He convince d her that she was 
"too pure" for his b ase "animal instinc ts." With this "noble" rus e, he conned his own wife to look 
away from his o bvious pr eference f or the "animal" black woman . So the "delicate m istress " sat 
and watch ed the plantation's little mongrel- complexioned children , sired o bviously by her father, 
her h usband, h er brothers, her sons. I said a t that college t hat the guilt o f Americ an whites 
includ ed their knowledge that in hating Negroes, they were h ating, t hey were rej ecting, th ey were 
denying, t heir own blo od.
 
Anyway, I'd never se en anyone I ever sp oke b efore more affected than this little white college gir l. 
She demanded, right up  in my f ace, "Do n't you b elieve th ere ar e any _go od_ wh ite people?" I 
didn't want t o hurt her feelings. I t old her, "People's _ deeds_ I believe in , Miss -not their words."
 
"What can I _do_?" she exclaime d. I told her, "Nothing." S he burst out crying,  and ran out and up 
Lenox Avenue and caught a  taxi.
 
*     *     *
 
Mr. Muhammad-eac h time I'd go t o see hi m in Chicago, or in Phoenix-would wa rm me with his 
expressions of his ap proval an d confidenc e in m e.
 
He le ft me in charge of the Natio n of Islam's a ffairs when h e made an Omra pilgrimage t o the 
Holy City Mecca .
 
I believed s o stro ngly in Mr . Muhammad that I would h ave hurle d mysel f betwee n him  and an 
assassin. 
A chance event brough t crashing h ome to me that there was so mething- one thing-greater t han 
my reverence f or Mr. Muhammad.
 
It was t he awes omeness of my reason to revere him .
 
I was th e invited s peaker a t the Harvard Law Sc hool Forum . I happened to glance through a 
window. Abruptly, I realized th at I was looking in t he directio n of the apartment house that was  my 
old burglar y gang's  hideout.
 
It rocked me like a tidal wave. Sc enes from my once depraved life las hed through my mi nd. 
_Livin g_ like an  animal; _thinking_ like a n animal!
 
Aware ness c ame surging  up in me -how  deeply the religion o f Islam had reache d down into the 
mud to lift me up, to save m e from being what I inevitably would have b een: a dead crimin al in a 
grave, or , if still alive, a  flint-har d, bitter, thirty-seven-year- old convict in some p enitentiary, or 
insane asylum. Or , at best, I would h ave been an old, fading Detroit R ed, hustling, stealing 
enough f or food and narcotics, and mysel f being st alked as pr ey by cruelly  ambitious younger 
hustlers suc h as Detroit R ed had been.
 
But Allah h ad bless ed me to learn about the relig ion of Islam, which h ad enabled me to lift myself 
up from the muck and the m ire of this rotting wor ld.
 
And there I stood, the invited speaker , at Harva rd. 
A story  that I had read in prison whe n I was rea ding a lot of Greek myth ology flicked in to my 
head.
 
The boy Icar us. Do you remember th e story?
 Icarus' father m ade some win gs th at he fastened with wa x. "N ever fly b ut so high with t hese 
wings," t he father s aid. B ut soaring aro und, this wa y, that way, Icarus' flying  pleased him so that 
he bega n thinking he  was flying on his own merit . Higher, he flew-higher- until the heat of the sun 
melted the wa x hol ding those win gs. And down ca me Icarus-tu mbling.
 
Standing there by that Harvard  window, I silen tly vowed t o Allah t hat I never would f orget that any 
wings I wore had been put on by t he religion o f Islam. That fact I never have f orgotte n . . . not for 
one secon d.
 
 
 
CHAPT ER S IXTEEN
OUT
 
In nineteen sixt y-one, Mr. Muhammad's c ondition grew  suddenly worse.
 
As he talked with m e when I visited him, when h e talked with anyone , he would u npredicta bly 
begin c oughing har der, and harder, until his body was  wracke d and jerking in ag onies t hat were 
painful to watch , and Mr. Muhammad would have to take to his b ed.
 
We among Mr . Muhammad's o fficials, and his family, kept the situ ation to ours elves, while we 
could. F ew other Muslims became aware o f Mr. Muhammad's c ondition until there we re last-
minute cancellatio ns of long-advertised personal a ppearances at some big Muslim rallies. 
Muslims k new that only something really serious would ever  have st opped the Mess enger fr om 
keeping his pr omise to be with them at their rallies. Their qu estions had to be answered, a nd the 
news  of our leader's illness s wiftly spread through th e Na tion of Islam .
 
Anyon e not a Muslim c ould not conceive  what th e possible loss o f Mr.Muhammad would h ave 
meant among his followers. To us, the Natio n of Islam was M r. Muhammad. What bonded us into 
the best orga nizatio n black America ns ever ha d was every  Muslim's d evout r egard for Mr . 
Muhammad as black America's m oral, mental, an d spiritual re former.
 
Stated another way , we Muslims regarded ourselves as moral an d mental and spiritu al exam ples 
for other black America ns, b ecause we f ollowed the pers onal exam ple o f Mr. Muhammad. Black 
communities discuss ed with resp ect h ow Muslims were s uspended if they lied , gam bled, cheated, 
or smoke d. For moral crimes, such as fornica tion or adultery , Mr. Muhammad personally would 
mete out sentences of from one to five years  of "isolation," if not comple te exp ulsion f rom the 
Natio n. And Mr. Muhammad would punish h is officials more rea dily than the newest c onvert in a 
mosque. H e said that any defecting o fficial betrayed both hims elf and his po sition as a leader a nd 
exam ple for other Muslims . For every  Muslim, in his rej ection of immoral t emptation, the beacon 
was Mr. Muhammad. All Muslims f elt as one that without his light, we would all be  in darkness.
 
As I have rel ated, doctors recommended a dry  climat e to ease Mr . Muh ammad's co nditio n. 
Quickly  we found up for sale i n Phoenix the home of the saxoph one player, Louis Jord an. The 
Natio n's tre asury  purc hased the home, and Mr. Muh ammad soon moved there.
 
Only by b eing two people could I have wo rked harder in the serv ice of the Natio n of Islam. I had 
every gratification that I wanted. I had helped bring ab out the progress  and national impac t suc h 
that none could c all us liars when we called Mr . Muhammad the mo st powerf ul black ma n in 
America. I  had helped Mr . Muh ammad and his other m inisters t o revolutio nize the America n black 
man's thinking, o pening his eyes u ntil h e would n ever again lo ok in t he same fearful, worshipf ul way at the white man. I had particip ated in s preading the truths that had done so much to help the 
American black m an rid hi msel f ofthe mirage t hat the white race was made up of "superior" 
beings. I had been a part of the tapping o f something in the black s ecret s oul.
 
If I harbored any person al disa ppointment whatso ever, it was th at privately  I was convinced that 
our N ation of Islam co uld b e an eve n greater f orce in the American b lack m an's overall  strug gle-if 
we engaged i n mo re _actio n_. By that, I mean I thought privately  that we should have amended, 
or relaxed , our general n on-engagem ent policy . I felt that, wherever  black p eople c ommitted 
themselves, in the Little R ocks an d the Birmingha ms a nd other pl aces, milita ntly discipline d 
Muslims s hould also be there-for all t he world t o see, and resp ect, a nd discuss.
 
It could be heard increasingl y in the N egro c ommunities: " Those Muslims _talk_ t ough, but they 
never _d o_ anythi ng, unless somebody  bothers Muslims." I moved ar ound among ou tsiders m ore 
than m ost other Musli m officials. I felt the very  real p otentiality that, consi dering  the merc urial 
moods of the black ma sses, this l abeling o f Muslims a s "talk o nly" could see us, power ful as we 
were, one day suddenly separate d from the N egroes' front-line strugg le.
 
But beyo nd that single pers onal conc ern, I  couldn' t have a sked Allah to bless my e fforts a ny more 
than he had. Islam in New  York Cit y was  grow ing faster th an anywhere in America. Fro m the one 
tiny mosqu e to which Mr. Muh ammad had originally  sent m e, I had now bu ilt thr ee of the N ation's 
most powerful and aggressi ve m osques-Harle m's Seven-A  in Manh attan, Coron a's Seve n-B in 
Queens, a nd Mosque S even-C  in Bro oklyn. And on a national b asis, I  had either directl y 
establish ed, o r I had helped to establish, most of the one hundred or more mosques in the fifty 
states. I was  crissc rossing North America sometimes a s often as four times a week. Often, what 
sleep I go t was  caught in the jet planes . I was ma intaining a m arathon sc hedule o f press, ra dio, 
television, a nd public-speaking  commitments. The only way that I could keep up with my job for 
Mr. Muhammad was by  flying with th e win gs th at he had given m e. 
*     *     *
 
As far back as 1961, when Mr . Muha mmad's illness to ok that turn for the worse, I had heard 
chance nega tive re marks co ncerni ng me. I had heard veiled i mplicatio ns. I had noticed other little 
evidences of the envy and of the jealousy  which Mr . Muha mmad had prophesie d. For exa mple , it 
was being sai d that "Minister Malcol m is tr ying to take over  the Nati on," it was bei ng said t hat I 
was "taking credit" for Mr . Muhammad's teaching, it was be ing said t hat I was try ing to  "build a n 
empire" for mysel f. It was being said that I loved playing "coast-to-co ast Mr . Big Shot."
 
When I heard these things, a ctually, they didn't anger me. They h elped me to re-st eel my in ner 
resolve  that such lies would never be come tr ue of me. I would always  remember that Mr . 
Muhammad had prophesie d this envy  and jealousy . This would help me  to ignore it , because I 
knew that _he_ would u ndersta nd if _he_ ever should h ear s uch t alk.
 
A freque nt rumor a mong no n-Muslims was  "Malcol m X is making a pile of money." All Musli ms at 
least knew be tter than that. _M e_ m aking m oney? The F.B.I. and the C.I.A. and the
 
I.R.S. all c ombined can't turn u p a thing I got, b eyon d a c ar to drive and a seven-room house to 
live in. (And by now the Natio n of Islam is je alously  and greedily trying to take awa y even t hat 
house.) I had _acc ess_ t o money. Yes! Elija h Muh ammad would a uthoriz e for me any amount 
that I asked for. But he knew, as every  Muslim official k new, that every nickel a nd dime I ever got 
was used to promote the N ation of Islam.
 
My attitude toward m oney generat ed the only  domestic quarrel th at I have ever h ad with my 
beloved wife Betty. As our c hildren increas ed in number, so di dBetty's  hints to me that I should 
put awa y _something_ f or our family. But I refused, and finally we had this a rgument. I put my f oot 
down. I  knew I h ad in Betty a wif e who would s acrifice her li fe for me if such an occasio n ever 
presented its elf to her , but still I told h er that too many organizatio ns had been destroyed by 
leaders who trie d to benefit pers onally, often goa ded into it by th eir wives. W e nearly  broke u p over this argu ment. I finally convinced Betty that if anythi ng ever h appened to me, the N ation of 
Islam would t ake c are o f her for the rest o f her life, and of our childre n until they were g rown. I 
could never h ave be en a bigger fool!
 
In every radio or television a ppearance, in every  newsp aper in terview, I always made it crystal 
clear t hat I was M r. Muhammad's _r epres entative_. Anyon e who ever he ard m e make a public 
speech during this time knows th at at least o nce a minute I said, " The Hon orable Elijah 
Muhammad teaches-" I would re fuse to talk w ith any perso n who ever tried any so-calle d "joke" 
about my constant reference to Mr. Muhammad. Whenever anyon e said , or wrote, " Malcolm X, 
the number two Bl ack Muslim-" I  would rec oil. I have called up reporters an d radio a nd television 
newscast ers long-distance and aske d them never t o use that phrasing  again, expl aining  to them: 
"_All_ Muslims are n umber two-a fter Mr. Muhammad."
 
My briefcase was stock ed with Mr . Muhammad's photograp hs. I gave them to photograph ers who 
snapped my pic ture. I would t elephone editors asking th em, "Please u se Mr . Muhammad's picture 
instead of mine." When, to my joy , Mr. Muhammad agre ed to gran t interviews to white writers, I 
rarely spoke t o a white w riter, or a black o ne either, whom I  didn't urge to visit  Mr. Muh ammad in 
person in Chicago-"G et the truth from the Mess enger in p erson"-an d a number o f them did go 
there a nd meet and interview him.
 
Both white p eople a nd Negroes-even incl uding Muslims-would ma ke me uncomfortable, always 
giving me  so much cre dit for the steady progress t hat theNatio n of Islam was  making. "All pr aise 
is due to Allah ," I told ever ybody. "Anything creditable that I do is d ue to Mr. Elijah Muhammad."
 
I believe  that no man in the Natio n of Islam could h ave gaine d the intern ational pr omin ence I 
gaine d with the wings Mr. Muh ammad had put on me-plus h aving the freedom that he granted me 
to take liberties and do things  on my own-a nd still have rem ained as faithful and as selfless a 
servant t o him as I was.
 
I would s ay that it was  in 1962 when I bega n to notice t hat less a nd less a bout me appeared in 
our N ation's _Muhammad Speaks_. I learned that Mr. Muh ammad's so n, Her bert, n ow the 
paper's p ublish er, had instruc ted that as little a s possible be printed about me. In fact, there was 
more in t he Muslim p aper ab out integrationist N egro "leaders" than there was  about me. I could 
read mo re about mysel f in the European, Asian, and African pr ess.
 
I am not griping ab out publicity  for myself . I alrea dy had received mo re publicity  than ma ny world 
personages . But I resen ted the fact that the Muslims' own newspa per de nied them news o f 
important things  being done in their behalf, simply  because it happened that I had done the 
things. I was conducti ng rallies, trying to propagate Mr . Muhammad's teachings, a nd becaus e of 
jealo usy and narrow -mindedness fi nally I got n o coverage a t all-for by now an order h ad been 
given t o completely  black m e out of the newspa per. For ins tance, I spoke t o eigh t thousand 
students a t the U niversit y of California, and the press t here gave big c overage t o what I  said of 
the power a nd program o f Mr. Muhammad. But whe n I got to Chicago, exp ecting  at least a 
favorabl e resp onse and some coverage, I  met only a chilly reacti on. The same thing happened 
when, i n Harlem , I staged a rally  that drew  seven thousand people. At that time, Chicago 
headqu arters was  even disc ouraging  me from staging  large rallies. But the next week, I held 
another Harle m rall y that was even b igger and more success fulthan the first one-an d obviousl y 
this o nly incre ased the envy of the Chicago h eadquarters.
 
But I would put these things out of my m ind, as they occ urred.
 
At least , as much as I humanly could, I put them out of my mi nd. I am not trying to make mysel f 
seem right a nd noble. I am telling  the truth. I _loved _ the Na tion, and Mr. Muhammad. I _lived 
for_ the Nati on, and for Mr. Muh ammad.
 
It made other Muslim o fficials je alous b ecause my  pictur e was  often in the daily press. They wouldn't r emember th at my pic ture was t here b ecause of my fervor in championing M r. 
Muhammad. They wouldn't simply  reaso n that as vulnera ble a s the Na tion of Islam was to 
distorted rumors and outright lies, we ne eded nothing so little as to have o ur pu blic sp okes man 
constantly denying th e rumors. Com mon sense would have t old a ny official t hat certai nly Mr. 
Muhammad couldn't be running all over the country  as his own s pokesman. And who ever h e 
appointed as his sp okes man couldn't avoid a lot of press f ocus.
 
Whenever I caught a ny res entful feelings  hanging on in my mind, I would be  ashamed of myself , 
considering  it a sign of weakn ess in myself . I knew  that at least Mr . Muhammad knew  that my li fe 
was totally dedicated to represen ting him.
 
But duri ng 1963,I couldn't help bei ng very  hyperse nsitive to my critics  in high p osts within o ur 
Natio n. I quit selec ting certain of my New York brothers an d giving them money to go a nd lay 
groundwork  for new mosqu es in o ther cities- because slighting remarks were bei ng made about 
"Malcol m's mi nisters. " In a time in America when it was of arch importa nce f or a milita nt black 
voice to reach mass au diences, _Life_ magazine want ed to do a person al story  of me, and I 
refused. I refused agai n when a  cover  story  was o ffered by _Newsweek_. I refused again when I 
could have been a gues t on the top-rat ed "Meet thePress " television program . Each re fusal was a 
general l oss f or the black man, and, for the Na tion o f Islam , each re fusal was a specific loss- and 
each re fusal was ma de because o f Chic ago's  attitude. There was jeal ousy because I had been 
request ed to make these featured appearances.
 
When a high- powere d-rifle slug tore through the back o f the N. A.A.C.P. Fiel d Secretary  Medgar 
Evers  in Mississ ippi, I want ed to say the blunt truths that needed to be said. When a bomb was 
explod ed in a N egro Christian church in Birmingha m, Alabama, snuffing ou t the lives  of those f our 
beautiful little b lack gir ls, I made comments-but not what s hould have b een said a bout the climat e 
of hate that the American white man was gen erating  and nourishing. The more hate was 
permitte d to las h out when there were  ways it could have b een check ed, the more bold the hate 
became-until at last it was fl aring ou t at even the white ma n's own kind, includi ng his own leaders. 
In Dallas, Texas, for ins tance, the then Vice Presi dent and Mrs. J ohns on were vul garly  insulted . 
And the U. S. Ambassad or to the Unit ed Na tions, Adlai S tevenso n, was sp at upon and hit on the 
head by a white woma n pick et.
 
Mr. Muhammad made me the Natio n's first Na tional Minister . At a late 1963 rally in Phila delphia, 
Mr. Muhammad, embracing me , said to that audienc e before us, "This is my most faithful, hard-
working  minist er. He will follow me  until h e dies."
 
He h ad never pai d such a  complim ent to any Muslim. N o praise from any ot her e arthly perso n 
could have meant more to me.
 
But this would be Mr. Muhammad's a nd my last p ublic a ppearance toget her.
 
Not long before, I had been on the Jerry  Williams radi o program in Boston, whe n someone 
handed m e an item hot off the Associat ed Pr ess m achine. I readthat a chapter o f the Louisiana 
Citizens Co uncil h ad just o ffered a $10,000 reward for my de ath. 
 
 
But the threat of death was  much clos er to me than somewhere in Louisian a.
 
What I am telling  you is the trut h. W hen I disc overed who else wante d me  dead, I am telling you- it 
nearly sent me to Bellevue.
 
*     *     *
 
In my twelve  years a s a Muslim mi nister , I had alwa ys taught so strongly  on the moral iss ues t hat 
many Musli ms acc used me of being "and-woma n." The very keel of my teaching, a nd my most bone-deep pers onal belie f, was th at Elija h Mu hammad in every aspect o f his existence was a 
symbol o f moral, m ental, and spiritual reform among the Americ an bl ack p eople. F or twelve 
years,  I had taught t hat within t he entire Nati on of Islam; my own tr ansformation was the best 
exam ple I knew  of Mr. Muh ammad's power t o reform black m en's lives. Fro m the time I entered 
prison until I married, a bout twelve  years  later, because o f Mr. Muhammad's influence upon me, I 
had never touched a woman .
 
But around 1963, if anyone had notice d, I spoke l ess an d less of religion. I taught social d octrin e 
to Muslims, a nd curren t events , and politics. I  stayed wholly off the subjec t of morality.
 
And the reaso n for this was th at my f aith had been shaken in a  way that I can never f ully 
describe. For I had discovered Musli ms ha d been betrayed by Elija h Muh ammad himsel f.
 
I want t o make this as bri ef as I can, only enough s o that my p ositio n and my re actio ns will be 
underst ood. As to wheth er or n ot I should reveal this, there'sno longer a ny need for any questio n 
in my mi nd-for now the public knows. To make it c oncise , I will quot e from one wire service st ory 
as it appeared i n newspa pers, a nd was report ed over ra dio a nd television, a cross t he Unite d 
States:
 
"Los Angel es, July  3 (UPI)- Elijah Mu hammad, 67-year- old leader o f the Black Musli m move ment, 
today faced paternity suits from two former secre taries who c harged h e fathered their four 
childre n. . . . Both wom en ar e in t heir twenti es. . . .Miss Ros ary and Miss  Williams charged they 
had intimaci es with Elija h Mu hammad from 1957 until this yea r. Miss Ros ary alleged h e fathered 
her two c hildren a nd said she was  expecting a third c hild by  him . . . the other plai ntiff said he  was 
the father of her d augh ter. . . ."
 
As far back as 1955, I had heard h ints. But believe m e when I tell you t his: f or me even t o 
consider b elieving anything as insane-so unding as any slightest implicati on of any immoral 
behavior  of Mr. Muh ammad-why, the ver y idea made me shake with f ear.
 
And so my  mind sim ply refused to acce pt anything  so grotesqu e as adultery  mentioned in the 
same br eath with M r. Muhammad's n ame.
 
_Adultery_! W hy, any Muslim guilty of adultery was summarily ousted in disgrace. One of the 
Natio n's mo st closely kept sc andals was  that a succ ession o f the personal s ecret aries  of Mr. 
Muhammad had become pregn ant. They were br ought before Musli m co urts an d charged with 
adultery  and they confessed . Humiliated before the gen eral body, they rec eived sentences of 
from one to five years o f "isolation ." That meant they were to have n o contact whats oever  with 
any ot her Muslims .
 
I don't think I c ould say anything  which b etter testifies t o my d epth of faith in Mr . Muhammad than 
that I totally and absolutely  rejecte d my own int elligenc e. I simply  refused to believe. 
I didn't want Allah to "burn my  brain " as I felt the brain o f my br other Reginald h ad been burned 
for harboring evil  thoughts a bout Mr . Elijah Mu hammad. The last ti me I had seen Reginald , one 
day he  walked into the M osque Seven rest aurant. I saw him coming in the door. I went and met 
him. I looke d into my own br other's eyes ; I told h im he wasn't welcome a mong Muslims, and he 
turned around and left, and I haven't s een him since . I did that to my own blood br other be caus e, 
years  before, Mr. Muh ammad had sentenced Reginald to "isolatio n" from all ot her Muslims-a nd I 
considere d that I was a Muslim before I was Reginald's br other.
 
No o ne in the world co uld h ave convince d me  that Mr. Muh ammad would b etray  the reverenc e 
bestowed u pon him by all o f the mosques full of poor, trus ting Musli ms nickeling an d diming u p to 
faithfully support the N ation of Islam-when many of these faithful were sc arcel y abl e to pay their 
own rents .
 
But by late 1962, I learne d relia bly that numerous Muslims were leaving  Mosqu e Two in Chicago . The ugly rumor was spreadi ng swiftly-even a mong no n-Muslim Negroes . When I thought h ow the 
press c onstantly sough t ways to discr edit t he Natio n of Islam, I tremble d to think of such a thing 
reaching the ears of some newspaper report er, either black or white.
 
I actually began to have nigh tmares . .  . I saw _headlin es_.
 
I was bur dened with a leaden fear as I kept s peaking  engage ments all over Americ a. Any time a 
reporter ca me anywhere n ear me, I could _hear_ him ask , "Is it tru e, Mr . Malcolm X, t his rep ort 
we hear, that . . ." And what was  I going  to say?
 
There was  never any specific moment whe n I admitted the sit uation t o mysel f. In the wa y that the 
human mind can do, somehow I slid over ad mitting tomysel f the ugly fact, even as I bega n 
dealing  with it.
 
Both in Ne w York and Chic ago, non-Muslims who m I k new began to tell me  indirectl y they had 
heard-or t hey would ask m e if I had heard. I would a ct as if I had no idea what ever o f what t hey 
were talking  about-and I was g rateful when they chose not to spell out what t hey knew . I went 
around knowing that I looke d to them like a total fool. I felt like a total fool, out there every  day 
preaching, a nd apparently not knowing what was going  on right u nder my  nose, in my  own 
organization, involving th e ver y man I was praising  so. To look like a fool unearthed emotions I 
hadn't felt since my Harlem hustler d ays. The worst t hing in the hustler's world was  to be a dupe.
 
I will give you an exam ple. B ackst age at  the Apollo Theater in Harle m on e day, the comedian Dick 
Gregor y look ed at me. "Man," he said, "M uhammad's nothing bu t a . . ."-I can't say the word he 
used. _ Bam_! Jus t like t hat. My Muslim ins tincts s aid to attack Dick-but, instead, I felt weak a nd 
hollow . I think Dick  sensed how upset I was and he let me get hi m off the subject. I  knew Dick, a 
Chicagoa n, was w ise in the wa ys of the stree ts, and blunt-spok en. I want ed to plead with him not 
to say to anyone else what he had said to me -but I couldn't; it would have been my own 
admission .
 
I can't d escrib e the torme nts I went t hrough.
 
Always  before, in any extremity , I had caught the first pl ane to Mr. Elijah Muhammad. He h ad 
virtually  raise d me  from the dead. Ever ything I was th at was cre ditabl e, he had made me. I felt 
that no matter what, I could n ot let h im down.
 
There was  no one I could turn to with this pro blem , excep t Mr. Muhammad himself. Ultim ately  that 
had to be the case . But first I went t o Chicago t o see Mr . Muhammad's sec ond youngest s on, 
Wallace Mu hammad. I felt that Wallacewas Mr . Muhammad's most str ongly spiritual so n, the son 
with the most objective ou tlook. Always, Wallace and I had shared an excep tional close ness a nd 
trust.
 
And Wallace knew , when he saw me, why I had come to see him. "I know," he said. I said I 
thought we should rall y to help his f ather. Wallace sai d he didn't f eel that his f ather would 
welcome a ny efforts to help him. I told myself  that Wallace must be crazy.
 
Next, I br oke t he rule t hat no Muslim is s uppose d to have any contact with another Muslim in t he 
"isolated" state. I looked up, and I talked with thr ee of the former secret aries to  Mr. Muhammad. 
From their own m ouths, I heard their stories o f who h ad fathered their c hildren. And from their 
own mouths I heard that Elijah Mu hammad had told them I was the best, the grea test m inister he 
ever had, but that someday  I would l eave  him, turn agains t him-so I was " dangerous. " I learn ed 
from these former secre taries o f Mr. Muhammad that whi le he was praising  me to my face, he 
was tearing me  apart behind my back.
 
That deeply hurt me.
 Every day, I was meeting th e micr ophones, c ameras, pr ess rep orters, a nd other c ommitm ents, 
includi ng the Muslims o f my own Mosque S even. I felt almost out of my mind.
 
Finally , the thing crystalli zed f or me. As lo ng as I did nothing, I felt it was  the same a s being 
disloyal.  I felt that as long as I sat down, I  was not helping Mr. Muh ammad-when somebody 
needed to be standing up .
 
So one night I wrote t o Mr. Muhammad about the poison being spread about him. H e telephoned 
me in New York. He sai d that whe n he saw me he would disc uss it. 
 
I desperately wanted to find some way -some kin d of a bridge- over which I was cert ain the N ation 
of Islam co uld b e saved from self-destructi on. I had faith in t he Natio n: we  weren't so me group of 
Christian N egroes , jumping an d shouting an d full of sins.
 
I thought o f one bridge th at could be used if and when t he shattering disclos ure sh ould become 
public. Loyal Muslims could be taught t hat a man's a ccomplish ments in his life outwei gh his 
personal, human weakn esses. Wallace Mu hammad helped m e to review the Q uran and the Bible 
for documentation . Dav id's adultery  with Bathsheba wei ghed less o n history 's scales, f or 
instance , than the positive fact of David's kill ing G oliath . Thinking o f Lot, we t hink n ot of incest, 
but of his s aving the people from the destructio n of Sodom and Gomorra h. Or , our image of Noah 
isn't o f his getting dru nk-but of his b uilding  the ark a nd teaching p eople to save themselves fr om 
the flood. We think of Moses leading the Hebr ews from bondage, n ot of Moses' a dultery with the 
Ethiopia n wome n. In all o f the cases I revie wed, the positive  outweighed the neg ative.
 
I began teaching in New  York Mosqu e Seven that a man's acco mplish ments in his life outweighed 
his p erson al, human weakness es. I taught t hat a person's good deeds outweigh his b ad deeds. I 
never me ntioned the previously familiar  subjects o f adultery and fornicatio n, and I never 
mentioned immoral evils.
 
By some miracl e, the adultery talk which was so widespread in Chicago seemed to only leak a 
little in Boston, Detroit , and New York. Apparently , it hadn't re ached other mo sques ar ound the 
country  at all. I n Chicago, incre asing  numbers of Muslims were  leavin g Mosqu e Two, I heard, and 
many non-Muslims who had been symp athetic to  the Na tion were n ow outspoke nly anti-Muslim . 
In Febru ary 1963,I officiated at the U niversit y of Islam gradu ation exercises; when I intro duced 
various members o f the Mu hammad family, I could feel the cold c hill toward t hem from the 
Muslims in the audience.
 
Elijah Mu hammad had me fly to Phoenix to see him in April, 19 63.
 
We embraced, as always-and almost immedi ately  he took me outside, where we bega n to walk 
by his swimming  pool.
 
He was  The Messenger o f Allah . When I was a foul, vicious convict, s o evi l that other co nvicts 
had called m e Satan, this m an had rescu ed m e. He was  the man who had trained me , who h ad 
treated me  as if I were his own flesh and blood. He was t he m an who h ad given me  wings-to go 
places, to do things  I otherwise never would h ave dreamed of. We walked, with me caught u p in a 
whirlwind o f emotions.
 
"Well, son," Mr. Muhammad said, "what is o n your mi nd?"
 
Plainly , frankly, pulling  no punches, I told Mr. Muhammad what was being said . And without 
waiting f or any respo nse from him, I said that with his son Wallace's h elp I had found in the Q uran 
and the Bible t hat which might b e taught to  Muslims-if  it became necessary -as the fulfillment of 
prophecy .
 
"Son, I'm no t surprised, " Elijah Muhammad said . "You alwa ys have h ad such a go od underst anding of prophecy, and of spiritual things. You rec ognize th at's what all of this is-
prophecy . You have t he kind o f understa nding t hat only an old m an has.
 
"I'm David," he said. "When you read about how Dav id took an other m an's wife, I'm that David. 
You re ad about Noah, who got dr unk-th at's m e. You re ad about Lot, who went a nd laid up with his 
own daughters. I have to fulfill all o f those things. " 
*     *     *
 
I remembered t hat when a n epidemic is about to hit somewher e, that community 's people ar e 
inoculated agai nst exp osure with so me of the same ger ms th at are anticip ated-and this p repares 
them to resist th e oncoming v irus.
 
I decided I had better pre pare six other E ast C oast Muslim o fficials whom I selec ted.
 
I told them. And then I told them why I had told them-that I felt they should not be caught by 
surprise a nd shock if  it became their job to teach the M uslims in t heir m osques the "fulfillme nt of 
prophecy ." I found then that some had alre ady heard it; o ne of them, Minister L ouis X o f Boston, 
as m uch as seven m onths before. They had been living with th e dilemma themselves.
 
I never dreamed that the Chicago Musli m officials were going to make it appear that I was 
throwin g gasolin e on the fire inst ead of water. I never dr eamed that they were going to  try to 
make it appear that ins tead of inoculati ng against a n epidemic, I had started it.
 
The stage i n Chicago eve n then was being se t for Musli ms to shift their focus off the epidemic-
and onto me .
 
Hating me  was going  to become the cause for people o f shattered faith to rally  around.
 
Non-Muslim N egroes who knew me well, and even s ome of the white re porters with whom I had 
some regular c ontact, were telling  me, almost wherever  I went, "Malcol m X, you're looki ng tired. 
You need a rest. "
 They didn't know a fraction of it. Since I had been a Musli m, this was the first time any white 
people really  got t o me in a personal way . I could t ell th at some of them were really  honest and 
sincere . One of these, whose name I won't c all-he might lose h is job-s aid, "M alcolm X, the whites 
need your voice worse th an the Negroes. " I remember so well his s aying this b ecause it prefaced 
the first ti me si nce I  became a  Muslim t hat I had ever talk ed with any white ma n at any length 
about anythi ng exce pt the N ation of Islam an d the America n black ma n's struggle today.
 
I can't r emember how , or wh y, he somehow happened to mention the De ad Sea Scrolls. I came 
back with something like, "Yes, those scrolls ar e going  to take Jes us off the stained-glass 
windows an d the fresco es where h e has been lily-white, a nd put Him back into the true 
mainstre am o f history  where J esus a ctually was non-white. " The reporter was  surprised, and I 
went on  that the De ad Sea Scrolls we re going t o reaffirm that Jesus was  a member o f that 
brotherhood of Egyptia n seers calle d the Ess ene-a fact alre ady known fr om Philo, t he famous 
Egyptia n hist orian o f Jesus' ti me. And the rep orter a nd I got o ff on about two good h ours of talking 
in the areas of archa eology , hist ory, and religion. It was so ple asant. I almost forgot t he heavy 
worries on  my mind-for that brief respite . I remember we  wou nd up agre eing that by the year 
2000, ever y schoolchild wi ll be taught t he true color o f great m en of antiquity .
 
*     *     *
 
I've said t hat I expect ed headlines momentarily. I hadn't exp ected the ki nd which ca me.
 
No o ne needs to be remin ded of who got a ssassin ated in Dallas , Texas, o n Nove mber 2 2, 1963.
 
Within hours a fter the ass assina tion-I a m telling  nothing bu t the truth-every Muslim m inister received f rom Mr . Elijah Mu hammad a direc tive-in f act, _two_ direc tives. Every  minister was 
ordered t o make no remarks a t all c oncerni ng the assassi natio n. Mr . Muhammad instruc ted that if 
press ed for comment, we  should s ay: "N o comment."
 
During  that three-day peri od where t here was no other news to be heard exce pt rel ating  to the 
murdered Presi dent, Mr. Muhammad had a previousl y sch eduled s peaking  engage ment in N ew 
York at the Manhattan Cent er. He ca ncelle d his c oming t o speak, and as we were u nable to get 
back th e money alre ady paid for the rental of the center, Mr. Muhammad told me  to speak in his 
stead. And so I spoke.
 
Many  times since then, I've looke d at the speech n otes I used that day, which h ad been prepared 
at least a week b efore the assassi natio n. The tide of my sp eech was  "God's Judgme nt of White 
America. " It was on the theme, familiar t o me , of "as you sow, so shall you re ap," or how the 
hypocritical America n white m an was reaping what h e had sowed.
 
The questio n-and-answer  period opened, I suppose inevitably , with someone asking  me, "What 
do you thi nk ab out Preside nt Kennedy's  assassi natio n? What is your o pinio n?"
 
Without a second thought , I said what I  honestly felt-that it was, as I  saw it, a case of "the 
chicke ns co ming ho me to roos t." I said that the hate in white me n had not stopped with the killing 
of defenseless b lack p eople, but that hate, allowed to spread unchecke d, finally had struck down 
this c ountry's Chief of State. I said it was th e same thing as had happened with Medgar Evers, 
with Patrice L umumba, with  Madame Nhu's husband.
 
 
The headlin es an d the news bro adcasts pr omptly had it: "_Black M uslims' Malcolm X: 'Chick ens 
Com e Ho me to Roost._'"
 
It makes m e feel weary  to think o f it all n ow. All over  America , all over th e wor ld, some o f the 
world's m ost importan t pers onages we re saying in various wa ys, an d in far stronger wa ys than I 
did, that America's clim ate of hate had been responsible for the Presid ent's d eath. But when 
Malcolm X said the same thing, it was  ominous .
 
My regular  monthly visit to Mr. Muhammad was du e the next d ay. Somehow, on the plane, I 
expect ed something.  I've always  had this s trong int uition .
 
Mr. Muhammad and I embraced each other in greeting. I  sensed some ingredient missing fr om 
his u sual a miability. And I was suddenly  tense-to me also very signific ant. For years, I had prid ed 
myself  that Mr. Muh ammad and I were  so close t hat I knew how he felt by how I f elt. If he was 
nervous, I was  nervous. If I was relaxed, then I knew he was relaxed . Now, I felt the tension . . . .
 
First we talked of other thi ngs, sitting in his living room. Then he asked m e, "Did you see the 
papers t his mo rning? "
 
I said, "Y es, sir , I did."
 
"That was a very bad statement," he said. "The country loved this man. The whole country is in 
mourning. That was ver y ill-timed. A statement like t hat can ma ke it har d on Muslims i n gen eral."
 
And then, as if Mr. Muhammad's voice c ame from afar, I heard his words: " I'll have t o sile nce you 
for the next ni nety days- so that the Muslims every where ca n be disassociat ed from the blunder."
 
I was nu mb. 
But I was a follower  of Mr. Muh ammad. Ma ny tim es I had said to my own assist ants that anyone 
in a position t o discipline o thers must be able to take disciplining hi msel f.
 I told Mr . Muhammad, "Sir, I agree with you, a nd I submit, o ne hundred per ce nt."
 
I flew ba ck to  New York psychologicall y preparing  mysel f to tell my  Mosque S even a ssistan ts that 
I had been susp ended-or "silenc ed."
 
But to my astonish ment, upon arrival I learned that my a ssistan ts alre ady had been informed.
 
What astonish ed m e even m ore-a telegram ha d been sent to every New York City newspap er 
and radio a nd television st ation. It was  the most quick a nd thorough p ublicity  job that I had ever 
seen the Chicago o fficials initiat e.
 
Every telephone where I could p ossibly  be reach ed was ringin g. London. Paris. A.P., U.P .I. Every 
television a nd radio network, a nd all of the newspapers were c alling. I told them all, "I disobeyed 
Mr. Muhammad. I submit complet ely to his wi sdom. Yes, I exp ect to be speaking  again a fter 
ninety days."
 
"_Malcolm X Sile nced _!" It was headlines.
 
My first worry was that if a scandal b roke for the Natio n of Islam within the next ninety days, I 
would be  gagged when I could be the most experienc ed Muslim in d ealing with th e news m edia 
that would m ake the m ost of any sca ndal within t he Natio n.
 
I learned next t hat my "sile ncing" was  even m ore thorough t han I had though t.I was no t only 
forbidden to talk with the press, I was  not even to teach in my own Mosque S even.
 
Next, an  announcement was made throughout the Nati on of Islam that I would be reinst ated 
within n inety days, " _if he submits_ ."
 
This m ade me suspicio us-for the first ti me. I had comple tely submitted. But, delib erately , Muslims 
were being gi ven t he impression t hat I had rebelled.
 
I hadn't hustled in the stre ets for years  for nothing.  I knew when I was  being set up.
 
Three days lat er, the first word came to me that a Mosque S even o fficial who ha d been one of my 
most immediat e assist ants was  telling  certain Mosque S even brothers: "I f you k new what t he 
Minister did , you'd go o ut and kill him  yourself ."
 
And then I knew. As any official in t he Natio n of Islam would ins tantly have k nown, a ny death-talk 
for me could have b een approved of-if not actually initia ted-by  only one man.
 
*     *     *
 
My head felt like it was  bleeding inside . I felt like my brain was da maged. I went t o see Dr . Leona 
A. Turner, who has been my family doctor for years, who p ractices in East El mhurst, L ong Isl and. 
I asked her to give  me a brain exa mina tion.
 
She did exami ne m e. She said I was under great str ain-and I needed rest .
 
Cassius Clay  and I are not toget her today. But always  I must be grateful to himthat at just t his 
time, when he was in Miami trai ning to fight Sonny Listo n, Cassi us inv ited m e, Betty, and the 
childre n to come there as h is guests-as a sixth weddi ng anniversar y present to Betty and me.
 
I had met Cassi us Cla y in D etroit in 1962. He a nd his br other Rudolph c ame into the Student's 
Luncheonette next door to the De troit Mosque where Elijah Mu hammad was ab out to speak at a 
big rally. Ever y Muslim pr esent was  impress ed by the bearing  and the obvious gen uineness o f the 
strikin g, handsome pair o f prizefigh ter bro thers. Cassius c ame up and pumped my h and, introducing hi msel f as he later pres ented himself to the wor ld, "I'm Cassi us Clay ." He acted as if I 
was suppose d to know who he  was. So  I acted as though I  did. Up t o that moment, though, I had 
never even heard o f him. O urs we re two e ntirely  different wor lds. In fact, Elija h Muh ammad 
instruct ed us Muslims against all forms o f sports.
 
As Elija h Muh ammad spoke , the two Clay  brothers practic ally led the applaus e, further 
impressing  everyone with t heir sincerity -since a Muslim rally was a bout the world's last place to 
seek fig ht fans.
 
Thereafter, now and then I heard how Cassius s howed u p in Muslim m osques and res taura nts in 
various cities. And if I happened to be speaking  anywhere within re asonable dist ance of where ver 
Cassius was, h e would b e present. I liked him. Some contagious qualit y about him made him one 
of the ver y few p eople I ever  invited to my home. Betty liked hi m. O ur childre n were  crazy about 
him. Cassius was sim ply a likeable , friendly, clean-cut, down- to-eart h youngster . I noticed how 
alert h e was even in little details. I susp ected that there was  a plan in his p ublic cl owning. I 
suspected, and he confirmed to me, that he was do ing everything  possible t o con and "psyche " 
Sonny Listo n into coming int o the ring angry , poorly trained, a nd overcon fident, exp ecting an other 
of his vaun ted one-rou nd knocko uts. Not o nly was  Cassius rec eptive to  advice, h e solicited it. 
Primarily , I impresse d upon him to what a great exte nt apublic figure's succ ess de pends upon 
how alert a nd knowledge able h e is t o the true natures and to the true m otives o f all o f the people 
who flock ar ound him. I warned him about the "foxes, " his expressi on for the aggressi ve, c ute 
young  females who flocked after him; I told Cassi us th at instead of "foxes, " they really were 
wolves.
 
This was  Betty's first vacati on sinc e we  had married. And our three girls romped and played with 
the heavyweight contender.
 
I don't know what I might h ave do ne if I had stayed in New  York d uring  that crucial ti me-be sieged 
by insisten tly ringing telephones, a nd by the press, and by all o f the other people so anxious t o 
gloat, to speculate and to "commisera te."
 
I was in a  state o f emotional sh ock. I  was like someone who for twel ve years ha d had an 
inseparable, b eautiful marriage-an d then suddenly one morning at breakfast the marriage p artner 
had thrust a cross t he table so me divorce papers.
 
I felt as though s omething in _nature_ h ad failed, like the sun, or the stars. It was t hat incredibl e a 
phenomenon to me-something to o stupendous to conceive. I am not sparing myself . Around 
Cassius Clay's  fight camp, around the Ha mpton H ouse Motel where my family was st aying,  I 
talked with my  own wife, and with other pe ople, and actually I was only mo uthing wo rds that really 
meant nothing to me. Whatever I  was saying at any time was  being handled by a small corn er of 
my mind. The rest of my mind was  filled with a parade of a thousand and one different scenes 
from the past twelve  years  . . . scenes i n the Muslim mosques . . . scen es wi th Mr. Muh ammad . . 
. scenes with Mr . Muhammad's family . . . scenes with Muslims , individually , as my a udiences, 
and at our social ga therings . .  . and scenes with th e white m an in audiences, a nd the press .
 
I walked, I talked , I functioned. At the Cassi us Cla y fight c amp, I told the various s portsw riters 
repeatedly what I  gradually had come to know within mysel f was a lie-that I would be reinst ated 
within n inety days. B ut I could n ot yet let mysel f psychological ly face what I knew:  that alre ady the 
Natio n of Islam and I were physicall y divorce d. Do you underst and what I mean? A judge's 
signature on a piece of paper c an grant to a couple a physical  divorce-b ut for either o f them, or 
mayb e for both of them, if they have b een a very close m arriage te am, to actually  become 
_psychol ogically_  divorced from each other might t ake years.
 
But in the physical  divorce , I could not evad e the obvious stra tegy and plotting coming o ut of 
Chicago t o eliminat e me from the Natio n of Islam . . . if not from this wor ld. And I felt that I 
perceived the anatomy of the plo tting. 
Any Muslim would h ave kn own that my "chickens c oming home to roost" statement had been 
only an excuse t o put into actio n the plan for get ting me out. And step one had been already 
taken: the Muslims were gi ven t he impression t hat I had rebelled against Mr . Muh ammad. I could 
now anticipat e step two: I  would re main "suspe nded" (an d later I would b e "isolated") ind efinitely. 
Step three would be  either to provoke some M uslim ignoran t of the truth to take it upon himself to 
kill me as a "religious d uty"-or to "isola te" me so that I would gradu ally disappear from the public 
scene.
 
The only perso n who k new was  my wife. I never would h ave dre amed that I would ever depend 
so m uch upon any woma n for strength as I now lea ned upon Betty. There was  no exchange 
between us; Betty said n othing, b eing the calib er of wife that she is, with  the depth of 
underst anding that she has-bu t I could feel the envelopment of her comfort. I knew that she was 
as faithful a servant o f Allah as I was,  and I knew  that what ever h appened, she was  with m e.
 
The death talk was not my f ear. Ever y sec ond of my twelve  years with M r. Muhammad, I had 
been ready to lay down my life for him. The thing to  meworse than death was t he betrayal. I could 
conceive death. I couldn't conceive be trayal -not of the loyalty which I had given t o the Natio n of 
Islam, and to Mr. Muh ammad. During the pr evious twelve years, if  Mr. Muhammad had committe d 
any ci vil crim e punish able by death, I would h ave sai d and trie d to prove that I did it-to  save hi m-
and I would have go ne to the electric c hair, as Mr. Muhammad's s ervant.
 
There as C assius Clay 's gues t in Mia mi, I tri ed desperately to push my mi nd off my tro ubles and 
onto the Natio n's tro ubles . I still strugg led to pers uade mysel f that Mr . Muha mmad had been 
fulfilling  prophecy. Because I  actually  had believed that if Mr. Muhammad was  not God, then he 
surely  stood next t o God.
 
What bega n to bre ak my f aith was th at, try as I might , I couldn't hi de, I couldn't evad e, that Mr. 
Muhammad, ins tead of facing what he had done before his f ollowers,  as a human weak ness or 
as fulfillme nt of prophecy-which I  sincerely  believe th at Muslims would h ave underst ood, or a t 
least they would h ave acc epted-M r. Muhammad had, instead, been willing to hide, to cover  up 
what he  had done.
 
That was  my major blow.
 
That was  how I first b egan to realize that I had believed in Mr . Muhammad more than he believed 
in himsel f.
 
And that was how, after twel ve years o f never thinking f or as m uch as five m inutes a bout myself , I 
became able finally to mu ster the nerve, a nd the strength, to start facing th e facts, to think for 
myself .
 
Briefly I left Florida t o return B etty and the children to our Long Isl and home. I learned that the 
Chicago Muslim officials were f urther dis pleas ed with m ebecause o f the newspa per rep orts o f me 
in the C assius Clay  camp. They f elt that Cassius h adn't a prayer  of a chanc e to win.  They felt the 
Natio n would b e embarrasse d through my linking  the Muslim i mage with hi m. (I d on't know if the 
champion t oday cares to  remember that most newspap ers in America we re repres ented at the 
pre-fig ht camp-exce pt _M uhammad Speaks _. Eve n though C assius was  a Muslim brother, the 
Muslim n ewspaper didn't consider his fight worth covering. )
 
I flew ba ck to  Miami f eeling th at it was Allah's intent for me to help C assius prove Isl am's 
superiorit y before the wo rld-thro ugh proving  that mind can win over  brawn. I d on't have to remin d 
you o f how people ever ywhere sc offed at Cassi us Cla y's ch ances of beating List en.
 
This time, I brought f rom New York with me  some photographs o f Floyd P atterson a nd Sonny 
Listen in their fight camps, with white pries ts as their "spiritu al advisors." Cassi us Clay , being a Muslim, d idn't need to be told how wh ite Christianity  had dealt with t he American black man. ' 
"This fight is th e truth," I told Cassius. "It's th e Cross a nd the Cresce nt fighting in a prize  ring-for 
the first ti me. It's a  modern Crusa des-a Christian a nd a Muslim f acing each other with tel evision t o 
beam it off Telstar for the whole world to see what h appens!" I told C assius, "D o you t hink Allah 
has bro ught a bout all t his int ending for you t o leave the ring as anythi ng but the champion?" (You 
may re member t hat at the wei ghing- in, Cassius was yell ing suc h things  as "It is p rophesie d for 
me to be succ essful! I cannot be beaten!")
 
Sonny Listo n's ha ndlers and advisors h ad him fighting  harder to  "integrate " than he was training 
to meet Cassius. L iston finally had managed to rent a big, fi ne house over in a  rich, wall -to-wal l 
white section. To give you an  idea, the owner o f the neighboring ho use was  the New York 
Yankees b aseball clu b owner , Dan Topping. In the early evenings, when C assius an d I would 
sometimes walk  where th e black pe ople lived, th ose Negroes' mo uths would h angopen in 
surprise t hat he was among t hem inst ead of whites as m ost black ch ampions p referred. Again 
and agai n, Cassius startle d those Negroes, t elling  them, "You're my own ki nd. I get my str ength 
from being around my own b lack p eople."
 
What Sonny Liste n was  about to meet, in fact, was one of the most awesome frights th at ever can 
confront any pers on-on e who worships Allah , and who is c ompletely without fear.
 
Among over eight t housand other se at holders in Miami's big Co nvention Hall, I rec eived Seat 
Num ber S even. S even h as always been my f avorite n umber. It has followed me througho ut my 
life. I took this to  be Allah's m essage confirming  to me that Cassius Cla y was  going  to win. Along 
with Cassi us, I really  was more wo rried a bout how his bro ther R udolph was going  to do, fighting 
his first pr o fight i n the preliminaries.
 
While Ru dolph was  winning  a four-rou nd decisio n over  a Florid a Negro na med "Chip" Johnson, 
Cassius s tood at the rear of the auditorium watching c almly , dresse d in a black t uxedo. After all o f 
his m onths o f antics, after the wei ghing- in act that Cassius ha d put on, this cal mness should h ave 
tipped off some o f the sportsw riters who were pre dicting  Clay's slaught er.
 
Then Cassius disappeared , dressi ng to meet Listen. As we had agree d, I joined hi m in a sile nt 
prayer  for Allah's b lessings. Fin ally, he and Liste n were in t heir corn ers in t he ring. I  folded my 
arms and trie d to appear the coolest man in the place, because a televis ion camera can show 
you looki ng like a  fool yell ing at  a prizefight.
 
Except for what ever ch emic al it was  that got in to Cassius' eyes an d blinded hi m temporarily  in the 
fourth and fifth rounds , the fight went acc ording  to his pla n. He evad ed Lis ton's powerf ul punches. 
The third r ound automaticall y bega nthe tiring  of the aging  Liste n, who was overcon fidently train ed 
to go only two ro unds. Then, despera te, Liste n los t. The secre t of one of fight history 's great est 
upsets was t hat months be fore that night, Clay  had out-thought L isten.
 
There pro bably never ha s been as quie t a new- champion party . The boyish ki ng of the ring ca me 
over to my m otel. He ate ice cre am, drank milk, talked with f ootball star Ji mmy  Brown a nd other 
friends, a nd some re porters. Sleepy, Cassius took a quick  nap on my be d, then he went back 
home.
 
We had breakfast together th e next mor ning, just before the press conference when Cassius 
calmly  made the announcement which b urst i nto intern ational h eadlines t hat he was a "Black 
Muslim. "
 
But let me tell you s omething about that. Cassi us never a nnounced hims elf a member of any 
"Black Muslims. " The press reporters ma de that out of what h e told them, which was  this: "I 
believe in the relig ion of Islam, which me ans I believe t here is n o God but Allah , and Mu hammad 
is His Apostle. This is t he same relig ion that is believed in by  over seven hundred m illion d ark-
skinn ed peoples t hroughou t Africa an d Asia." 
Nothing in all o f the furor wh ich followed was mor e ridiculo us th an Floyd Patterso n announcing 
that as a Cath olic, he  wante d to fight Cassi us Cla y-to save the heavyweight crown from being 
held by a Muslim . It was such a  sad case o f a brainwash ed bl ack Christia n rea dy to do battle for 
the white m an-who wants n o part of him. Not t hree weeks  later, the newspa pers rep orted that in 
Yonkers, New York, Patterso n was  offering to sell his $1 40,000 house for a $20,000 loss. He had 
"integrate d" into a  neighborh ood of whites who ha d made his life misera ble. No ne were f riendly. 
Their c hildren c alled his children "niggers." O ne neighb or train ed his dog t o deface Patterso n's 
property . Another erect ed a fence to hide the Negroes from sight. "I tried, it j ust di dn't work," 
Patterso n told the press. 
*     *     *
 
The first direct order for my de ath was  issue d through a  Mosque S even o fficial who previously 
had been a close assista nt. Another pr eviously  close a ssista nt of mine was assigne d to do the 
job. He was a b rother w ith a knowledge of demolitio n; he was ask ed to wire my c ar to expl ode 
when I turned the ignition key. But this b rother, it happened, had seen too much of my total loyalt y 
to the Nati on to carry out his ord er. Instead, he came to me. I thanked him for my lif e. I told him 
what was  really  going  on in Chicago. He was  stunned al most beyo nd belief.
 
This br other was clos e to others in the Mosque Seven circle who m ight su bsequ ently  be called 
upon to elimin ate me. He s aid h e would take it u pon himsel f to enlighte n each of them enough so 
that they wouldn't a llow themselves t o be used.
 
This first direc t death-order was how , finally, I began to arrive at  my psychological  divorce from 
the Nati on of Islam.
 
I began to see, where ver I went-on the stree ts, in business pl aces, on elevat ors, sidewalks, in 
passing  cars-the faces of Muslims whom I knew, and I knew that any of them m ight b e waiting  the 
opportunity  to try and put a bullet in to me.
 
I was racking  my brain. What was I going  to do? My life was inse parably commit ted to the 
American black m an's strugg le. I was gen erally regard ed as a "leader." For years, I had attack ed 
so m any so-c alled " black l eaders" f or their shortc omings. N ow, I had to honestly ask mysel f what I 
could o ffer, how I was gen uinely  quali fied to help the black p eople win  their struggle for human 
rights. I had enough exp erienc e to know that in order to be a goo d organizer  ofanything  which 
you expect to succe ed-inclu ding yoursel f-you m ust almost m athematically analyze cold facts.
 
I had, as one asset, I knew, an international image. No a mount of money co uld h ave bought t hat. 
I knew that if I said s omething newsworthy , people would rea d or h ear of it, mayb e even around 
the wor ld, depending u pon what it was. More immedi ately, in N ew York City, where I would 
naturally  base any operatio n, I had a large, direc t pers onal follow ing o f non-Muslims. This had 
been buildi ng up steadily ever since I had led Muslims i n the dramatic pro test to the polic e when 
our b rother Hint on was be aten up. Hundreds o f Harlem Negroes had seen, and hundreds of 
thousands of them had later he ard h ow we ha d shown th at almost a nything could be 
accomplished by black m en who would f ace the white man withou t fear. All of Harle m ha d seen 
how from then on, the police gave Muslims res pect. (This was  during th e time that the D eputy 
Chief Inspector at the 28th Precinct had said o f me, "No o ne man should h ave th at much power.")
 
Over  the ensuing years, I'd had various kin ds of evidenc e that a high perce ntage of New York 
City's black p eople respo nded to what I said, inclu ding a grea t many who would not publicly say 
so. For inst ance, time a nd again whe n I spoke at street rallies, I  would draw  ten and twelve  times 
as m any p eople a s mo st other so-calle d "Negro le aders." I  knew that in any socie ty, a true le ader 
is one who e arns a nd deserves  the followin g he enjoys. True followers are bestowed by 
themselves, out of their own volition and emotions . I knew that the great lack o f most of the big-
named "Negro leaders" was t heir lack o f any true ra pport with the ghett o Negroes. How could 
they have rapport when they spent most of their tim e "integrating" with white p eople? I knew that the ghe tto people knew  that I never le ft the ghe tto in spirit, a nd I never left it physicall y any more 
than I had to. I had a ghetto instinc t; for insta nce, I could feel if tension was  beyond normal in a 
ghett o audience . And I could speak and underst and the ghet to's la nguage. There was an 
exam ple o f this that alwa ysflew to my mi nd every time I heard some o f the "big na me" Negro 
"leaders" d eclaring  they "spoke for" the ghetto black people.
 
After a Harlem s treet rally, one of these d owntown  "leaders" a nd I were  talking when we we re 
approac hed by a Harle m hustler . To my knowledge I'd never se en this h ustler b efore; he said to 
me, approxima tely: "Hey, baby! I dig you h olding this all-originals sce ne at the track .  . . I'm going 
to lay a vine under the Jew's b alls for a dime-got t o give you a play . . . Got the shorts o ut here 
trying to scuffle up on some br ead . . . Well, my m an, I'll get o n, got to go p eck a  little, a nd cop me 
some z's -" And the hustler went o n up Sevent h Avenue.
 
I would n ever have gi ven it another thought, exce pt that this d owntown  "leader" was  standing, 
staring a fter that hustler, looking as if he'd just h eard Sanskrit. He a sked me  what h ad been said , 
and I told him . The hustler h ad said h e was aware t hat the Muslims were h olding an  all-black 
bazaar a t Rockl and Palace, which is pri maril y a dancehall. The hustler intended to pawn a suit for 
ten dollars  to attend and patronize  the baza ar. He had ver y little mo ney b ut he was try ing har d to 
make some. He was going to  eat, then he would ge t some sl eep.
 
The point I am making is th at, as a "leader," I could talk over t he ABC, CBS , or NBC 
micro phones, at Harvard or at Tuskegee; I could t alk wi th the so-calle d "middle class " Negro an d 
with the ghett o blacks ( whom all t he other le aders j ust talked _about_). And because I had been a 
hustler, I knew better than all whites knew, and better than nearly  all o f the black "leaders " knew, 
that actually the mo st danger ous bl ack m an in America was  the ghet to hustler.
 
Why do I say this? The hustler , out there in t he ghett o jungles, has less res pect for the white 
power struct ure than any ot her N egro in North America. The ghetto hustler is int ernally  restr ained 
by nothing. He h as no religion, no concep t of morality, no civic respo nsibilit y, no fear-no thing. To 
survive, he is outthere c onstantly  preying upon others, pr obing f or any human weakn ess like a 
ferret. The ghett o hustler is f orever  frustrated, restless, and anxious for some "action." Whatever 
he undertakes, he commits hims elf to it fully, absolutely .
 
What makes t he ghett o hustler yet m ore dangerous is h is "glam or" image t o the sc hool-dropout 
youth i n the ghe tto. These ghe tto teen-agers se e the hell ca ught by  their parents s truggling to get 
somewhere, o r see that they have given  up strugg ling in the prejudic ed, intoler ant white m an's 
world. The ghe tto teenagers m ake up their own mi nds t hey would rather be  like t he hustlers 
whom t hey see dress ed "sharp" a nd flashing money and dis playing no  resp ect for anyb ody or 
anything. S o the ghett o yout h become a ttracted to the hustler wor lds o f dope, thiever y, 
prostit ution, and general crim e and immorality .
 
It scared me the first ti me I really saw the danger o f these ghet to teen-agers  if they are ever 
sparked t o violence . One sweltering  summer a fternoon, I attended a Harle m stre et rally  which 
contain ed a lot of these t een-agers in t he crowd. I  had been invited by some "respo nsible " Negro 
leaders who n ormally never spok e to me ; I knew they had just u sed my na me to help them draw 
a crowd. The more I though t about it on the way there, the hotter I got . And when I  got o n the 
stand, I just told that crowd in the stre et that I wasn't r eally wante d up there, that my na me had 
been used-and I walked off the speaker's stand.
 
Well, what did I want t o do that for? Why, those young, te enage Negroes got upset, and started 
milling  around and yelling, up setting the older Negroes in t he crowd. The first thing you k now 
traffic was bl ocked in four direc tions by a crowd whos e mo od quickl y grew  so ugl y that I really  got 
apprehensive. I got up  on top of a car a nd bega n wa ving my ar ms a nd yelling at them to quiet 
down. They did quiet , and then I aske d them to disp erse-an d they did.
 
This was  when it b egan being said that I was America's only Negro who " couldst op a race riot-or start one." I don't know if I could do  either o ne. But I know one thing: it h ad taught m e in a very 
few minutes to have a  whole lot of respec t for the human combusti on that is pa cked am ong t he 
hustlers an d their young a dmirers who live  in the ghe ttoes where t he N orthern white man has 
sealed-o ff the Negro- away  from whites-f or a hundred years.
 
The "long hot summer" o f 1964 in H arlem, in Roc hester, and in other cities, h as given  an idea of 
what co uld h appen-and that's a ll, only  an idea. For all of those riots were k ept contained within 
where th e Negroes lived. You let any of these bitter, seething ghe ttoes all over America receive 
the right igniting inci dent, and become really inflamed, and expl ode, and burst o ut of their 
boundaries in to where whites live! In  New York City, you l et enraged blacks p our out of Harlem 
across C entral P ark a nd fan down t he tunnels of Madiso n and Fifth and Lexington and Park 
Avenues. Or , take C hicago's  South Sid e, an older, even worse slu m-you  let those Negroes swarm 
downt own. You let W ashington , D.C.'s f estering blacks head down Pe nnsylvania Avenue. Detroit 
has alrea dy seen a peaceful massing  of more than a _hundred thousand_ blacks-think about 
that. You name the city . Black soci al dynamite is in Clevelan d, Philad elphi a, San Francisco, Los 
Angeles . . . the black m an's ang er is there, f ermenting.
 
*     *     *
 
I've strayed off onto some o f the incide nts a nd situations wh ich have t aught me to respect the 
danger in the gh ettoes. I had been tryin g to explain how I honestly evalu ated my own 
qualific ations to  be worthy of pres enting mysel f as an independent "leader" among bl ack me n.
 
In the end, I reasoned that the decisio n alre ady had been made for me. The ghett o masses 
alrea dy had entruste d me with an  image o f leadership among t hem. I knew the ghe tto instinctivel y 
exten ds that trust o nly to one who had demonstrated that he would never s ell them out to the 
white man. I not onlyhad no such intentio n-to sell out was  not even i n my  nature.
 
I felt a challenge t o plan, a nd build, a n orga nizatio n that could help to cure the black ma n in North 
America o f the sick ness which ha s kept him under the white m an's he el.
 
The black man in North America was me ntally sick in his cooperative, s heeplike a ccep tance of 
the white m an's cultur e.
 
The black man in North America was spiritu ally sick b ecause for centuries he  had accepted the 
white man's Christia nity-which a sked the black so-calle d Christian to exp ect n o true Br otherho od 
of Man, but to endure the cru elties o f the white s o-called C hristians. C hristianity had made black 
men fuzzy, nebulous, confused in their thinking. I t had taught t he black m an to think if he had no 
shoes, a nd was hungry, "we gon na get shoes and milk an d honey and fish fries in He aven."
 
The black man in North America was ec onomically  sick a nd that was  evident in one simpl e fact: 
as a consumer, he got l ess th an his sh are, a nd as a producer ga ve _least_. The black American 
today shows  us the perfect parasite image-th e black tick u nder the delusio n that he is progressing 
becaus e he rides on the udder of the fat, three-st omached cow that is white America. For 
instance , annually, the black man spends over $3  billion for automobiles, b ut America contains 
hardly any franchised black automobile dealers. F or instance, forty per cent of the expe nsive 
imported Scotch whisky  consumed in America goes down t he throats o f the status-sick bl ack 
man; but the only black-owned dis tilleries ar e in bathtubs, or in t he woods s omewhere . Or f or 
instance-a scandalous s hame-in New  York City , with over a  million N egroes, there a ren't twenty 
black-owne d business es em ploying  over t en people. It's b ecause black men don't own an d 
control th eir own community 's retail establish ments that they can't st abiliz e their own co mmunity. 
The black man in North America was sickest of all politically . He le t the white m an divide him int o 
such foolishness as consi dering  himself a black " Democrat ," a black "R epublican, " a black 
"Conservati ve," or a  black "Liberal " . . . when a ten-millio n black vote bl oc co uld b e the deciding 
balance of power in American politics, b ecause the white m an's vote is al most always  evenly 
divided. The polls are one place where every  black m an could fight t he black man's cause with dignity , and with  the power a nd the tools that the white ma n underst ands , and respec ts, and 
fears, and cooperat es with. List en, let m e tell you s omething! I f a black b loc committee told 
Washingto n's wo rst "nigger-ha ter," "We repres ent ten millio n votes, " why, that "nigger- hater" 
would lea p up: "Well, how _ar e_ you ? Co me o n _in_ here!" Why, if the Mississippi black man 
voted in a bloc, Eastland would pr etend to be more liberal t han Jac ob Javits-or Ea stlan d would 
not surv ive in his office. Why else is it t hat racist p oliticians f ight to keep bl ack m en from the 
polls?
 
 
Whenever any group can vote in a bloc, and decide the outcome of elections , and it _fails_ to do 
this, then that group is politically  sick. I mmigran ts on ce m ade Tammany Hall th e most powerf ul 
single  force in American p olitics. I n 1880, New York City's first Irish Catholic Mayor was  elected 
and by 19 60 America had its f irst Irish Cat holic Presi dent. America's bl ack ma n, voting  as a bloc, 
could w ield a n even m ore p owerf ul force.
 
U.S. politics is rule d by special- interest blocs a nd lobbies. What group has a more urge nt sp ecial 
interest, what group needs a bloc , a lobby, more than the black man? Labor owns o ne of 
Washingto n's largest no n-government buildings- situated where t hey ca n literally  watch t he W hite 
Hous e-and no political  move is m ade that doesn't invol ve how Labor feels a bout it. A lobby got 
Big Oil its depletion all owanc e. The farmer, through his lobby, is the mo st governm ent-subsidized 
special- interest group in America t oday, because a  million farmers vote, n ot as De mocra ts, or 
Republicans , liberals, cons ervatives, b ut as farmers.
 
Doctors have t he best lobby in W ashington . Their sp ecial- interes t influence succ essfully fights the 
Medicare program that's wante d, and needed, by millions o f other people. Why, there's a  Beet 
Growers ' Lobby! A Wheat Lobby! A Cattle Lobby! A China Lobby! Littl e countries n o one ever 
heard o f have th eir Washington lobbies, re prese nting th eir speci al interests.
 
The government has departments to deal with the special- interest groups that make themselves 
heard a nd felt. A Departme nt of Agriculture c ares f or the fanners' needs. There is a De partment of 
Healt h, Education and Welfare. There is a  Dep artment of the Interior- in wh ich the Indians are 
includ ed. Is the farmer, the doctor, the Indian, the great est pr oblem in America t oday? No-it is the 
black man! There o ught t o be a Pentagon-si zed Washingto n department dealing with ever y 
segm ent o f the black man's pr oblems. 
 
Twenty -two million bl ack m en! They have given  America four hundred years o f toil; t hey have bl ed 
and died in ever y battle si nce t he Revolution; they were in America b efore the Pilgr ims, a nd long 
before the ma ss im migrations-an d they are s till today at the bottom of everything!
 
Why, twenty-two m illion bl ack pe ople should tomorrow  give a dollar apiece t o build a  skyscrap er 
lobby building  in Washingto n, D.C. Every morning, every legislat or should rec eive a 
communica tion a bout what the black ma n in America expec ts an d wants and needs. The 
demanding voice o f the black lo bby should b e in the ears of every legislator who votes on  any 
issue .
 
The cornerston es of this country's op eration ar e economic a nd politic al strength and power. The 
black man doesn't have th e economic s trength-an d it will take ti me for him to build it. But right 
now the American b lack m an has the political stre ngth a nd power  to change his d estiny overnight.
 
*     *     *
 
It was a big order-th e organization I was crea ting in my  mind, one which would help to challenge 
the American b lack m an to gain his h uman rights, and to cure his mental, spiritu al, ec onomic, a nd 
political sick nesses . But if you ever intend to do anything  worthwhile, you h ave to start with a 
worthwhile pla n.
 Substantially , as I  saw it, the orga nizatio n I hoped to build would di ffer from the Na tion o f Islam in 
that it would embrace all f aiths o f black m en, and it would carry  into practice what t he Natio n of 
Islam ha d only preached.
 
Rum ors we re swi rling,  partic ularly in East Co ast cities-what was I going to  do? Well, the first thing 
I was going  to have to  do was to attract far more willing he ads and hands than my own. E ach d ay, 
more milit ant, action br others who had been with  me in Mosqu e Seve n announced their br eak 
from the Na tion o f Islam to come with me . And each day, I learned , in o ne or another way, of more 
support from non-Muslim Negroes, includi ng a surprising  lot of the "middle" and "upper class" 
black bourgeoisie, who were sick o f the status-symbol c harade. There was a growin g cla mor: 
"When are you going to  call a meeting, t o get organi zed?"
 
To hold a first m eeting, I arrange d to rent the Carver  Ballroo m of the Ho tel Theresa, which is a t 
the cor ner o f 125th Str eet and Seventh Avenue, which m ight be  calle d one of Harlem's f use-box 
locations.
 
The _Amsterdam News_ rep orted the planned meeting a nd many readers inferred that we we re 
establishing our begin ning mosqu e in t he Theresa. Telegrams an d letters and telephone calls 
came to the hotel for me, from across t he country. Their gener al tone was th at this was  a move 
that people h ad waitedfor. People I'd never heard of expresse d confidence in m e in moving wa ys.
 
Num erous people said that the N ation of Islam's stringent moral restrictions had repelled them-
and they wanted to join m e.
 
A doctor who owne d a small hospital t elephoned long- distance t o join. Ma ny others s ent 
contributio ns-even b efore our policies h ad been publicly stated. Muslims wrote f rom other cities 
that they would join m e, their remarks being generally  along the lines t hat "Islam is too inactive" . . 
."The Nation is moving  too slow ."
 
Astonishing n umbers o f white p eople c alled, and wrote, o ffering co ntributi ons, or asking c ould 
_they_ join ? The answer was,  no, they couldn't join ; our membership was all b lack-bu t if their 
conscienc es dict ated, they could financially  help our co nstructive ap proach t o America's rac e 
problems .
 
Speaking-engage ment reques ts ca me in-twen ty-two o f them in one particular Mon day morning's 
mail. It was st artlin g to me that an unusual n umber o f the requests c ame from grou ps of white 
Christian m inisters.
 
I called a  press conference. The microp hones st uck u p before me . The flashbulbs p opped. The 
reporters, m en and wom en, white and black, re prese nting  media that reache d around the world, 
sat looking a t me with th eir pencils and open notebooks.
 
I made the announcement: "I am going  to organi ze and head a new mosqu e in New  York City 
known a s the Muslim Mosque, I nc. This will give us a religious b ase, and the spiritual f orce 
necessary  to rid o ur people o f the vices th at destroy the moral f iber of our community.
 
"Muslim Mosque, I nc. will have its te mporary  headqu arters in the Hot elTheres a in H arlem. It will 
be the work ing ba se for an action program d esigne d to elimi nate the political op pressio n, the 
economic exploit ation , and the social d egrada tion suffered daily by twenty-two m illion Afro-
Americans ."
 
Then the report ers bega n firing questio ns at me.
 
*     *     *
 
It was n ot all as simple a s it m ay sound. I went f ew pl aces without constant aware ness that any number of my former bro thers f elt they would ma ke heroes of themselves  in the Na tion of Islam if 
they killed m e. I knew how Elija h Mu hammad's followers th ough t; I had taught s o many o f them to 
think. I knew  that no one would kill  you quicker t han a Muslim i f he felt that's what Allah wanted 
him to do.
 
There was  one further m ajor pr eparatio n that I knew I n eeded. I'd had it in my m ind for a long 
time-as a servant o f Allah . But it would r equire m oney that I didn't have.
 
I took a plane to Boston. I was turning again t o my sist er Ella. Though a t times I'd m ade Ella 
angry  at me, beneath it all, sinc e I had first come to her a s a teen-aged hick f rom Michigan, Ella 
had never once really  wave red from my corn er.
 
"Ella," I said, "I want t o make the pilgr image t o Mecca ."
 
Ella s aid, " How much do you ne ed?"
 
 
 
CHAPT ER S EVEN TEENMECCA
 
The pilgrimage to Mecca, k nown as Hajj, is a religious o bligation t hat every  orthodox Muslim 
fulfills, i f humanly able, at least o nce in his o r her lifetime.
 
The Holy Qur an says it, " Pilgrimage to the Ka'ba is a duty men owe t o God; those who are a ble, 
make the journ ey."
 
Allah said: "And proclai m the pilgr image a mong men; they w ill come to you on  foot and upon 
each le an camel, they will come from every deep ravine. "
 
At one or a nother college or u nivers ity, usually in the informal gat herings  after I h ad spoken, 
perhaps a dozen ge nerally  white-complexioned people would co me up to me, identifying 
themselves a s Arabian, Mid dle E aster n or Nort h African M uslims who ha ppened to be visitin g, 
studying, or liv ing in the U nited States. They had said to  me that, my wh ite-indicting  statements 
notwithst anding,  they felt that I was  sincere in co nsidering myself  a Muslim-an d they felt if I was 
expos ed to what t hey always  called " true Isla m," I would "understa nd it, and embrace it ." 
Automatic ally, as a follower o f Elijah Muhammad, I had bridl ed when ever this was  said.
 
But in the privacy of my own t houghts after several o f these experienc es, I did questio n mysel f: if 
one was sincere in professing a  religion, why should h e balk a t broadening his k nowledge o f that 
religion?
 
Once in a  conversation I broach ed this with W allace Mu hammad, Elijah Mu hammad's s on. He 
said that yes, cert ainly, a Muslim should s eek t o learn all t hat he could a bout Islam . I had alwa ys 
had a high o pinio n of Wallace Mu hammad's o pinion.
 
Those orthodox Muslims whom I had met, one after another, had urged m e tomeet and talk with  a 
Dr. Manmoud Yousse f Shawarbi. He was  describ ed to me as an eminent, learned Muslim, a 
University  of Cairo grad uate, a University  of London Ph.D., a  lecturer on  Islam, a United Na tions 
advisor  and the author o f many bo oks. He was  a full pro fessor o f the Universit y of Cairo, o n leave 
from there to be in New York as the Director of the Federation o f Islamic Associatio ns in t he 
Unite d States an d Canada. Several ti mes, driving in that part of town, I had resiste d the impuls e 
to drop in a t the F.I.A. building, a brown- stone at 1 Rivers ide Dri ve. Then one day D r. Shawarbi 
and I were introd uced by a newspaperma n.
 
He was  cordial. He sai d he had followed m e in the press; I said I  had been told o f him, and we 
talked for fifteen or twenty  minutes. We both had to leave to make appointments we ha d, when he dropped on me something whos e logic  never would get o ut of my h ead. He said , "No ma n has 
believed perfectly until he  wishes for his brother what h e wishes f or himsel f."
 
Then, there was  my sist er Ella h erself . I couldn' t get over what s he had done. I've said before, 
this is a  _strong_, big, black, Georgia-bor n woma n. Her d omineering wa ys had got ten her p ut out 
of the Nati on of Islam's B oston Mosqu e Eleven ; they took her b ack, then she left on her own. E lla 
had started studying un der B oston orthodox Muslims, then she founded a school where Arabic 
was taught ! _She_ couldn't sp eak it , she hire d teachers who did . That's Ella! She deals in real 
estate, and _she_ was saving  up to make the pilgrimage. N early all night, we talked in her living 
room. She told me  there was n o ques tion a bout it; it was mo re import ant that I go. I thought a bout 
Ella t he whole flight back to  New York. A _stro ng_ woma n. She had brok en the spirits o f three 
husbands, more driv ing an d dyn amic t han all o f them combin ed. She had played a  very 
significant rol e in my li fe. No o ther woman ever was stro ng enough t o point me in dir ections ; I 
pointed wome n in d irectio ns. I had brought Ell a into Isla m, and now sh e was  financing  me to 
Mecca.
 Allah always  gives  you signs, whe n you are with Him , that He is w ith you .
 
When I applied for a visa to  Mecca at the Saudi Arabian Cons ulate , the Saudi Ambassador t old 
me that no Muslim co nverted in America could have a visa  for the Hajj pilgrimage witho ut the 
signed approval o f Dr. Manmoud Shawarbi. Bu t that was  only the beginni ng of the sign f rom 
Allah . When I telephoned Dr. Shawarbi, h e registere d astonishm ent. "I was just going to  get in 
touch with you, " he said, "by all m eans come right ove r."
 
When I got to his o ffice, Dr . Shawarbi h anded me the signed letter approving me to make the Hajj 
in Mecc a, and then a book. It was _The Eternal Mess age of Muha mmad_ by Abd-Al-Rah man 
Azzam.
 
The author had just sent the copy of the book to be given to me, Dr. Shawarbi sai d, and he 
explaine d that this a uthor was an  Egyptia n-born Saudi citizen, a n intern ational st atesman, and 
one of the cl osest advisors  of Prince F aisal, t he rul er of Arabia. " He h as followed you in the press 
very closely." It was hard for me to believe.
 
Dr. Shawarbi  gave m e the telephone number o f his son, Muh ammad Shawarbi, a student in 
Cairo, a nd also the number of the author's so n, Omar Azzam, who li ved in Je dda, "your l ast st op 
before Mecca. Call them both, by all m eans."
 
I left New  York quietly  (little re alizing that I was going  to return noisily ). Few  people were t old I 
was leaving at all. I didn't want s ome State Dep artment or other roadblocks p ut in my pa th at the 
last m inute. Only my wif e, Betty, and my three girls an d a few close associ ates came with me  to 
Kennedy Internati onal Airport. W hen the Lufthansa Airlines jet had taken off, my two seatrow 
mates and I introduce d oursel ves. Another sign! B oth were  Muslims, o ne was bound for Cairo, as 
I was, a nd the other was bo und for Jedda, where I would be in a few days. 
All th e wa y to Frank furt, Germa ny, my seatmates and I talke d, or I read the book I had been 
given. W hen we la nded in Frank furt, the br other bo und for Jedda said his wa rm good-bye t o me 
and the Cairo- bound brother. We had a few ho urs' layo ver b efore we  would take another pl ane to 
Cairo. W e decided to go sights eeing in Fra nkfurt.
 
In the me n's room there a t the airport, I met the first American a broad who r ecogni zed me, a 
white student from Rh ode Isla nd. He kept eyeing m e, then he came over . "Are you X?" I  laugh ed 
and said I was, I hadn't ever he ard it that way . He exclaime d, "You can't be! Boy , I know no  one 
will believe me when I  tell t hem this!" H e was  attending school, he  said, in France .
 
The brother Muslim and I both were struck by the cordial h ospitalit y of the people in Frank furt. We 
went int o a lot of shops an d stores, looking mo re than intending to buy anything. W e'd walk in, 
any stor e, every  store, a nd it would b e Hello! People who never saw  you before, and knew you 
were strangers. And the same cor diality when we  left, without buyin g anything. In America , you walk in a  store a nd spend a hundred dollars, and leave, and you're still a stranger . Both you and 
the clerks a ct as though you're d oing e ach other a favor. Europeans a ct more h uman, or humane, 
whichever the right word is. My  brother Muslim, who c ould s peak en ough German to get by , 
would explain t hat we were Muslims , and I saw something I had already experienc ed when I was 
looked upon as a Muslim a nd not as a Negro, right in America. People seeing you a s a Muslim 
saw you a s a human being an d they had a different look , different talk, everything. I n one 
Frank furt store-a little s hop, actually-the storeke eper leaned over his counter to us and waved his 
hand, indic ating  the Germa n people p assing by:  "This way one day, that way another day- " My 
Muslim br other explaine d to me  that what h e meant was t hat the Ger mans would rise agai n.
 Back at the Frank furt airp ort, we to ok a Unite d Arab Airlines plane on to Cairo. Throngs o f 
people, obviously Muslims fr om every where, b ound on the pilgrimage, were hugg ing a nd 
embracing. They were o f all co mplexions, the whole a tmosphere was o f warmth a nd friendliness. 
The feeling hit me that there re ally wasn't any color pr oblem here. The effect was  as though I h ad 
just s tepped out of a priso n.
 
I had told my  brother Muslim friend that I wante d to be a tourist in Cairo f or a couple o f days 
before continuing t o Jedda. He gave m e his nu mber an d asked me  to call him, as he want ed to 
put me with a party  of his friends, who c ould speak English, and would b e going o n the 
pilgrimage , and would b e happy to look o ut for me.
 
So I spent two ha ppy days si ghtseei ng in Cairo. I was impress ed by th e modern sc hools, ho using 
develo pments for the m asses, a nd the highwa ys an d the industriali zation that I saw. I had read 
and heard that Pr eside nt Nass er's administra tion h ad built up  one of the most highly 
industriali zed c ountries on  the African continent. I believe what m ost surprised me was that in 
Cairo, a utomobiles were be ing manufactured, and als o buses .
 
I had a good vis it with D r. Shawarbi's so n, Mu hammad Shawarbi, a  nineteen-year- old, who was 
studying economics an d political scie nce a t Cairo University . He tol d me that his f ather's dre am 
was to build a  Unive rsity of Islam in the Unit ed States.
 
The friendly people I met were astounded when t hey learn ed I was a Muslim-fr om America! They 
includ ed an Egyptia n scien tist an d his wife, also on their way to Mecca for the Hajj, who insiste d I 
go w ith them to dinner in a resta urant in Helio polis, a  suburb o f Cairo . They were a n extre mely 
well-informed and intelligent couple. Egypt's rising  indus trialization was one of the reas ons why 
the Western powers were  so anti-Eg ypt, it was  showin g otherAfrican c ountries what t hey should 
do, the sci entist s aid. His wife ask ed m e, "Why are p eople in the world  starv ing when America 
has so m uch surplus f ood? What do they do, dump it in the ocean?" I told h er, "Yes, but they put 
some o f it in the holds of surplus s hips, a nd in subsidized gran aries and refrigerate d space and 
let it stay there, with a s mall ar my of caretakers, un til it's un fit to eat. Then another ar my of 
disposal p eople get rid of it to make space for the next s urplus b atch." She looked at me in 
something like disb elief. Probably she thought I was kid ding. Bu t the American taxpayer  knows 
it's th e truth. I didn't go on to tell h er that right in the Unit ed States, there are hungry people.
 
I telephoned my  Muslim f riend, a s he had asked, a nd the Hajj p arty of his friends was waiting  for 
me. I made it eight of us, and they incl uded a judge a nd an official of the Ministr y of Educati on. 
They spoke E nglish beautifully, and accepted m e like a b rother. I consid ered it another o f Allah's 
signs, that wherever  I turned, someone was  there to help m e, to guide m e.
 
*     *     *
 
The literal me aning of Hajj in Arabic is t o set out toward a definite o bjective. In Islamic law , it 
means to set out for Ka'ba, the Sacred H ouse , and to fulfill the pilgrimage rites. The Cairo air port 
was where sc ores o f Hajj groups were b ecoming Muhrim , pilg rims, upon entering  the state of 
Ihram, the ass umption of a spiritual a nd physical  state of consecra tion. Upon advice, I arra nged 
to leave in C airo all of my luggage a nd four cameras, one a movie c amera. I had bough t in Cairo 
a small valise, just big enough t o carry one suit, shirt, a  pair o f underwear s ets a nd a pair of shoes in to Arabia. Dri ving to the airport with o ur Hajj  group, I began t o get nervous, knowin g that 
from there in , it was going  to be watchi ng others who knew what th ey were do ing, an d tryin g to do 
what th ey did.
 
Entering  the state of Ihram, we to ok off our clot hes a nd put on two white t owels. O ne, the _Izar_, 
was folded ar ound the loins. The other, the _Rida _, wasthrown over th e neck a nd shoulders, 
leavin g the right s houlder a nd arm b are. A pair of simple sa ndals, th e _na'l_, left the ankle-b ones 
bare. Over th e _Izar_ waist-w rapper, a money belt was wo rn, and a bag, something like a 
woman's big handbag, w ith a long strap, was for carry ing the passport and other valu able p apers, 
such as t he letter I h ad from Dr. Shawarbi.
 
Every one of the thousands a t the airport, about to leave f or Jedda, was dresse d this way. You 
could be  a king or a peasant and no one would k now. Some powerful personages, who were 
discree tly pointed out to me, had on the same thing I h ad on. Once t hus dress ed, we all h ad 
begu n intermitt ently  calling out "_Labbayka! L abbayka_! " (Here I  come, O L ord!) The airport 
sounded with t he din of _Muhrim_ expressing  their intention to perform the journ ey of the Hajj.
 
Planeloads o f pilgr ims we re taking o ff ever y few minutes, but the airport was ja mmed with m ore, 
and their fr iends and relatives  waiting to see them off. Those not going were asking o thers to pray 
for them at Mecc a. We were on  our pla ne, in the air, when I learned for the first time that with the 
crush, there was  not supposed to have b een space for me, but strings ha d been pulled , and 
someone had been put off because they didn't want to disappoint an American Muslim. I felt 
mingled emotions o f regret t hat I had inco nvenienc ed and disco mfited who ever was  bumped off 
the plane for me, and, with that, an utter h umility  and grate fulness that I had been paid s uch a n 
honor a nd resp ect.
 
Pack ed in the plane we re white, black , brown, re d, and yellow people, blue eyes an d blond hair, 
and my kinky  red hair-all togeth er, brothers! All ho noring th e same Go d Allah , all in turn giving 
equal h onor to each other.
 
From some in our grou p, the word was spre ading fr om seat to seat that I was a Muslim f rom 
America. F aces t urned, s miling  toward me in gree ting. A boxlunch was p asse d out and as we a te 
that, the wo rd that a Muslim f rom America was ab oard got u p into the cockpit.
 
The captain of the pla ne came back t o meet me. He was  an Egyptia n, his complexion was dark er 
than m ine; he could h ave walked in Harlem a nd no one would have gi ven him a second glanc e. 
He was  delight ed to meet an American M uslim. W hen he invited me to visit th e cockpit, I jumped 
at the chance.
 
The co-pilot was darker t han he was.  I can't t ell you th e feeling it gave me . I had never seen a 
black man flying a jet. That instru ment panel: no one ever could know what all o f those dials 
meant! Both of the pilo ts we re smiling  at me, treating me  with the same honor a nd respect I had 
received ever sinc e I le ft America. I  stood there lo oking  through the glass at  the sky  ahead of us. 
In America , I had ridde n in more pla nes than pr obably any other Negro, and I never ha d been 
invited up into the cockpit . And there I was, with two Muslim s eatmates, one from Egypt, t he other 
from Arabia, all o f us bound for Mecca, with m e up in the pilots' ca bin. Br other, I _knew_ Allah 
was with me .
 
I got back to my seat. All of the way, about an hour's f light, we pilgrims we re loudly crying out, 
"_Labbayka! Labbayka_ !" The plane lan ded at Jedda. It's a seaport t own o n the Red Sea, the 
arrival or dis embarkati on point for all p ilgrims who co me to Arabia t o go t o Mecc a. Mecc a is a bout 
forty miles t o the east, inla nd.
 
The Jedda airport s eemed even more cro wded than Cairo's h ad been. Our party  became another 
shuffling unit in the shifting ma ss wi th every race o n earth repres ented. Each party was  making its 
way toward the long line wa iting to  go thr ough Cus toms. B efore reac hing Custo ms, each Hajj party  was assigned a _Mutawaf _, who would be  resp onsibl e for transferring that party  from Jedda 
to Mecca. Some pilgrims cried "_Labbayka_!" O thers, so metimes large groups, were ch anting in 
unison a prayer th at I will transla te, "I submit to no one butThee, O Allah, I submit to no one but 
Thee. I submit to Thee becaus e Thou hast no partner. All praise a nd blessings  come from Thee, 
and Thou art alone in Thy kingdom ." The essence o f the prayer  is the Oneness o f God.
 
Only officials were  not wearing  the _Ihram _ garb, o r the white sk ull caps, long, white, n ightshirt-
looking gown  and the littl e slipp ers of the _Mut awaf_, those who guid ed each pilgrim p arty, and 
their helpers. I n Arabic, an _mmmm_ sound before a verb m akes a verbal noun, so " _Mu_tawaf" 
meant "the one who guid es" the pilg rims o n the "_Tawaf _," which is th e circu mam-bulation o f the 
Ka'ba in Mecca .
 
I was nervous, shuffling in the center of our grou p in t he line waiting  to have our pass ports 
inspected. I had an apprehensive
 
feeling. Look what I 'm handing th em. I'm in t he Muslim wor ld, right at The Fountain . I'm ha nding 
them the Americ an passport which signifi es th e exact opposit e of what Isl am s tands f or.
 
The judge i n our group sense d my strain . He p atted my shoulder . Love, humility , and true 
brotherhood was  almost a  physical f eeling wherever  I turned. Then our grou p reac hed the clerks 
who examin ed each passp ort an d suitcas e care fully and nodded to the pilgrim to  move on.
 
I was so n ervous t hat when I turned the key in my  bag, a nd it didn't work, I broke open the bag, 
fearing that they might think I h ad something in t he bag t hat I shouldn't h ave. Then the clerk saw 
that I was handing hi m an  Americ an passport. H e hel d it, he looked at me and said something in 
Arabic. M y friends aro und me  began s peaking  rapid Arabic, gest uring a nd pointing, tr ying to 
intercede for me. The judge a sked me  in English f or my le tter from Dr . Shawarbi, and he thrust it 
at the clerk, who re ad it. He gave th e letter b ack, protesting- I could tell that. An argum ent was 
going  on, _about_ me. I felt like ast upid fool, unable to say  a word, I  couldn't even u ndersta nd 
what was  being said. B ut, finally, sadly, the judge turned to me.
 
I had to go before the _Ma hgam a Sharia_ , he explain ed. It was th e Muslim high co urt wh ich 
examin ed all possibly nonauthentic converts t o the Islamic religion s eeking to enter Mecc a. It was 
absolut e that no non-Muslim co uld e nter Mecca.
 
My friends we re going t o have to go on to Mecca witho ut me. They seemed stricken with concer n 
for me. And _I_ was  stricken. I found the words t o tell them, "Do n't wor ry, I'll be  fine. Allah guides 
me." They said t hey would pray  hourly in my be half. The white-garbed _M utawaf _ was urging 
them on, to keep sc hedule i n the airp ort's hu man crush. W ith all o f us waving, I watched them go.
 
It was t hen about three in the morning, a  Friday  morning. I never h ad been in such a  jammed 
mass of people, but I never h ad felt more alone, and helpless, sinc e I was a baby. Worse, Frid ay 
in the M uslim wo rld is a  rough counterpart o f Sunday in the Christian world. O n Friday , all the 
members o f a Muslim co mmunity  gather, to pray toge ther. The even t is calle d _ya wn al-
jumu'a_-"the day of gathering." I t meant that no courts were  held on Friday . I would have t o wait 
until Saturday , at least.
 
An official b eckoned a young  Arab _M utawa f's_ aide. In broken English, t he official explai ned that 
I would b e taken to a plac e right at the airp ort. My  passp ort was  kept at Customs. I want ed to 
object, b ecause it is a traveler's  first law never to get separated from his pa ssport , but I didn't. In 
my wrapped towels  and sandals, I f ollowed the aide in his sk ull cap, long white gown, an d 
slippers. I guess we were quite a  sight. P eople p assing us were speaking  all kinds o f languages. I 
couldn't speak anybody's  language. I  was in ba d shape.
 Right outside t he airport was a mosque, and above t he airport was a huge, dormitory -like 
buildi ng, four tiers high. I t was  semi-dark, n ot long before dawn, a nd planes were regularly  taking 
off and landing, t heir la nding li ghts sweeping the runways, or their wing and tail lights blinking in the sky . Pilg rims f rom Ghana, Indonesi a, Ja pan, and Russia, to mention some, were moving  to 
and from the dormitory  where I was being ta ken. I don't believe that motion pic ture c ameras ever 
have f ilmed a human spectacl e mor e colorful than my  eyes  took in. We reac hed the dormit ory 
and began climbing, u p to the fourth, top, tier, passing  members o f ever y race on earth. Chi nese , 
Indonesia ns, Afghanista nians . Many , not yet changed in to the _Ihram _ garb, s till wore th eir 
national dress . It was like p ages o ut of the _Na tional Geographic_ m agazine.
 
My guide, on the fourth tier, gesture d me  into a compartment that contained about fifteen people. 
Most lay  curled up on their rugs asleep. I could tell t hat some were wom en, covered h ead and 
foot. An old Russia n Muslim a nd his wif e we re not asle ep. They stare d frankly at me. Two 
Egyptia n Muslims a nd a Persia n rous ed and also stare d as my  guide m oved u s over int o a 
comer. With gest ures, h e indicat ed that he would d emonstrate to me the proper prayer ritu al 
postures . Imagine, being a Muslim m inister , a leader in Elijah Mu hammad's Na tion of Islam , and 
not knowing the prayer ritual.
 
I tried to do what h e did. I knew I wasn't doing it right. I  could feel the other Muslims' eyes o n me. 
Western ankles won't d o what Musli m an kles h ave done for a lifetime. Asians squa t when t hey sit, 
Westerners sit upright in ch airs. When my guide was down i n a p osture, I tried ever ything I c ould 
to get down a s he was, bu t there I was, sticking up . After ab out an hour, my guide left, indica ting 
that he would return later.
 
I never even thought about sleeping. W atched by the Muslims,
 
I kept practicing prayer  posture . I refused to let myself  think how ridiculo us Im ust have lo oked to 
them. After a while, th ough , I learned a lime trick t hat would le t me get d own closer t o the floor. 
But after two or t hree days, my an kle was going  to swell.
 
As the sleeping Muslims woke up , when dawn h ad broke n, they almost instantly became aware 
of me, and we watch ed each other while  they went a bout their b usiness. I bega n to see what a n 
important role the rug  played i n the overall cult ural lif e of the M uslims. E ach individual ha d a small 
prayer  rug, and each man and wife, or large g roup, had a larger  communal rug. These M uslims 
prayed o n their rugs th ere in the compartment. Then they sprea d a tableclot h over th e rug a nd 
ate, so the rug b ecame the dini ng room. Removing th e dis hes and clot h, they sat on the rug- a 
living room. Then they curl up and sleep on the rug-a bedroom. In that compartment, before I was 
to leave it, it dawne d on me for the first ti me why the fence had paid suc h a high price for Orie ntal 
rugs whe n I had been a burglar  in Boston. It was  because so much in tricate c are was  taken to 
weave fine rugs in c ountries where rugs we re so culturally  versatile. L ater, in Mecca, I would s ee 
yet another us e of the rug. W hen any kind of dispute arose, someone who was res pected highly 
and who was no t invol ved would sit o n a rug with the disputers ar ound him, which m ade the rug a 
courtroom . In other instances it was a classroo m.
 
One of the Egyptian Muslims, p articularly , kept watching me  out of the corner of his eye. I smile d 
at him. He got up and came over  to me. "Hel-lo-" he said . It sounded like the Ge ttysburg  Address. 
I beamed at him, "Hello! " I asked his n ame. "Name? Na me?" He was try ing har d, but he didn't get 
it. We tried some wo rds o n each other. I'd guess his English voca bulary  spanned mayb e twenty 
words. Just enough t o frustrate me . I was tryin g to get h im to comprehend anything. " Sky." I'd 
point. H e'd s mile. " Sky," I'd say again , gesturing f or him to repeat it a fter me. He would. "Airplan e . 
. . rug . . . foot. . . sandal .  . . eyes. .  . ." Like that. Then an amazing  thing h appened. I was so glad 
I had some c ommunicatio n with a human being, I was just s aying whatever  came to mind. I 
said"Muh ammad Ali Clay-" All of the Muslims liste ning lighted up like a  Christ mas tr ee. "Y ou? 
You?" My friend was poi nting at  me. I shook my h ead, "No, n o. Muh ammad Ali Clay my friend-
_friend_!" They half understo od m e. Some of them didn't understa nd, a nd that's h ow it bega n to 
get ar ound that I was  Cassius Clay , wor ld heavyweight c hampio n. I was later to learn th at 
apparently every  man, woma n and child in t he Muslim wor ld had heard how Sonny Liston (who in 
the Muslim world ha d the image of a man-eating ogre) ha d been beaten in G oliath-David f ashion 
by Cassius Clay , who th en had told the world th at his na me was Muha mmad Ali and his relig ion was Islam and Allah h ad given hi m his victory .
 
Establishing th e rapport was the best thing that could h ave ha ppened in the compartment. My 
being an America n Muslim c hange d the attitudes from merely watching me  to wanting to look out 
for me. Now, the others bega n smiling st eadily . They came clos er, they were frankly  looking  me 
up and down. In spec ting me. Very friendly. I was like a man from Mars.
 
The _Mut awaf_'s aide re turned, indicati ng that I should go with  him. He p ointed from our tier 
down a t the m osqu e and I knew that he had come to take me  to make the morning pr ayer, El 
Sobh, always  before s unrise. I followed him down, a nd we passed pilgrims by  the thousands, 
babbling la nguages, every thing but English. I was angry with myself  for not having ta ken the tim e 
to learn more of the orthodox prayer  rituals be fore leavin g America. I n Elija h Muh ammad's Nati on 
of Islam, we  hadn't prayed i n Arabic. About a dozen or mo re years be fore, when I  was in priso n, a 
member of the orthodox Muslim m ovem ent in Bo ston, named Abdul Ha meed, had visited me  and 
had later se nt me prayers  in Arabic. At that time, I had learn ed those pr ayers p honetic ally. But I 
hadn't used them sinc e.
 
I made up my m ind to let the guide d o everything  first and I would watch hi m. It wasn't h ard to get 
him to do things first. He wante d to anyway. Just o utsid ethe mosque there was  a long trough with 
rows of faucets. Ablutions had to preced e praying.  I knew that. Even watchi ng the _Mut awaf_'s 
helper, I didn't get it right. There's a n exact way that an orthodox Musli m washes, a nd the exac t 
way is ver y important.
 
I followed him  into the mosque , just a step behind, watching. He d id his prostr ation , his h ead to 
the groun d. I did mine. "_Bi-smi-llahi-r- Rahmain-r-Rahi m-_" ("In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, 
the Merci ful-") All Muslim pr ayers beg an that way. After that, I may not have b een mumbling  the 
right thing, b ut I was  mumbling.
 
I don't mean to have a ny of this sound joking. I t was  far from a joke with m e. No o ne who 
happened to be watching c ould t ell th at I wasn't saying  what the others s aid.
 
*     *     *
 
After that Sunrise Praye r, my guide accompanied m e back up to the fourth tier. By sign la nguage, 
he said he would ret urn w ithin three hours, then he left.
 
Our ti er gave an excelle nt daylight view of the whole airport a rea. I stood at the railing, watching. 
Planes were la nding an d taking o ff like clockwork.  Thousands upon thousan ds of people from all 
over the wo rld m ade colorful patterns o f movem ent. I saw groups leavin g for Mecca, in buses , 
trucks, cars. I saw some setting out to walk the forty miles. I  wished that I could s tart walkin g. At 
least, I knew  how to do that.
 
I was a fraid to  think what m ight lie a head. Would I be reject ed as a Mecca pilgrim? I wond ered 
what th e test would consist of, and whe n I would f ace the Muslim high co urt.
 The Persia n Muslim i n our compartment came up to me at the rail. H e greeted me, hesit antly, 
"Amer .  . . Americ an?" He indica ted that he want ed m e to come a nd have br eakfast with hi m and 
his wife , on their rug. I k new that it was  an immense o ffer he was ma king. You don't have tea with 
a Musli m's wife. I didn't want to impose, I don't know if the Persian underst ood or n ot whe n I 
shook my h ead and smiled , meaning "No, thanks. " He brought me some tea and cooki es, 
anyway. Until th en, I hadn't even t hought ab out eating.
 
Others ma de gest ures. They would jus t come u p and smile an d nod at me. My first friend, the one 
who had spoke n a little E nglish, was  gone. I didn't k now it, but he was spre ading t he word o f an 
American Muslim on  the fourth tier . Traffic had begu n to pick u p, going past our c ompartment. 
Muslims in the _Ihram_ garb, or still in t heir na tional dr ess, walked slowl y past, smiling. I t would 
go on  for as long as I was there to be seen. But I hadn't yet le arned that I was the attractio n. 
I have al ways  been restless, a nd curio us. The _Mu tawaf _'s ai de didn't ret urn in t he three hours 
he had said, a nd that made me nervous. I feared that he had given up on me as beyon d help. By 
then, too, I was really getting hu ngry. All of the Muslims in the compartment had offered me food, 
and I had refused. The trouble was, I have to admit it, at that point I didn't know  if I could go
 
for their m anner o f eating. Everything  was in o ne pot on the dining- room rug, and I saw them jus t 
fall right in, using th eir hands.
 
I kept standing at  the tier railing ob serving the courtyard below, and I decided to expl ore a bit on 
my own. I went down to  the first ti er. I though t, then, that maybe I shouldn't ge t too far, someone 
might c ome for me. So I went back up  to our compartme nt. In about forty-five minutes, I went 
back down. I  went f arther this ti me, feeling my way . I saw a little resta urant in the courtyard. I  went 
straight in there. I t was  jammed, and babbling w ith languages. Using  gest ures, I bought a  whole 
roast ed chicke n and something like t hick p otato c hips. I got b ack o ut in the courtyard a nd I tore 
up that chicken , using my ha nds. Muslims were d oing th e same thing all around me. I saw men at 
least seventy  years  old bringing  both legs up under them, until th ey made a human knot of 
themselves, eating with as much aplomb and satisfaction as though they had been in a fine 
resta urant with waiters all over t he place. All ate as One, and slept as O ne. Ever ything ab out the 
pilgrimage atmosphere acc ented the Oneness o f Man under O ne G od.
 
I made, during th e day, several trips u p to the compart ment and back ou t in the courtyard, each 
time exploring  a little further than before. Once, I nodded at two b lack m en standing togeth er. I 
nearly shouted when one spoke to me in British-acc ented English. B efore their party  approac hed, 
ready to leave f or Mecca, we were ab le to talk en ough to exch ange t hat I was American a nd they 
were Ethiopians. I was heartsick. I had found two English- speaking  Musli ms at last-an d they were 
leavin g. The Ethiopians had both been schooled in C airo, and they were liv ing in Ryadh, the 
political c apital of Arabia. I was  later going t o learn to  my surprise t hat in E thiopia, with eight een 
million p eople, ten million are M uslims. Most people think Et hiopi a is Christian . But only its 
government is Christian . The West has alwa ys helped to keep the Christian government in p ower.
 
I had just s aid my S unset Pr ayer, _El Maghrib _; I was lying on my cot in the fourth-tier 
compartme nt, feeling blue and alone, when o ut of the dark ness came a sudden light!
 
It was ac tually a sudden thought. O n one of my venturings  in the yard f ull of activity below, I had 
noticed four men, officials, s eated at a table with a telephone. Now, I though t about seeing them 
there, a nd with _telephone_, my mind flashed to the connectio n that Dr . Shawarbi i n New  York 
had given me, the telephone number of the son of the author o f the book which had beenbought 
a whole roast ed chicken and something like t hick po tato chips. I  got b ack o ut in the courtyard an d 
I tore u p that chicke n, using my hands. Muslims were  doing the same thing all ar ound me. I saw 
men at least s eventy years ol d bringing  both legs up  under them, until they ma de a human knot o f 
themselves, eating with as much aplomb and satisfaction as though they had been in a fine 
resta urant with waiters all over t he place. All ate as One, and slept as O ne. Ever ything ab out the 
pilgrimage atmosphere acc ented the Oneness o f Man under O ne G od.
 
I made, during th e day, several trips u p to the compart ment and back ou t in the courtyard, each 
time exploring  a little further than before. Once, I nodded at two b lack m en standing togeth er. I 
nearly shouted when one spoke to me in British-acc ented English. B efore their party  approac hed, 
ready to leave f or Mecca, we were ab le to talk en ough to exch ange t hat I was American a nd they 
were Ethiopians. I was heartsick. I had found two English- speaking  Musli ms at last-an d they were 
leavin g. The Ethiopians had both been schooled in C airo, and they were liv ing in Ryadh, the 
political c apital of Arabia. I was  later going t o learn to  my surprise t hat in E thiopia, with eight een 
million p eople, ten million are M uslims. Most people think Et hiopi a is Christian . But only its 
government is Christian . The West has alwa ys helped to keep the Christian government in p ower.
 
I had just s aid my S unset Pr ayer, _El Maghrib _; I was lying on my cot in the fourth-tier compartme nt, feeling blue and alone, when o ut of the dark ness came a sudden light!
 
It was ac tually a sudden thought. O n one of my venturings  in the yard f ull of activity below, I had 
noticed four men, officials, s eated at a table with a telephone. Now, I though t about seeing them 
there, a nd with _telephone_, my mind flashed to the connectio n that Dr . Shawarbi i n New  York 
had given me, the telephone number of the son of the author o f the book which had beendone. 
"My father will be so happy to  meet you," said Dr . Azzam. The author who ha d sent me the book!
 
I asked questio ns about his father. Abd-Al-Ra hman Azzam was kn own a s Azzam P asha, or Lord 
Azzam, until the Egyptia n revolutio n, when Pr eside nt Nasser elimi nated all " Lord" and "Noble" 
titles. "He should b e at my h ome when we get t here," Dr. Azzam s aid. "H e spends m uch time in 
New York with his Unite d Natio ns work,  and he has followed you w ith great interest. "
 
I was sp eechl ess.
 
It was e arly in the morning when we reached Dr . Azzam's home. His father was th ere, his father's 
brother, a chemist, and another f riend-all u p that early , waiting. E ach of them embrace d me as 
though I  were a long-lost c hild. I  had never seen these me n before in my life, and they treated me 
so go od! I am going to  tell you t hat I had never b een so honored in my life, nor ha d I ever 
received s uch tr ue hospit ality.
 
A servant br ought tea and coffee, and disappeared. I was urge d to make mysel f comfortable. No 
women were anywhere in view. In Arabia, you co uld e asily think th ere were no  females.
 
Dr. Abd-Al-Rahman Azzam dominated the conversation . Why hadn't I calle d before? They 
couldn't underst and why I hadn't. Was I comfortable? They seemed embarrasse d that I had spent 
the time a t the airport; that I had been delayed in getting to Mecca. No m atter how I p rotested that 
I felt no inc onvenie nce, that I was fine, they would n ot hear it. "You must rest," Dr. Azzam s aid. He 
went to  use the telephone.
 
I didn't know  what this distinguish ed m an was doing. I  had no dream. W hen I was  told that I would 
be brought b ack f or dinner that evening, a nd that, m eanwhile, I s hould get b ack in the car, how 
could I h ave re alized t hat I was ab out to see the epitome of Muslim h ospit ality?
 
Abd-Al- Rahman Azzam, when a t home, lived in a suite a t the Jedda Palac e Ho tel. B ecause I  had 
come to them with a l etter from a friend, he was going t o stay at his s on's h ome, and let me use 
his suite, u ntil I could get o n to Mecc a.
 
When I found out, there was no use pr otesting: I was in t he suite ; young D r. Azzam was gon e; 
there was  no one to protest to. The three-roo m suit e had a bathroom that was as big as a  double 
at the New  York Hilton. It was suit e number 2 14. There was  even a  porc h outside, affording a 
beautiful vie w of the ancient Red S ea city.
 
There had never before b een in my emotions suc h an impuls e to pray-and I did, pros trating 
myself  on the liv ing-room rug.
 
Nothing in either o f my two careers a s a black man in America had served t o give m e any 
idealistic  tendencies. My  instincts a utomatically  examine d the reasons, the m otives, o f anyone 
who did anything th ey didn't have t o do for me. Always  in my  life, if it was  any white perso n, I 
could se e a selfish motive.
 
But there in that hotel that morning,  a telephone call and a few hours awa y from the cot on the 
fourth-floor tier o f the dormit ory, was on e of the few times I had been so awed that I was totally 
without resist ance. That white m an-at least h e would have b een consid ered "whit e" in America-
related to Arabia's ruler , to whom h e was a close a dviso r, truly an internatio nal m an, with  nothing 
in the world to  gain, h ad given u p his suite to me, for my transie nt comfort. H e had _nothing_ to gain. He didn't need me . He had everything.  In fact, he had more to lose than gain . He h ad 
followed t he America n press about me. If he did that, he knew there was on ly stigma a ttached to 
me. I was suppose d to have horns . I was a "racist ." I was "anti-white "-and he from all 
appearanc es was  white. I wassup posed to be a crimin al; no t only that, but everyone was even  
accusing  me of using his relig ion of Islam as a cloak f or my criminal pr actices and philoso phies. 
Even i f he had had some motive to  use me , he knew  that I was separated from Elijah Muhammad 
and the Natio n of Islam, my " power  base," acc ording  to the press in America. The only 
organization t hat I had was just a  few weeks old. I had no job. I had no money. Just to get over 
there, I  had had to borrow  money from my sister .
 
That morning was  whe n I first bega n to reappraise the "white m an." It was when I first b egan to 
perceive that "white m an," as commonly used, m eans complexion o nly sec ondarily; primarily it 
described attitudes an d actions. In America, "white man" meant specific attitudes a nd actions 
toward t he black m an, and toward all o ther non-white m en. But in the Musli m wo rld, I had seen 
that men with white complexions were mor e gen uinely  brotherly than anyone else had ever be en.
 
That morning was  the start of a radical alt eratio n in my whole o utlook a bout "whit e" men.
 
I should quot e from my n otebook here. I  wrote this about noon, in the hotel: "My excitem ent, 
sitting her e, waiting  to go b efore the Hajj Committe e, is i ndescrib able. My window faces to the 
sea west ward. The streets ar e filled with the incoming  pilgrims f rom all over the world. The 
prayers  are to Allah and verses fr om the Q uran are on the lips o f everyone. N ever h ave I seen 
such a b eautiful sight, nor witnessed such a sc ene, nor felt suc h an atmosphere. Although I am 
excited, I feel safe and sec ure, t housands o f miles from the totally different life that I have known. 
Imagine t hat twenty-four hours ago, I was  in the fourth-floor ro om over the airport , surrou nded by 
people with who m I c ould not communicate, feeling uncertain a bout the future, and very  lonely, 
and then _one_ phone call, f ollowing Dr. Shawarbi's ins tructio ns. I have m et one of the m ost 
powerf ul men in the Muslim wor ld. I will soon sle ep in his b ed at theJedda Palace. I  know that I 
am surro unded by f riends whose sincerity  and religious zeal I can feel. I must pray again to thank 
Allah for this blessi ng, and I must pray again t hat my w ife and childre n back in America wi ll 
always  be bless ed for their sacrific es, too."
 
I did pray, two m ore prayers,  as I had told my n otebook. Then I sle pt for about four hours, until the 
telephone rang. I t was  young  Dr. Azzam. I n another hour, he would pick m e up to return m e there 
for dinner. I tumbled words over on e another, tryin g to express s ome of the thanks I felt for all o f 
their actions. He cut me off. "Ma sha'a-llah "-which me ans, "It is as Allah has pleased."
 
I seized t he opportunity  to run down into the lobby, to see it agai n before Dr. Azzam arrived. 
When I opened my do or, just across t he hall f rom me a man in some cer emonial dr ess, who 
obviously  lived th ere, was als o headed downst airs, surroun ded by attendants. I  followed t hem 
down, t hen through t he lobby. Outside, a small car avan of automobiles was wailing. My  neighbor 
appeared through th e Jedda Palace Hotel's f ront entranc e and people rushe d and crowded him, 
kissing  his hand. I found out who he  was: th e Gra nd Mufti of Jerusale m. Later, in the hotel, I 
would have t he opportunity  to talk wi th him for about a half-hour. He was  a cordial ma n of grea t 
dignity . He was  well up on world affairs, a nd even t he latest even ts in America.
 
I will never f orget the din ner a t the Azzam home. I qu ote my notebook ag ain: " I couldn't say in my 
mind that these were 'white' me n. Why, the men acted as if they were brothers o f mine, the elder 
Dr. Azzam a s if he were my  father. His f atherly , sch olarly speech. I _felt_ like h e was my  father. 
He was, you co uld tell, a highl y skilled diplom at, with a broad ra nge o f mind. His k nowledge was 
so worldl y. He was as curren t on world affairs a s some people are to what's going on in their 
living room.
 
"The more we talked , the more his vast reservoir  of knowledge and its variet yseemed unlimit ed. 
He spoke of the racial line age o f the desce ndants of Muha mmad the Pro phet, and he showed 
how they were  both black a nd white. He a lso p ointed out how col or, the complexities  of color , and the problems o f color which exist in t he Muslim wor ld, exist  only where , and to the extent that, 
that area of the Muslim wor ld has been influence d by the West. He said th at if one encountered 
any di fferences ba sed on attitude toward color , this directly  reflected the degree o f Western 
influence."
 
I learned duri ng dinner that while  I was at the hotel, th e Hajj Co mmit tee Court h ad been notified 
about my case, and that in the mo rning I s hould be  there. And I was.
 
The judge was Sh eikh Muha mmad Harkon . The Court was e mpty excep t for me and a sister f rom 
India, f ormerly a Protest ant, who h ad converte d to Islam, and was,  like me , trying to ma ke the 
Hajj. Sh e was brown- skinned, with a small face that was mo stly covered . Judge Harko n was  a 
kind, impressi ve m an. We talked . He a sked me  some questio ns, h aving to do with  my sincerity . I 
answered him as truly as I could. He not only recognized m e as a true Muslim, b ut he gave m e 
two books, o ne in English, the other in Arabic. He recor ded my name in the Holy  Register o f true 
Muslims, a nd we were re ady to part. H e told me , "I hope you wi ll become a  great p reacher o f 
Islam in America. " I said t hat I shared that hope, and I would tr y to fulfill it.
 
The Azzam family were very  elated that I was qualified and accepted to go t o Mecc a. I had lunch 
at the Jedda Pal ace. Then I slept again f or several ho urs, u ntil the telephone awakened m e.
 
It was Mu hammad Abdul Azziz Maged , the De puty Chie f of Protocol f or Prince F aisal. " A special 
car wi ll be waiting  to take you t o Mecca , right after your  dinner," he told m e. He a dvised m e to eat 
heartily, as the Hajj ritu als require  plenty of strength. 
I was beyon d astonishm ent by then.
 
Two young  Arabs a ccompanied me to Mecca . A well-lighted, modem turnpike highwa y made the 
trip e asy. Guards a t intervals al ong th e wa y took one look a t the car, and the driver ma de a sign, 
and we we re passed through, never even having  to slow down. I  was,  all at  once, thrilled, 
important, humble, and thankful.
 
Mecca, when we  entered, seemed as ancient as tim e itself. Our car slowed t hrough t he winding 
stree ts, lin ed by sh ops o n both sid es and with buses , cars, a nd trucks , and tens of thousa nds of 
pilgrims f rom all over the earth were ever ywhere .
 
The car h alted brie fly at a place where a  _Mutawaf _ was waitin g for me. He wore the white 
skullcap and long nightshirt garb t hat I had seen at the airport. He was  a short, dark-skinn ed 
Arab, named Muha mmad. He s poke no English what ever.
 
We park ed near the Gre at Mosqu e. We performed our a blutions and entered. Pilgrims se emed to 
be on top of each other, there were so many, lying,  sitting, sle eping, pr aying,  walking.
 
My vocabul ary cannot describ e the new mosqu e that was be ing built a round the Ka'ba. I was 
thrilled t o realize th at it was  only one of the tremendous re building ta sks un der the directio n of 
young  Dr. Azzam, who h ad just been my h ost. The Grea t Mosque of Mecca, whe n it is f inished, 
will surpass t he archit ectural b eauty of India's Taj Ma hal.
 
Carrying my sa ndals, I f ollowed the _M utawaf _. Then I saw the Ka'ba, a huge bl ack st one house 
in the m iddle o f the Great Mosque. I t was  being circu mambulate d by th ousands up on thousands 
of praying pilg rims, both sexes, a nd every size, sh ape, color, and race in the world. I knew  the 
prayer  to be uttered when the pilgrim's eyes fi rst perceive  the Ka'ba. Translat ed, it is "O  God, You 
are p eace, and peace derives f rom You. So greet us, O Lord, with peace." Up on entering  the 
Mosque, the pilg rim s hould try  to kiss t he Ka'ba if possi ble, b ut if the crowds prevent him getting 
that clos e, he touches it, and if the crowds preven t that, he raises his hand and cries o ut "Takbir!" 
("God is great !") I c ould not get within yards. " Takbir! "
 
My feeling there in the H ouse of God was  a numbness. My  _Mutawa f_ led me in the crowd o f praying, c hanting  pilgrims, m oving  seven tim es ar ound the Ka'ba. Some were b ent and wizene d 
with ag e; it was a sight that stamped itsel f on the brain. I saw incapacitat ed pilgrims b eing carried 
by others. Fac es were  enraptured i n their faith. The seven th time around, I prayed two  _Rak' a_, 
prostr ating  myself , my he ad on the floor. The first pros tration , I prayed the Q uran verse "Say He is 
God, the one and only"; t he seco nd prostra tion: "Say O you who are u nbelievers,  I worship n ot 
that which you worship. . . ."
 
As I pros trated, the _Mut awaf_ fended pilgrims o ff to keep me from being trampled.
 
The _Mut awaf_ and I next drank water  from the well  of Zem Z em. Then we ran b etwee n the two 
hills, Sa fa and Marwa,  where Hajar wand ered over t he same earth searchi ng for water f or her 
child I shmael.
 
Three separat e times, after that, I visited the Gr eat Mosque a nd circum ambulat ed the Ka'ba. The 
next d ay we se t out after sunrise t oward Mount Arafat, thousands o f us, cry ing in unison: 
"Labbayka! L abbayka!" and "Allah Akbar!" Mecca is s urroun ded by the crud est-looki ng mountains 
I have ever  seen; they seem to be made of the slag from a blast f urnace. No ve getation is o n 
them at all. Arriving ab out noon, we prayed a nd chanted from noon until sunset, and the_asr_ 
(afternoon) an d _Maghrib_ (su nset) s pecial pr ayers were per formed.
 
Finally , we lifted our hands in pr ayer a nd thanksgi ving,  repeating Allah's words: " There is no  God 
but Allah. He h as no partner. His are authority and praise. Good emanates from Him, a nd He h as 
power over  all thi ngs."
 
Standing on Mount Arafat had conclu ded the essential rites o f being a pilgrim t o Mecc a. No o ne 
who misse d it c ould consi der hi msel f a pilgr im.
 
The _Ihram _ had ended. We cast the traditi onal s even stones at the devil. So me had their h air 
and beards cut . I decided that I was going to  let my b eard rem ain. I wond ered what my wife Betty, 
and our little d augh ters, were going  to say when they saw  me with a beard, when I  got b ack t o 
New York. New  York se emed a million miles away . I hadn't seen a newspa per that I could r ead 
since I left New  York. I had no idea what was happening there. A Negro rifl e club that had been in 
existenc e for over twel ve years in H arlem h ad been "disc overed" by the police ; it was  being 
trumpeted that I was "behind it." Elijah Muhammad's Natio n of Islam had a lawsuit going against 
me, to force me and my family to vacate t he house in which we  lived o n Long Isl and.
 
The major press , radio , and televis ion me dia in America h ad repres entatives in Cairo h unting all 
over, trying to loc ate m e, to interview me  about the furor in New York that I had allege dly caused-
when I knew  nothing ab out any of it.
 
I only knew what I  had left in America , and how it contraste d with what I had found in the Muslim 
world. About twenty  of us Muslims who h ad finished the Hajj we re sitting  in a huge tent on Mo unt 
Arafat. As a Muslim from Americ a, I was the center of attention . They asked m e what about the 
Hajj had impresse d me the most. O ne of the several who sp oke E nglish ask ed; they translate d 
my answers  for the others. My  answer t o that questio n was  not the one they exp ected, but it 
drove ho me my poi nt. 
I said, " The _brotherhood_! The people of all races , colors, from all over th e wor ld coming 
toget her a s _one_! It has pr oved to me the power  of the One God."
 
It may have b een out of taste, but that gave me  an opportunity, and I used it, t o preach them a 
quick  little ser mon on America's racism, and its evils.
 
I could t ell th e impac t of this u pon them. They had been aware th at the plight o f the black m an in 
America was  "bad," but they had not been aware th at it was  inhuman, that it was  a psychological 
castra tion. These people from els ewhere aro und the world  were shock ed. As Muslims, t hey had a 
very tender he art for all u nfortunates, and very  sensitive feelings f or truth and jus tice. And in everything I s aid to them, as long a s we talked, they were aware o f the yardstick t hat I was using 
to measure ever ything- that to me the earth's most explosive an d pernicio us evi l is racis m, the 
inability of God's creat ures t o live  as On e, especiall y in the W estern world.
 
*     *     *
 
I have re flected since t hat the letter I  finally sat down to compose h ad been subc onscio usly 
shaping itsel f in my  mind.
 
The _color-blindness_ o f the Muslim wo rld's religious s ociet y and the _color-blindness_ of the 
Muslim wor ld's h uman society: these two in fluences ha d each day b een ma king a grea ter im pact, 
and an incr easing pers uasio n agains t my previous wa y of thinki ng. 
 
The first letter was,  of cours e, to my w ife, Betty. I never had a moment's questio n that Betty, after 
initial a mazem ent, would c hange her thinking to  join m ine. I had known a thousand re assura nces 
that Betty's faith in m e was total. Ik new that she would se e what I  had seen-that in the land of 
Muhammad and the land of Abraham, I had been blessed by Allah with a new insight in to the true 
religion of Islam , and a better un derst anding of America's e ntire raci al dilem ma.
 
After the letter to my w ife, I wrote n ext essentially  the same letter to my sister Ella . And I knew 
where Ella would s tand. S he had been saving to make the pilgrimage t o Mecc a herself .
 
I wrote t o Dr. Shawarbi, whose belie f in my sinc erity had enabled me to get a  passport to Mecca.
 
All thr ough t he night, I copied si milar  long letters for others who were very  close to me. Among 
them was Elija h Muh ammad's so n Wallace M uhammad, who ha d express ed to me his conviction 
that the only possibl e salvation for the Natio n of Islam would b e its a ccepting an d projecting a 
better u ndersta nding o f Orthodox Islam.
 
And I wrote to my loyal assist ants at my newly formed Muslim Mosque, I nc. in Harle m, wi th a note 
appended, asking th at my le tter b e duplica ted and dis tribut ed to the press.
 
I knew that when my let ter became public knowledge ba ck in America, many would b e 
astounded-loved ones, friends, a nd enemies alike. And no less as tounded would be millions 
whom I  did not know-who h ad gaine d duri ng my twel ve years w ith Elijah Mu hammad a "hate" 
image of Malcolm X.
 
Even I was mysel f astounded. But there was  precedent in my life for this let ter. My whole lif e had 
been a chronology of-_changes _.
 
Here is what I  wrote . . . from my heart: 
"Never have I  witnessed such sincere hospitality  and the overwhelming  spirit o f true brotherhood 
as is pr actice d by people of all colors a nd races here in this Ancient Holy  Land, the home of 
Abraham, M uhammad, and all the other pr ophets of the Holy Script ures. F or the past week, I 
have b een utterly speec hless a nd spellbou nd by t he gracio usness I see dis played all ar ound m e 
by people _ of all col ors_.
 
"I have b een blesse d to visit th e Holy  City of Mecc a. I have m ade my s even circuits aro und the 
Ka'ba, led by a young _Mu tawaf_ named Muhammad. I drank water  from the well  of Zem Z em. I 
ran s even times b ack a nd forth between the hills o f Mt. Al-Safa and Al-Mar wah. I have prayed in 
the ancien t city of Mina , and I have p rayed on Mt. Arafat.
 
"There were te ns of thousands o f pilgr ims, from all over t he world. They we re of all colors, f rom 
blue-eyed blo nds to black-skinn ed Africans. B ut we were  all par ticipating in t he same rit ual, 
displaying  a spirit o f unity and brotherhood that my exp eriences i n Americ a had led me to believe 
never co uld exist b etween the wh ite and the non-white. 
"America needs to understa nd Islam , because t his is t he one religion that erases f rom its socie ty 
the rac e pro blem . Throughou t my travels  in the Muslim world, I  have m et, talked to, and eve n 
eaten with people who in Americ a would h ave been consi dered 'white'-bu t the 'white' a ttitude was 
removed from their mi nds by th e religion o f Islam. I have never be fore seen _sincere _ and _true_ 
brotherhood prac ticed by all c olors toge ther, irrespec tive of their color .
 
"You may be  shocke d by these words co ming fr om me. But on this pilgrimage, what I have se en, 
and exp erience d, has forced me to _re-arra nge_ m uch of my thought-pa tterns previously  held, 
and to _toss a side_ some of my previous co nclusio ns. This was no t too difficult f or me. Despite 
my firm co nvictio ns, I haveb een always  a man who tries t o face facts, and to accept the re ality of 
life as new experienc e and new knowledge u nfolds it. I  have always  kept an open mind, which is 
necessary  to the flexibility  that must go h and in hand with every  form of intelligent search f or truth.
 
"During th e past eleven d ays here in the Muslim world, I have e aten from the same pla te, drunk 
from the same glass, an d slept in the same bed (or on the same rug)-while prayin g to the same 
God-with f ellow Muslims, whos e eyes we re the bluest o f blue, whose h air was  the blondest o f 
blond, and whose skin was  the wh itest o f white. And in the _words_ a nd in the _actions _ and in 
the _deeds_ of the 'white' Muslims, I felt the same sinc erity that I felt among th e black African 
Muslims o f Niger ia, Sudan, and Ghana.
 
"We were _ truly_ all t he same (br others)-bec ause their belie f in one God had removed the 'white' 
from their _minds_, the 'white' f rom their _ behavior_, a nd the 'white' from their _attitude_.
 
"I could se e from this, t hat perhaps if white Americ ans c ould acce pt the Oneness o f God, then 
perhaps , too, they could a ccep t _in reality_  the On eness o f Man-and cease t o measure, and 
hinder, and harm others in t erms of their 'differences' in color .
 
"With racism pl aguing  America like an incura ble c ancer , the so-called 'C hristian' white Americ an 
heart should be more rec eptive to  a proven s olutio n to such a d estructi ve pr oblem. Perh aps it 
could be  in time to save America from immine nt dis aster-the same destructio n brought u pon 
Germany  by racis m that event ually destroyed the G ermans t hemselves.
 
"Each hour her e in t he Holy Land enables me  to have greater s piritual insights int o what is 
happening in America b etwee n black and white. The American Negro never ca n be blamed for his 
racial an imosities- he is o nly reacting to  fourhundred years  of the conscious racism o f the 
American whites . But as racism l eads America up the suicid e path, I do believe, f rom the 
experienc es that I have had with th em, that the wh ites of the younger gen eratio n, in the colleges 
and universities, will see the handwriting  on the wal l and many of them will turn to the _spiritual_ 
path of _truth_-th e _only_ wa y left to America t o ward o ff the dis aster t hat racism inevitably must 
lead to.
 
"Never have I  been so h ighly honored. Never  have I  been made to feel mor e humble a nd 
unworthy . Who would b elieve the blessi ngs that have b een heaped upon an _American N egro_? 
A few nights ago , a man who would b e called i n Americ a a 'white' m an, a Unite d Na tions 
diplo mat, an ambassador, a companion of kings, ga ve m e _his_ hotel suite, _his_ bed. By this 
man, His Excelle ncy Prince Faisal, who r ules this Holy Land, was  made aware of my presence 
here in J edda. The ver y next m orning, Pri nce F aisal's  son, in p erson, informed m e that by th e will 
and decree of his e steemed father, I was to be a State Guest.
 
"The De puty Chief of Protocol hi msel f took me before the Hajj Co urt. His Holiness Sheikh 
Muhammad Harko n him self okayed my v isit to Mecca . His Holiness gave m e two b ooks on Islam, 
with his personal s eal a nd autograp h, and he told me  that he prayed t hat I would be a success ful 
preacher o f Islam in Americ a. A car, a driver, and a guide, have b een placed at my dispos al, 
making it possible f or me to travel ab out this Holy Land almost a t will. The government provides 
air-conditi oned quart ers and servants in each city that I visit. Never would I h ave even thought o f dreaming t hat I would ever b e a recipie nt of such h onors-honors th at in America would be 
bestowed u pon a King- not a Negro.
 
"All pr aise is d ue to Allah, the Lord of all th e Worlds.
 
"Sincerely , 
"El-Hajj Malik  El-Shabazz
"(Malcolm X)"
 
 
 
CHAPT ER E IGHT EEN
EL-HAJJ MA LIK EL-SH ABAZZ
 
Prince Faisal, t he absolute ruler o f Arabi a, had made me a guest o f the State. Among the 
courtesies a nd privileges  which this br ought t o me, especially -shamelessly -I relish ed the 
chauffeured car which to ured me  around in M ecca with th e chauffeur-guide pointing  out sights o f 
partic ular significance. Some of the Holy  City looked as ancient a s time its elf. Other parts of it 
resemble d a modern Miami s uburb. I cannot describe with  what f eelings  I actually presse d my 
hands against the ear th where t he great Pr ophets h ad trod four thousand years  before,
 
"The Muslim from America " excite d ever ywhere the mo st intense c uriosit y and interest . I was 
mistaken tim e and again f or Cassius Clay . A local n ewspap er had prin ted a p hotograp h of 
Cassius a nd me togeth er at the Unite d Nati ons. Through my c hauffeur-guide-int erpret er I was 
asked sc ores o f questi ons a bout Cassius. Even childre n knew of him, and loved him  there in the 
Muslim wor ld. By popular d emand, the cinemas t hroughou t Africa an d Asia had shown  his fight. 
At that moment in you ng Cassius' care er, he had captured t he imagina tion a nd the support o f the 
entire dark world.
 
My car to ok m e to particip ate in special prayers  at Mt. Arafat, and at Mina. The roads offered the 
wildest d rives t hat I had ever known: night mare traffic, brakes squealing, skid ding cars, a nd horns 
blowing. (I b elieve th at all of the driv ing in the H oly Land is done in the name of Allah .) I had 
begu n to learnth e prayers in Arabic; now , my biggest pr ayer di fficulty was  physical. The 
unaccus tomed prayer  posture h ad caused my  big toe to swell, a nd it pai ned me .
 
But the Muslim world's cus toms no  longer seemed stra nge to me. My hands now rea dily pluck ed 
up food from a common dis h shared with br other Muslims; I was drinking  witho ut hesita tion f rom 
the same glass as others; I was washing  from the same little pi tcher o f water; a nd slee ping with 
eight or ten others o n a mat in the open. I remember o ne night a t Muzdali fa with nothing but the 
sky overhe ad I lay awak e am id sle eping Muslim b rothers an d I learned that pilgrims fr om every 
land-every  color, and class, and rank; high o fficials a nd the beggar alike-all sn ored in the same 
langu age.
 
I'll bet that in the parts o f the Holy Land that I visited a million bottles of soft drinks were 
consum ed-and ten million cigaret tes m ust have b een smoked. Partic ularly the Arab Muslims 
smoked constantly, even o n the Hajj pilgrimage its elf. The smoking evi l wasn't i nvented in 
Prophet Muh ammad's days- if it had been, I believe he would have b anned it.
 
It was t he largest Hajj in hist ory, I was later t old. K asem G ulek, of the Turkish P arliament, 
beaming with prid e, informed m e that from Turkey  alone over six  hundred buses-over  fifty 
thousand Muslims-ha d made the pilgrimage. I told hi m that I dreamed to see the day when 
shiplo ads and planeloads of America n Muslims would come to Mecc a for the Hajj.
 
There was  a color pattern in the huge crowds. O nce I happened to notice t his, I cl osely  observed 
it thereafter. Being from Americ a ma de me intensely sensitive to matters o f color . I saw that 
people who look ed alike dr ew toget her a nd most of the time stayed t ogether. This was  entirely voluntary;  there b eing no other re ason for it. But Africans were with Africans . Pakistanis were wi th 
Pakist anis. And so on. I tucked it into my mi nd that when I  returned home I would t ell Americ ans 
this o bservatio n; that where tru e bro therh ood existed among all c olors, where n o one felt 
segregate d, where t here was no "superiorit y" complex, no "inferiority" complex-then volun tarily, 
naturally , people of the same kind felt drawn toget her by  that which t hey had in common.
 
It is my in tention that by th e time o f my n ext Hajj pilgrimage, I will have a t least a  working 
vocabul ary of Arabic. I n my i gnorant, cripple d conditi on in the Holy  Land, I had been lucky  to have 
met patient friends who enabled me to talk by  interpr eting  for me. Never b efore in my life had I felt 
so deaf and dumb as during  the times when no interpreter was w ith me to tell m e what was being 
said around me, or a bout me, or eve n _to_ me, by ot her Muslims-b efore they learned that "the 
Muslim f rom America" knew only a few pr ayers in Arabic and, beyond that, he could only  nod and 
smile.
 
Behind my nods and smiles, though, I  was doing s ome America n-type thinking  and reflection . I 
saw that Isla m's co nversio ns aro und the wor ld could double and triple if  the color fulness a nd the 
true spiritual ness o f the H ajj pilgrimage were pro perly  advertise d and communicat ed to the 
outside world. I  saw that the Arabs are poor at underst anding the psychology  of non-Arabs and 
the importance of public relatio ns. The Arabs said " _insha Allah_" ("G od wi lling") -then they waited 
for converts. Even by this me ans, Islam was o n the m arch, but I knew that with im proved public 
relatio ns m ethods th e number o f new converts  turning to Allah could be turned into millions .
 
Cons tantly, wherever  I went, I was  aske d ques tions a bout America's r acial discrimina tion. Even 
with my b ackgroun d, I was astonishe d at the degree t o which th e major si ngle image o f America 
seemed to be discrimi natio n.
 
In a hundred different conversatio ns in the Holy  Land with Muslims high a nd low, and from around 
the wor ld-an d, later, when I got t o Black Africa-I d on't have t o tell you never o nce did I bite my 
tongue or miss a  single op portunity  to tell th e truth a bout the crimes , the evils  and the indignities 
that are suffered bythe black man in America . Through my interpre ter, I lost no opportunity  to 
advertise t he America n black ma n's real plight. I  preached it on the mountain at  Arafat, I preache d 
it in t he busy lob by of the Jedda Palace Hot el. I would point at one after another-to bring it cl oser 
to home; "You . . . you . . . you-bec ause of your  dark skin , in America you, too, would b e called 
'Negro.' You co uld b e bombed and shot and cattle-prodded and fire-hosed and beaten because o f 
your complexions."
 
As some of the poorest pilgr ims heard m e preach, so did some o f the Holy World's mo st 
important person ages. I talked at length wi th the blue-eyed, b lond-haired Hussei n Amini, Gran d 
Mufti of Jerusale m. W e were in troduced on Mt. Arafat by Ka sem Gulick o f the Turkish Parliam ent. 
Both were le arned me n; both were e speci ally well-read on America. K asem Gulick aske d me why 
I had broken with Elijah Muha mmad. I said that I preferred not to elaborate upon our di fferences, 
in the interes ts of pres erving the America n black ma n's u nity. They bo th underst ood and accepted 
that.
 
I talked with the Mayor o f Mecca , Sheikh Abdullah Er aif, who when he was a journalist ha d 
criticized th e methods of the Mecc a municip ality-and Prince Faisal m ade him the M ayor, to see if 
he could d o any better. Everyone generally  acknowledged t hat Sheikh Eraif was doi ng fine. A 
filmed feature " The Muslim Fro m Americ a" was ma de by Ahmed Horyallah a nd his p artner Essid 
Muhammad of Tunis' television station. In America o nce, in Chicago, Ahmed Horyal lah had 
interviewed E lijah Mu hammad.
 
The lobby of the Jedda Palace Hotel offered m e freque nt sizable in formal audiences o f important 
men from many different countries who were curious t o hear the "America n Muslim. " I met many 
Africans who ha d either spent some tim e in America, or who h ad heard o ther Africans' testim ony 
about Americ a's treatment of the black man. I remember how before o ne large au dience, one 
cabinet minist er from Black Africa (he knew  more about wor ld-wide current events than anyone else I've ever m et) told of his occ asion ally traveling in t he Unite d States, Nort h and South, 
delib erately not wearin g his national dress. Just recalling  the indignities h e had met as a black 
man seemed to expos e some raw nerve in t his highly  educated, dignified official. His eyes bl azed 
in his passi onate anger, his h ands ha cked the air: "Why is t he America n black ma n so complace nt 
about being trampled upon? Why doesn't t he America n black ma n _fight_ to be a human being?"
 
A Sudanese high o fficial hugged me, "You champion the American b lack p eople!" An Indian 
official wept in his c ompassio n "for my br others in your  land." I reflected many, many ti mes t o 
myself  upon how th e American Negro has been entirely  brainwashe d from ever se eing or thi nking 
of hims elf, as he should, as a part of the non-white p eoples of the world. The American Negro has 
no concep tion of the hundreds o f millio ns of other n on-whites' co ncern for him: he has no 
concep tion o f their f eeling o f brotherhood for and with him.
 
It was t here i n the Holy  Land, and later in Africa, that I formed a conviction which I h ave ha d ever 
since-th at a topmost requisite f or any Negro  leader in America o ught to be extensive  travelin g in 
the non-white la nds o n this ear th, and the travel should inclu de m any co nferences with the 
ranking m en of those l ands . I gu arant ee that any honest, open-mi nded Negro le ader would return 
home with m ore effective thinki ng about alternative  avenu es to  solu tions of the America n black 
man's pr oblem. Above all, t he Negro leaders would f ind that many non-white o fficials o f the 
highest standing, e speci ally Africans, would t ell th em-privately -that they would be glad to throw 
their weight be hind the Negro c ause , in the Unite d Nati ons, a nd in other wa ys. But these officials 
underst andably  feel that the N egro in America is so confused and divided that he doesn't hims elf 
know what his c ause is. Again, it was mainly Africans who var iously expresse d to me that no one 
would w ish to be embarrasse d trying to help a b rother who sh ows no  evide nce t hat he wants t hat 
help-and who se ems to refuse to cooperate in his own in terests . 
The America n black "l eader's" m ost critical  problem is l ack o f imagina tion! His thinking, h is 
strategies, if any, are always  limited, at least basicall y, to only that which is ei ther a dvised, or 
approved by th e white m an. And the first thing t he American power struct ure d oesn't want a ny 
Negroes to start is thi nking  _internati onally_.
 
I think t he single worst mis take of the American b lack orga nizatio ns, a nd their leaders, is th at they 
have f ailed to establish direc t brotherhood lines of communicati on between the independent 
nations of Africa and the America n black people. W hy, every  day, the black African h eads of state 
should b e receiving direct a ccounts of the latest d evelop ments in t he America n black ma n's 
strug gles-inst ead of the U.S. State Department's rel eases to Africans which alwa ys imply  that the 
American black m an's strugg le is being "solved. "
 
Two America n authors, b est-sellers in the Holy  Land, had helped to spread and intensify the 
concern f or the American black m an. James Bal dwin's b ooks , translate d, had made a 
tremendous im pact, as had the book _Bl ack Lik e Me_ , by John Gri ffin. If you're unfamiliar with 
that book, it t ells how the white m an Griffin blacke ned his skin a nd spent two months traveling  as 
a Negro a bout America; then Gri ffin wrote of the experie nces t hat he met. "A frighte ning 
experienc e!" I heard exclaime d ma ny times by  people in the H oly World who had read the popular 
book. B ut I never heard it withou t opening their t hinking f urther: " Well, if it was a fright ening 
experienc e for him as nothing but a make-believe Negro f or sixty days-th en you t hink about what 
_real_ Negroes i n America have go ne through f or four hundred years. "
 
One honor that came to me, I had prayed for: His Eminenc e, Princ e Fais al, inv ited m e to a 
personal a udience with him.
 
As I entered the ro om, tall, handsome Princ e Faisal c ame from behind his desk .I never will forget 
the reflection I had at that ins tant, that here was  one of the wor ld's most im portant m en, and yet 
with his dignit y one saw cle arly his sincere humility. He indic ated for me a chair op posite f rom his. 
Our in terpre ter was  the Dep uty Chief of Protocol, Muh ammad Abdul Azziz Maged, an Egyptia n-
born Arab, who looked like a Harle m Negro.
 Prince Faisal im patiently  gest ured when I began stu mbling f or words try ing to express my 
gratitude for the great honor he  had paid me in m aking me a gues t of the State. It was  only 
Muslim h ospit ality to another Muslim, he explaine d, and I was an  unusual Muslim from America . 
He a sked me to underst and above all t hat whatever  he had done had been his ple asure , with no 
other m otives whateve r.
 
A gliding servant s erved a choice of two ki nds o f tea as Princ e Faisal t alked. His so n, Mu hammad 
Faisal, h ad "met" me on America n television while a ttending a  North ern Cali fornia university . 
Prince Faisal h ad read Egyptia n writers' articles a bout the America n "Black Musli ms." "If what 
these wr iters s ay is tru e, the Black Musli ms have t he wrong Isla m," he said . I expl ained my  role o f 
the previous twelve  years, of helping to orga nize an d to build t he Natio n of Islam. I said that my 
purpose for making t he H ajj was to  get a n understa nding o f true Isla m. "That is goo d," Prince 
Faisal s aid, p ointing out that there was an abundance of English-transl ation literat ure ab out 
Islam-so that there was  no excuse f or ignoranc e, and no reas on for sinc ere p eople to allow 
themselves t o be misled.
 
*     *     *
 
The last o f April, 1 964, I flew to Beirut, the seaport ca pital o f Lebanon. A part of me, I left behind 
in the H oly City of Mecca. And, in turn, I  took away  with me-f orever- a part of Mecca.
 
I was on  my way, now , to Nigeria, t hen Ghana. B ut some friends I had made inthe Holy  Land had 
urged a nd insiste d that I make some s tops en  route and I had agree d. For exa mple , it had been 
arrange d that I would f irst st op and address the faculty and the students at the America n 
University  of Beirut.
 
In Beirut's Palm Be ach Hot el, I l uxuriat ed in my first long sle ep sinc e I had left Americ a. Then, I 
went walk ing-fresh from weeks i n the Holy  Land: immediately my at tention was  struck by  the 
mannerisms a nd attire of the Lebanese wome n. In the Holy Land, there h ad been the ver y 
modest, ver y feminine Arabian wome n-and there was t his sudden contrast of the half-Fre nch, 
half-Arab Lebanese wom en who p roject ed in their dress a nd street manners m ore liberty , mor e 
boldness. I saw cle arly the obvious E uropean in fluence u pon the Lebanese culture. I t showed me 
how any co untry 's moral str ength, or its m oral weakn ess, is quickly  measurable by the stree t 
attire and attitude of its wome n-especi ally its young  women. Wherever th e spiritual values h ave 
been submerged , if not destroyed, by an emphasis up on the material things, invariably , the 
women reflect it. Witness th e wom en, both you ng and old, in America-w here scarcely  any moral 
values ar e left. There seems in mo st countries t o be either o ne extrem e or t he other. Truly a 
paradise c ould exist wherever ma terial pr ogress and spiritu al values co uld b e properly balanced.
 
I spoke at the Univers ity of Beirut t he truth of the American b lack m an's conditio n. I've pr eviously 
made the comment that any experienc ed public s peaker ca n feel his audienc e's re actions . As I 
spoke, I  felt the subjective an d defensive reac tions o f the America n white st udents p resent-bu t 
gradually  their ho stilities less ened as I contin ued to pres ent the unass ailable f acts. But the 
students o f African heritage-wel l, I'll _never_ get over how the African d isplays  his em otions.
 
Later, with astonish ment, I heard that the American press c arried stories  that my B eirut s peec h 
caused a "riot." What kind of a riot ? I don't know how any reporter, in good consci ence , could 
have c abled that across t he ocean. The Beirut _Daily  Star_ f ront-page rep ort of my sp eech 
mentioned no "rio t"-be cause t here was none. W hen I was  done, the African students all b ut 
besieged m e for autographs; s ome of them even h ugged m e. Never h ave even America n Negro 
audiences a ccep ted me  as I have be en accepted time and again by the less in hibite d, more 
down-to-ear th Africans.
 
From Beirut , I flew ba ck to Cairo, a nd there I took a train to Alexandria, Egypt. I kept my ca mera 
busy during e ach brief stopover. Finally I was on a plane to Nigeria.
 During  the six-hour flight, when I was not talking w ith the pilot (who h ad been a 1960 Olympics 
swimm er), I s at with a p assio nately political  African. He al most shouted in his fervor . "When 
people are in a stagn ant s tate, and are being brought o ut of it, there is no _time_ for voting!" His 
central th eme was th at no new African nation, try ing to  decolonize its elf, needed any politic al 
system that would per mit division a nd bickering. " The people don't know what t he vote m eans! It 
is the job of the enlightened leaders to raise t he people's intellec t."
 
In Lagos , I was g reeted by Pro fessor E ssien-Udo m of the Ibadan Univers ity. We were bo th happy 
to see each other. We had met in the Unit ed States a s he had researche d the Na tion o f Islam for 
his b ook, _Black Nati onalis m_. At his h ome, that eveni ng, a dinner was held in my  honor, 
attended by other pr ofessors and professio nal p eople. As we ate, a you ng doctor ask ed m e if I 
knew that New  York City 's press was  highly upset about a recent killing  in Harle m of a white 
woman-f or which, according  to the press, many were bl aming m e at least in directly . An elderly 
white couple who own ed a Harlem clothing store h ad been attacked by several young Negroes,  
and the wife was  stabbed to death. Some of these you ng Negroes , apprehended by the polic e, 
had describe d themselves  as belonging to  an organization t hey calle d "Bl ood Bro thers. " These 
youths, allegedly , had said or implie d that they were affiliated with "Bl ack Muslims " whoh ad split 
away from the Na tion o f Islam to join u p with me .
 
I told the dinner guests that it was my fi rst word o f any o f it, but that I was not surprised when 
violence h appened in a ny of America's ghe ttoes where bl ack me n had been living packed like 
animals a nd treated like le pers. I said that the charge agains t me was typical  white man 
scapegoat-s eeking- that whenever so mething white men disliked h appened in the black 
community, typicall y white public attention was direc ted not at the cause , but at a selec ted 
scapegoat .
 
As for the "Blood Br others," I  said I consid ered a ll Negroes to  be my blo od brothers. I said that 
the white m an's efforts to make my name poison actually succe eded only in m aking millions of 
black people regard me  like J oe Louis.
 
Speaking in the Ibadan U niversit y's Trenchard Hall, I urged t hat Africa's ind ependent nations 
needed to see the necessity  of helping t o bring th e Afro-A merica n's cas e before the Unit ed 
Natio ns. I said that jus t as t he America n Jew is in political, e conomic, and cultural h armony with 
world Jewry, I was convinced that it was  time for all Afro-Am ericans t o join the wor ld's Pan-
Africanists. I said t hat physicall y we Afro-A merica ns might remain in America, fighting  for our 
Cons titutio nal rights, b ut that philoso phically  and culturally  we Afro-Am ericans b adly needed to 
"return" to Africa-and to develo p a working  unity in the framework o f Pan-Africanis m.
 
Young Africans aske d me politically  sharper ques tions t han one hears fr om most America n adults. 
Then an astonishing  thing happened when o ne old West Indian stood and began a ttacking  me-for 
attacking Americ a. "Shut up! Shut up!" students yelled, booing, an d hissing.  The old West Indian 
tried t o express defiance of them, and in a sudden rus h a grou p of students s prang up  and were 
after him. He barely esca ped ahead of them. I never saw  anything like it. Screa ming at  him, they 
ran h im off the campus. (L ater, I found out that the old West Indian was  married to a white woma n, 
and he was tr ying to get a job in some white-in fluenced ag ency  which h ad put him up  to 
challenge me . Then, I understo od his pro blem.)
 
This wasn't t he last ti me I'd see the Africans' al most fanatic expression of their p olitical em otions.
 
Afterward, in the Students' Unio n, I was plied with questi ons, a nd I was m ade an honorary 
member of the Nigerian Muslim Students' S ociety . Right h ere in my wallet is my c ard: " Alhadji 
Malcolm X. Registratio n No. M-138." With the me mbershi p, I was gi ven a new name: "Omowale. " 
It means, in the Yoruba language, "the son who h as come home." I meant it when I told them I 
had never received a more treasure d honor.
 
Six hundred members o f the Peace Corps were in Nigeria, I  learn ed. Some white Peace Corps members who t alked with m e were o penly embarrass ed at the guilt of their rac e in America. 
Among t he twen ty Negro Pe ace Corpsm en I talked with, a  very impressive f ellow  to me was Larry 
Jacks on, a  Morgan S tate
 
College g raduate from Fort L auderdale, Fl orida, who h ad joined the Peace C orps in 1 962.
 
I made Nigerian ra dio a nd televis ion program ap pearanc es. W hen I remember seeing bl ack me n 
operating t heir _own_ communica tions ag encies, a thrill still runs up my spine. The reporters who 
interviewed m e includ ed an America n Negro fr om _Newsweek _ mag azine-his n ame was 
Williams . Traveling  through Africa, h e had rece ntly interviewed Prime Minister Nkrum ah.
 
Talking  with m e privately, one group of Niger ian officials  told me  how skillf ully the U.S . Information 
Agency  sought to spread among Africans t he impressi on that Americ an Negroes were st eadily 
advanci ng, and that the race problems oon would b e solved. One high o fficial tol d me, "Our 
informed lea ders a nd many, many others k now otherwise." He said that behind the "diplom atic 
front" of every  African U.N. o fficial was recognition o f the white man's gi gantic du plicity and 
conspirac y to keep the world's p eoples o f African heritage separat ed-bo th physicall y and 
ideological ly-from each other.
 
"In your lan d, how many bl ack pe ople think about it t hat South and Centr al and Nort h America 
contain over _eighty  million_ people of African desce nt?" he asked me.
 
"The wor ld's course will change t he day th e African-heritage p eoples c ome toge ther as brothers!"
 
I never had heard that kin d of global bl ack t hinking fr om any bl ack ma n in Americ a.
 
From Lagos, Nigeria, I  flew on to Accra , Ghana.
 
I think t hat nowher e is th e black co ntinent's wealt h and the natural b eauty of its people richer th an 
in Ghana, which is s o pro udly the very fountainhead of Pan-A fricanism.
 
I stepped off the plane into a jarring no te. A red-faced American white man rec ognized me; he 
had the nerve to come u p grab bing my hand and telling me  in a molass es dr awl that he was  from 
Alabama, and then he invited m e to his ho me for dinner!
 
My hotel's di ning room, when I  went t o breakfast, was f ull of more of those whites-discussi ng 
Africa's u ntapped wealth a s though t he African waiters ha d no ears. It nearly  ruined my meal, 
thinking  how in America they sicke d polic e dogs o n black p eople, and threw bombs in black 
churches, while bl ocking  thedoors of their white c hurch es-and now, once agai n in t he land where 
their forefathers ha d stolen blacks and thrown them into slavery, was  that white ma n.
 
Right there at  my Ghanaian b reakfast table was  where I made up my m ind that as long a s I was 
in Africa, every time I opened my  mouth, I was going t o ma ke things h ot for that white man, 
grinning through h is teeth wanting  to exploit Africa agai n-it had been her human wealth the last 
time, now he want ed Africa's m ineral wealth.
 
And I knew  that my re acting  as I did presented no conflict with t he convictions o f brotherhood 
which I had gain ed in the Holy  Land. The Muslims o f "white " complexions who h ad changed my 
opinions were m en who ha d showed m e that they practice d gen uine b rotherhood. And I knew that 
any America n white m an with a genuine brotherhood for a black ma n was h ard to find, no matter 
how much he grinn ed.
 
The author Julian Mayfield s eemed to be the leader of Ghana's little col ony of Afro-A merica n 
expatriat es. W hen I telephoned Mayfield, in what s eemed no time a t all I  was sitting in his h ome 
surrou nded by ab out forty black America n expa triates; they had been waiting  for my arriva l. There 
were business a nd profession al people, suc h as the milit ant former Bro oklynites Dr . and Mrs. Robert E. Lee, both of them dentists, who h ad given up  their Unite d States' citi zens hip. S uch 
others a s Alice Windom, Maya Angel ou Mak e, Victoria Garvin, an d Leslie L acy had even formed 
a "Malcolm X Committee" to guid e me  through a  whirlwind c alendar o f appearances a nd social 
events .
 
In my briefcase here ar e some of the African p ress st ories which  had appeared when it was 
learn ed that I was en route:
 
"Malcol m X's  name is almost a s familiar  to Ghanaians a s the Southern dogs, fire hoses , cattle 
prods, p eople sticks, and the ugly, hate-contorted white faces. . . ." 
"Malcol m X's  decisio n to enter the mainstrea m of the strug gle h eralds a  hopeful sign o n the 
sickeningly  dismal sce ne of brutalized, n on-violent , passive resist ance. . . ."
 
"An extre mely  important fact is that Malc olm X  is the first Afro-Am erica n lea der o f national 
standing t o ma ke an independent trip to Africa sinc e Dr. Du Bois came to Ghana. This may be  the 
begin ning of a new ph ase in o ur strugg le. Let's m ake sure we don't give it less t hought t han the 
State Department is d oubtless g iving it right now ."
 
And another: "Malcol m X is one of our most signific ant and militant leaders. W e are in a battle. 
Efforts will be made to malign a nd discredit h im. . . ."
 
I simply couldn' t beli eve this kin d of reception five t housand m iles from America! The officials o f 
the press ha d eve n arrange d to pay my ho tel exp enses, a nd they would h ear n o objection t hat I 
made. They inclu ded T. D. B affoe, the Editor-in- Chief of the _Ghanaian Times_; G. T. Anim, the 
Managing Director o f the Ghana N ews Agency; Kofi Batsa, the Editor of _Spark_ and the 
Secretary -General o f the Pan-A frican Uni on of Journalists; an d Mr. Cam eron Duodu; a nd others. I 
could on ly thank them a ll. Then, during  the beautiful dinner which h ad been prepared by Julian 
Mayfield's pretty Puerto Rican wife , Ana Livia (she was in c harge o f Accra's district h ealth 
program), I  was plied with ques tions by t he eagerly  intereste d black expa triates from America 
who had returne d to Mot her Africa.
 
I can only wish that every  Americ an bl ack m an could have share d my ears , my eyes, a nd my 
emotions t hrough out the rou nd of engagem ents wh ich had been ma de for me in G hana. And my 
point in saying this is not the rec eption that I personally received a s an individual o f who m they 
had heard, but it was therec eption tendered to me as the symb ol of the milita nt American black 
man, as I had the honor to be regard ed.
 
At a jam-pack ed press clu b conference, I believe t he very  first questi on was wh y had I split w ith 
Elijah Mu hammad and the N ation of Islam . The Africans h ad heard such rumors as that Elijah 
Muhammad had built a  palace in Arizona . I straightened out that falsehood, a nd I avoi ded any 
criticism. I said that our disagree ment had been in terms o f political  directio n and involveme nt in 
the extra-reli gious s truggle for human rights. I said I  resp ected the Natio n of Islam for its having 
been a psychologically  revitalizing move ment and a source of moral and social re form, and that 
Elijah Mu hammad's i nfluence upon the America n black ma n had been basic.
 
I stressed to the ass embled press t he need for mutual c ommunicatio n and support b etween the 
Africans an d Afro-A merica ns whose s truggles we re interlock ed. I remember that in the press 
conference, I used the wo rd "Negro, " and I was firmly correcte d. "The word is not favore d her e, 
Mr. Malcol m X. The term Afro-Americ an has grea ter me aning, an d dignity ." I sinc erely apologi zed. 
I don't think th at I said "Negro" again a s long as I was in Africa. I said that the 22 million Afro-
Americans in the Unit ed States c ould become for Africa a great positive force-wh ile, in tur n, the 
African nations could an d should exert p ositive  force at diplo matic levels agai nst America's racial 
discrimina tion. I said, " All of Africa u nites in op position t o South Africa's apartheid, a nd to the 
oppressio n in t he Portuguese territories. B ut you waste your  time if you d on't realize  that 
Verwoerd and Salaza r, and Britain and Franc e, never could last a day if it were not for United 
States support. So until you expose the man in Washington, D.C., you h aven't a ccomplishe d anything. "
 
I knew that the State De partment's G. Menn en Williams was o fficially visitin g in Africa. I said, 
"Take my word f or it-you b e suspicious of all these America n officials who c ome to Africa grinning 
in your f aces when they don't grin in oursb ack h ome." I told them that my own f ather was 
murdered by whites in the state of Michi gan where G . Men nen Williams once was th e Governor.
 
I was ho nored at the G hana Club, by m ore p ress re prese ntatives a nd dignitaries. I  was the guest 
at the home of the late black American author Rich ard W right's d augh ter, beautiful, sle nder, soft-
voiced Julia , whose you ng Fre nch h usband publish es a Ghanaian paper. Later, in P aris, I was to 
meet Richard W right's wido w, Elle n, and a younger d augh ter, Rach el.
 
I talked with Ambassad ors, at  their embassi es. The Algeria n Ambassador i mpress ed m e as a 
man who was de dicated totally to milita ncy, and to wo rld revoluti on, a s the way  to solve th e 
problems of the wo rld's o ppressed masses. His perspective was at tuned not just to Algerians , but 
to includ e the Afro-America ns and all others a nywhere who were  oppresse d. The Chi nese 
Ambass ador, Mr. Huang Ha, a most perceptive, and als o mo st militant man, focused upon the 
efforts of the West to divide Africans f rom the peoples of African h eritage e lsewhere. The Niger ian 
Ambass ador was deeply concern ed about the Afro-Am ericans' p light in America. He had person al 
knowledge o f their su ffering, having  lived a nd studied in Washingto n, D.C. Similarly , the mo st 
sympathetic M ali Ambassad or had been in New York at the Unite d Nati ons. I  breakfasted with Dr . 
Mako nnen of British G uiana. We discuss ed the need for the type of Pan-African uni ty that would 
also includ e the Afro-A merica ns. And I had a talk i n depth about Afro-A merica n pro blem s with 
Nana Nketsi a, the G hanaian Minister o f Culture.
 
Once when I  returned to my hotel, a  New  York Cit y call was  waiting f or me from Mai Go ode of the 
American Broa dcasti ng Company. Over th e telephone Mai G oode aske d me questions that I 
answered for his beeping t ape record er, about the "Blood Brothers" in H arlem, the rifle clu bs for 
Negroes, a nd other s ubjects with which I was being ke pt identified in the Americ an pr ess.
 In the Univers ity of Ghana's Gr eat Hall, I addressed the largest a udience that I would in Africa-
mostly Africans , but also numerous whites . Before this a udience , I tried my b est to demolish t he 
false image of America n race relatio ns th at I knew was  spread by th e U.S. Informatio n Agency . I 
tried t o impress u pon them all t he true pict ure o f the Afro-A merica n's plight a t the hands of the 
white man. I worked o n those whites t here i n the audience :
 
"I've n ever _seen_ so m any whites so nice to so many blacks as you white p eople h ere in Africa. 
In America , Afro-Am ericans a re str uggling for integratio n. They sh ould come h ere-to  Africa-and 
see how you g rin at Africans. You've really  got i ntegratio n her e. But can you tell the Africans that 
in America you gr in at the black people? No , you ca n't! And you d on't honestly like t hese Africans 
any be tter, either-bu t what you _ do_ like is the _m inerals_ Africa h as under her soil. . .  ."
 
Those whites o ut in the audience turned pink a nd red. They knew I was telling th e truth. "I'm not 
anti-America n, and I didn't come h ere to _condemn_ America-I want t o make that very  clear! " I 
told them. "I came here to tell the truth-a nd if the _truth_ condemns America, t hen she st ands 
condemned!"
 
One eveni ng I met most of the officials in Ghana-all o f those with whom I had previously talk ed, 
and more-at  a party  that was  given f or me by the Hon orabl e Kofi Baako, the Ghanaian Minister o f 
Defense, and the Leader of the Nati onal Assembly. I was told that this was the first time suc h an 
honor was acc orded to a foreigner sinc e Dr. W. E. B. Du B ois ha d come to Gh ana. There was 
music, da ncing, a nd fine Ghanaian food. Several pers ons at the party were laughing  among 
themselves, saying th at at an earlier  party  that day, U.S . Ambassador Ma homey was kn ocking 
hims elf out being exce ption ally friendly  and jovial. Some thought t hat he was  making a strong 
effort to counteract t he truth about America t hat I was telling ever y chance I got.
 Then an invitatio n came to me which exceed ed my wi ldest dr eam. I would never have imagine d 
that I would ac tually  have an  opportunity  to address t he m embers of the Gh anaian Parlia ment! 
I made my re marks brie f-but I made them stro ng: "How  can you co ndemn Portugal and South 
Africa while our black p eople in Americ a are being bitten by dogs a nd beaten with clubs ?" I said I 
felt certai n that the only reaso n black Africans-our black brothers- could be so sile nt about what 
happened in America was that they had been misin formed by the American governm ent's 
propagan da ag encies.
 
At the end of my t alk, I heard "Y es! We support th e Afro-A merica n . . . morally , physicall y, 
materially  if necess ary!"
 
In Ghana-or in all o f black Africa-my high est single h onor was  an audience at the Cas tle wi th 
Osagyef o Dr. Kwame Nkru-ma h.
 
Before s eeing hi m, I was search ed m ost thoroughly. I respec ted the type o f security  the 
Ghanaians e rect a round their le ader. It gave  me that much more respec t for independent b lack 
men. Then, as I entered Dr. Nkram ah's l ong office, he came out from behind his de sk at  the far 
end. Dr . Nkrum ah wore or dinary  dress, his h and was exte nded and a smile was  on his sensiti ve 
face. I pumped his h and. We sat on a couch and talked . I knew that he was partic ularly well-
informed on the Afro-A merica n's plight, a s for years  he had lived and studied in America. We 
discuss ed the unity of Africans a nd peoples of African d escent. We agree d that Pan-Africanis m 
was the key also to the pr oblems o f those of African h eritage. I could f eel the wa rm, likea ble a nd 
very down-to-e arth qualities o f Dr. Nkru mah. My  time with hi m was  up all to o soon. I promis ed 
faithfully that when I returned to the Unite d States, I would relay  to Afro-America ns his p ersonal 
warm regards.
 That afternoon, thirty-nine m iles awa y in Winneba, I spoke at the Kwame Nkrum ah Ideological 
Institute-where two h undred students were bei ng trained to carry  forward Gh ana's int ellectu al 
revolution, and here ag ain o ccurred o ne of those astounding demonstra tions o f the young 
African's political f ervor. After I had spok en, during t he qu estio n-and-answer p eriod , some you ng 
Afro-A merica n stood up, whom none there seemed to know. "I am an American Negro," he 
announced hi msel f. Vaguely , he defended the Americ an white m an. The African students bo oed 
and harass ed hi m. Then instantly  when the me eting was over , they corn ered this f ellow with 
verbal abuse, "Are you a n age nt of Rock efeller ?" . . ."Stop corrup ting our children! " (The fellow 
had turned out to be a local seco ndary scho ol teacher, placed in the job by an America n agency .). 
. ."Come to this In stitute for some o rientation!" Temporaril y, a teacher rescu ed the fellow -but then 
the students r ushe d him and drove him  awa y, shouting, " Stooge!" . . ."C.I.A." . . ."America n 
agen t!"
 
Chines e Ambass ador and Mrs. Hua ng Hua gave a state dinner in my ho nor. The guests includ ed 
the Cu ban and the Algerian a mbassadors, and als o it was her e that I met Mrs. W . E. B. Du B ois. 
After the excelle nt dinner, three films were sh own. O ne, a color f ilm, depict ed the People's 
Republic o f Chin a in c elebra tion o f its Fourt eenth Anniversary . Pro minently  shown  in this film was 
the milit ant former North C arolina Afro-A merica n Ro bert W illiams, who h as since t aken refuge in 
Cuba after his advocacy  that the America n black people should t ake up arms to defend and 
protect themselves. The second film focused upon the Chin ese p eople's s upport f or the Afro-
American strug gle. C hairma n Ma o Tse-tung was sh own d elivering his st atement o f that support, 
and the film offered sicke ning moments o f grap hic white brutality-police a nd civilian-to Afro-
Americans who were d emonstrating in various U. S. cities , seeking  civil rights. And the final film 
was a dramatic presentation of the Alger ian Revolutio n.
 
The "Malcol m X Com mittee" rushed m e from the Chin ese E mbassy dinner towhere a soiree in my 
honor h ad alrea dy begun a t the Press Clu b. It was  my first sight of Ghanaians d ancing the high-
life. A high a nd merry  time was being ha d by ever yone, and I was press ed to make a short 
speech . I stresse d again t he need for unity betwee n Africans a nd Afro-Am ericans . I crie d out of 
my heart, "N ow, dance! Sing! B ut as you d o-rem ember
 
Mandela, remember S obokwe! R emember Lu mumba in his gra ve! Rem ember S outh Africans now in jail!"
 
I said, "Y ou wond er wh y _I_ don't dance? Because I want you to remember twenty- two million 
Afro-A merica ns in t he U.S.! "
 
But I sure felt like d ancing!  The Ghanaians performed the high-lif e as if possess ed. One pre tty 
African girl sang " Blue Moo n" like Sara h Vaughan. Sometimes th e band sounded like Milt 
Jacks on, s ometimes like Ch arlie Parker.
 
The next m orning, a  Saturday, I heard that Cassius Clay  and his e ntourage h ad arrived. There 
was a huge rece ption for him at the airport . I thought t hat if Cassius and I happened to meet, it 
would likel y prove e mbarrassing  for Cassius , since he had elected to remain with Elija h 
Muhammad's ve rsion of Islam. I would no t have be en embarrass ed, but I knew that Cassius 
would have b een forbidden to associate with m e. I knew that Cassius k new I had been with hi m, 
and for him , and believed i n him, when those who la ter embraced him felt that he had no chance . 
I decided to avoid Cassius s o as n ot to put him on the spot.
 
A lunc heon was gi ven f or me that afternoon by the Nigerian High Co mmissio ner, His Excelle ncy 
Alhadji Isa Wall, a short, b espectacled , extrem ely warm and friendly man who had lived in 
Washingto n, D.C. f or two years. After lunch , His Excellenc y spoke to the guests of his American 
encounters with discrimin ation, and of friends hips h e had made with Afro-America ns, a nd he 
reaffirmed the bonds between Africans an d Afro-America ns. 
His Excelle ncy held up before the lunch eon guests a large and handsome issu e of an Americ an 
magazine, _Horizon_; it was opened to an article a bout the Nati on of Islam, written by Dr. Morroe 
Berger o f Prince ton University . One full page was a photograph of me; the opposite f ull page was 
a beautiful color illustrati on of a black royal Niger ian Muslim, stalwart  and handsome, of hundreds 
of years  ago.
 
"When I look at these p hotograp hs, I know  these two p eople ar e one," said His Excellency . "The 
only difference is in their at tire-and one was bor n in America a nd the other in Africa.
 
"So to let ever yone know that I believe we ar e bro thers, I am going to  give to Alhadji Malc olm X  a 
robe like t hat worn by th e Nigerian in this p hoto."
 
I was over whelm ed by the splendor o f the beautiful blue robe and the orange t urban which  His 
Excellenc y then pres ented to me. I bent over s o that he, a short m an, could properly arrange t he 
turban on my head. His Excelle ncy Alhadji Isa W ali also pres ented m e with a two- volum e 
transl ation of the Holy  Quran. After this u nforget table lunc heon, Mrs. Shirley Gra ham Du B ois 
drove me  to her ho me, so that I could s ee and photograph the home where her famed late 
husband, Dr. W. E. B. Du Bois , had spent his last d ays. Mrs. D u Bois , a wr iter, was  the Director o f 
Ghanaian t elevis ion, which was  planned for educational purposes . When Dr. Du Bois had come 
to Ghana, sh e told m e, Dr. Nkru mah had set up the aging great militan t Afro-Am erican schol ar 
like a king,  giving to Dr. Du B ois everything  he could wish for. Mrs. Du Bois t old m e that when Dr. 
Du B ois was  failing fast, Dr. Nkru mah had visited, a nd the two m en had said goo d-bye, both 
knowing that one's d eath was n ear-an d Dr. Nkrumah had gone away  in tears.
 
My final G hanaian social event was a beautiful party in my honor given by HisExcel lency Mr. 
Armando Entralgo G onzale z, the Cuban Ambassad or to Ghana. The next m orning-it was  Sunday-
the "Malcolm X Co mmitt ee" was  waiting at my hotel, to accompany me to the airport. As we left 
the hotel, we  met Cassius Clay  with some of his e ntourage, returni ng from his mor ning walk. 
Cassius m omentarily  seemed uncertain-th en he spok e, something almost monosyllabic, like 
"How  are you ?" It flashed through my mi nd how close we ha d been before the fight that had 
changed t he course o f his li fe. I replied that I was fine-something like th at-an d that I hoped he 
was, which I  sincerely  meant. Later on, I sent Cassius a  message by wi re, saying that I hoped 
that he would realiz e how much he was loved by Muslims where ver they were; a nd that he would 
not let anyon e use him and maneuver hi m into saying and doing thi ngs to tarnish h is image. 
The "Malcol m X Com mittee" and I were exch anging  goodbyes a t the Accra airport whe n a small 
motorca de of _five Ambassa dors_ a rrived-to s ee me off! I no longer ha d any words.
 
In the plane, bound for Monrovia, Li beria, t o spend a day, I knew that after what I  had 
experienc ed in the Holy  Land, the sec ond mo st indelible memory  I would c arry back t o America 
would be  the Africa s eething w ith serious aware ness o f itself, and of Africa's wealth, and of her 
power , and of her destine d role in the world.
 
From Monrov ia, I flew to  Dakar , Senegal. The Senegales e in t he airport, hearing  about the 
Muslim f rom America, s tood in line t o shake my hand, and I signed m any au tograp hs. "Our 
people can't sp eak Arabic, b ut we h ave Islam in o ur hearts, " said o ne Senegales e. I told them 
that exac tly describ ed their f ellow Afro-Am erican M uslims.
 
From Dakar , I flew to  Morocco , where I s pent a day sightse eing.  I visited the famous Casb ah, the 
ghett o which ha d res ulted when t he ruling  white Fre nchwould n't let the dark-skin ned natives into 
certai n are as of Casablanca. Thousands up on thousands of the subjugat ed natives we re 
crowded in to the ghett o, in the same way that Harlem , in N ew York City, became America's 
Casb ah.
 
It was Tuesday, May  19, 1964-my thirty -ninth b irthday-when I arrived in Algiers. A lot of water ha d 
gone under the bridge in t hose years. I n some ways, I had had more exp eriences than a dozen 
men. The taxi drive r, while taki ng me to the Hotel Aletti, d escribe d the atrocities the Frenc h had 
commit ted, and personal m easures t hat he had taken to get eve n. I walked aro und Algiers, 
hearing  rank-an d-file expressio ns of hatred for America f or supporting t he oppressors o f the 
Algerians. They were tru e revolutionists , not afraid o f death. They had, for so long, f aced death.
 
*     *     *
 
The Pan American j et which to ok m e home-it was Fli ght 115-lan ded at New  York's  Kennedy Air 
Terminal on  May  21, at 4:25 in the afternoon. We passengers fi led off the plane and toward 
Customs. When I saw the crowd o f fifty or sixty reporters and photographers, I h onestly wond ered 
what cel ebrity I had been on the plane with.
 
But I was t he "villain" they had come to me et.
 
In Harlem e speciall y, and also in so me other U.S . cities, the 1964 long, h ot summer's predict ed 
explosions had begun . Article after article i n the white m an's press had cas t me as a symbol-if not 
a causative ag ent-o f the "revolt" and of the "violenc e" of the America n black man, wherever it h ad 
sprung up.
 
In the biggest press conference t hat I had ever  experienc ed anywhere, the camera bulbs flashed, 
and the report ers fired qu estio ns.
 "Mr. Malcolm X, what a bout those ' Blood Brot hers,' re portedly affiliated with your organization , 
reportedly  trained for violenc e, who h ave killed in nocent white people?" . . ."Mr. Malcolm X, what 
about your  comment that Negroes s hould form rifle clubs? . . ."
 
I answered t he qu estio ns. I knew  I was  back in America again , hearing  the subjective, sca pego at-
seeking  questions of the white ma n. New  York wh ite youth were killing  victims; t hat was  a 
"sociological" pr oblem. But whe n black youth kille d somebody , the power struct ure was  looking t o 
hang somebody. When black m en had been lynche d or o therwise mur dered in c old bl ood, it was 
always  said, "Things wi ll get be tter. "When whites h ad rifles in their ho mes, the C onstit ution gave 
them the right to protect their h ome and themselves. B ut when bl ack pe ople even spok e of having 
rifles in t heir ho mes, that was  "ominous."
 
I slipped in on the report ers something they hadn't been expec ting. I said th at the Americ an bl ack man needed to quit t hinking what t he white m an had taught hi m-which was  that the black m an 
had no alternative exce pt to beg for his so-calle d "civ il rights." I said that the America n black ma n 
needed to rec ognize that he had a strong, airtight cas e to take the U nited States before the 
Unite d Nati ons o n a formal a ccusation of "denial o f human rights"-and that if Angola a nd South 
Africa were pr eced ent cases, then there would b e no easy  way that the U.S . could e scap e being 
censured , right on its own h ome groun d.
 
Just as I had known, th e press wante d to get m e off that subject . I was ask ed about my "Letter 
From Mecca "-I was all set with a speech regarding  that:
 
"I hope that once and for all my Hajj  to the Holy  City of Mecc a has establish ed our Muslim 
Mosque's a uthentic reli gious affiliatio n with  the 750 million Muslims of the orthodox Islamic W orld. 
And I _know_ o nce and for all t hat the Black Africans l ook u pon America's 2 2 millio n blacks as 
long- lost _ brothers_! They _love_ us! They _study_ our strug gle for freedom! They were so 
_happy_ to hear how we are awakeni ng from our long sleep-a fter so-called 'C hristian' white 
America h ad taught us to be _ashamed_ of our African brothers a nd homeland!
 
"Yes-I wrote a  letter from Mecca . You're a sking  me 'Didn't you say that now you acc ept white men 
as br others?' W ell, my an swer is t hat in the Musli m World, I saw, I felt, and I wrote h ome how my 
thinking  was bro adened! J ust a s I wrote, I shared true, brotherly love with  many white-
complexione d Muslims who never ga ve a single t hought to the rac e, or t o the complexion, of 
another Muslim.
 
"My pilgr image bro adened my sco pe. It bless ed m e with a new insight. I n two weeks in t he Holy 
Land, I saw what I never ha d seen in t hirty-nine years  here in Americ a. I saw all _r aces _, all 
_colors_,-blu e-eyed blo nds to black-skinn ed Africans-in _true_ brotherhood! In unity! Livin g as 
one! Worshiping as one! No segregatio nists- no liberals; t hey would not have known how to 
interpret t he meaning of those wo rds.
 
"In the past, yes, I h ave m ade sweeping in dictm ents of all white people. I never w ill be guilty  of 
that ag ain-as I know  now that some wh ite people are truly sinc ere, t hat some tr uly are c apable of 
being brotherly toward a black m an. The true Isl am h as shown me  that a blanket indictm ent of all 
white people is as wrong  as when whites make bl anket indictm ents against blacks.
 
"Yes, I have been convinced that _some_ America n whites d o want t o help cure t he rampant 
racism which is o n the path to _destroying_ t his country!
 
"It was  in the Holy  World that my at titude was ch anged , by what I exp erience d there, and by what 
I witnesse d there, in terms o f brotherhood-no t just brotherh ood toward m e, but brotherhood 
between all m en, of all n ationalities and complexions, who were there. And now th at I am back in 
America, my a ttitude here concerning white pe ople has to be governed by what my black br others 
and I experienc e here, a nd what we w itness her e-in terms o f brotherhood. The _probl em_ her e in 
America is t hat we meet such a  small minority of individual s o-called 'goo d,' or 'brotherly' white 
people. Here in the Unit ed States, notwithst anding those few 'goo d' wh ite people, it is t he 
_collecti ve_ 150 millio n wh ite people whom t he _collecti ve_ 22 million b lack p eople h ave to  deal 
with!
 
"Why, here in America , the seeds of racism ar e so deeply rooted in the white p eople c ollecti vely, 
their belief that they are 's uperior' in some way  is so deeply rooted, that these things ar e in t he 
national wh ite subconsci ousn ess. Ma ny whites ar e even a ctually unaware of their own racis m, 
until they face some test, and then their racis m em erges in one form or another.
 
"Listen! The white man's racis m toward t he black m an here in America is what has got hi m in 
such trouble a ll over this wor ld, with other non-white peoples . The white ma n can't separat e 
hims elf from the stigma t hat he automatically feels about anyo ne, n o matter who, who is not his 
color . And the non-white p eoples o f the world are sick of the condescen ding white man! That's why you've got all o f this tro uble i n plac es like V iet Na m. Or right h ere in the Western 
Hemis phere-probably 100 million p eople o f African descen t are divided agai nst e ach other, taught 
by the white man to hate and to mistrust each other. In the West Indies, Cuba, Br azil, Venezuela, 
all of South Americ a, Ce ntral Americ a! All of those la nds are full of people with African blo od! On 
the African continent, eve n, the white man has m aneuvere d to divide the black African from the 
brown Arab, to divide the so-calle d 'Christian African' from the Muslim African . Can you im agine 
what ca n happen, what would c ertainly  happen, if all of these African-heritage p eoples ever 
_realize_ t heir bl ood bonds, if they ever re alize th ey all h ave a common go al-if they ever 
_unite_?"
 The press was glad t o get rid of me that day. I believe t hat the black bro thers who m I h ad just 
recently left in Africa would have f elt that I did the subjec t justice . Nearly  through t he night, my 
telephone at home kept ringing.  My black br others an d sist ers around New York and in s ome 
other cities were c alling to  congratulate me  on what they had heard on the ra dio a nd television 
news  broadcas ts, and people, mostly white, were wanting t o know if I would sp eak h ere or there.
 
The next d ay I was in my  car driv ing along the freewa y when a t a red light another car p ulled 
alongside. A white woma n was  drivin g and on the passe nger's  side, n ext to  me, was a white man. 
"_Malcolm X_! " he called o ut-an d whe n I lo oked, he stuck his hand out of his c ar, across a t me, 
grinning. "Do you m ind shaking  hands with a white man?" Imagin e that! Just a s the traffic light 
turned green, I told him, "I don't mind shaking ha nds with human beings. Are you o ne?"
 
 
 
CHAPT ER NINE TEEN
1965
 
I must be honest. Negroes-A fro-America ns-showed n o inclinatio n to rush to the Unit ed Na tions 
and demand jus tice f or themselves h ere in America . I really had known in adva nce t hat they 
wouldn't. The America n wh ite ma n has so thoroughly brainwash ed the black m an to see himsel f 
as only a domestic "civi l rights" pr oblem that it wi ll probably take longer th an I live before the 
Negro sees that the strug gle o f the America n black man is in ternation al.
 
And I had known, too, that Negroes would n ot rush to follow me into the orthodox Islam which 
had given me the insight a nd pers pective to  see that the black men and white me n truly could b e 
brothers. America's Negroes-es pecially  older Negroes-are too indelibl y soaked in Christia nity's 
double sta ndard o f oppressio n.
 
So, in the "public invited " meetings  which I  bega n holding ea ch Sunday afternoon or evening in 
Harlem's well -known Audubon Ballro om, as I  address ed pr edomin antly non-Muslim Negro 
audiences, I  did not immediately attempt to press t he Islamic religion, but inst ead to embrace all 
who sat before m e:
 
"-not Muslim , nor Christian, Cath olic, nor Protestant . . . Baptist n or Met hodist, De mocra t nor 
Republican , Maso n nor Elk! I  mean the black p eople o f America- and the black p eople all over t his 
earth! Because it is as t his collecti ve m ass o f black p eople that we have b een deprived not only of 
our civi l rights, but eve n of our human rights, t he right t o human dignity . . . ."
 
On the stre ets, a fter my speeches, in the faces and the voices o f the people I met-even t hose 
who would pu mp my ha nds and want my a utograph-I would f eel the wa it-and-see attitude. I would 
feel-and I understo od-th eir uncertainty  about where I s tood. S ince the Civil War's "freedom," the 
black man has go ne down so m any fr uitless paths. His leaders, ver y largely, had failed him. The 
religion of Christianit y had failed him. The black ma n was scarre d, he was ca utious , he was 
apprehensive.
 
I understo od it better n ow than I had before. In the Holy  World, away from Americ a's race 
problem , was  the first time I ever had been able to think cle arly about the basic div isions of white people in America, a nd how th eir attitudes and their motives rela ted to, and affected Negroes. I n 
my thirty -nine years  on this e arth, the Holy  City of Mecc a had been the first time I had ever st ood 
before the Creat or of All and felt like a c omplete human being.
 
In that peace of the H oly World-in f act, the ver y night I have m entioned whe n I lay awake 
surrou nded by sn oring brother pilgrims-my  mind took m e back toperso nal m emories I would have 
thought were gon e forever . . . as far back, eve n, as when I  was just a little b oy, eight or nine 
years  old. Out behind our house, out in the country  from Lansing,  Michi gan, there was a n old, 
grassy  "Hector's Hill," we called it-wh ich may still  be there. I  remembered there in the Holy  World 
how I used to lie on  the top of Hector's Hill,  and look up  at the sky , at the cl ouds moving  over me, 
and daydream , all kin ds of things. And then, in a funny contrast o f recollections , I remembered 
how years  later, when I  was in priso n, I used to lie o n my cell b unk-t his would be  especially  when 
I was in s olitar y: what we co nvicts calle d "The Hole"-an d I would pic ture mysel f talking to large 
crowds. I don't have a ny idea why such pr evisions came to me. But they did. To tell t hat to 
anyon e then would have sounded craz y. Eve n I di dn't have, myself , the slightes t inkling. . .  .
 
In Mecca, too, I had played back for myself  the twel ve years I h ad spent with Elija h Muh ammad 
as if it were a motion pic ture. I guess it would b e impossi ble for anyon e ever  to realize  fully how 
comple te was my  belie f in Elija h Muh ammad. I believed in hi m not only as a leader in t he ordin ary 
_human_ sense, but also I believed i n him  as a  _divine_ leader. I believed he had no human 
weakness es or f aults, and that, therefore, he could ma ke no mistakes a nd that he could do no 
wrong. There on a Holy World hillto p, I realized  how very dangero us it is f or people to hold any 
human being in s uch e steem, especially  to consider a nyone some s ort of "divinely  guid ed" and 
"protected" person.
 
My thinki ng had been opened up wide in Mecca. In the long letters I wrote to friends , I tried to 
convey to them my new insights in to the America n black ma n's struggle an d his pro blem s, as well 
as the depths of my searc h for truth and jus tice.
 
"I've h ad enough o f someone els e's pro paga nda," I had written to these friends. "I'm for truth, no 
matter who tells it. I 'm for justic e, no matter who it is f or or agai nst. I 'm a human being first a nd 
foremost, and as such I 'm for whoever  andwhatever  benefits hu manity _as a whole_ ."
 
Largely , the American white m an's press refused to conve y that I was  now attempting t o teach 
Negroes a new directio n. W ith the 1964 "long, ho t summer" steadily producing n ew incid ents, I 
was constantly  accused of "stirring up  Negroes. " Every  time I had another ra dio or television 
micro phone at my m outh, when I was asked about "stirring up Negroes" or "inciting  violenc e," I'd 
get h ot.
 
"It takes n o one to stir up the sociological  dynamite that stems from the unemployment, bad 
housing, a nd inferior e ducation alre ady in the ghet toes. This explosivel y criminal c onditi on has 
existed f or so long, it n eeds no fuse; it fuses itself; it spontaneously  combusts from within itself. . . 
."
 
They called me "the angriest N egro in America ." I wouldn't deny that charge. I spoke exactl y as I 
felt. "I _believe_ in anger . The Bible says there is a _ time_ for anger." They calle d me  "a teacher, 
a fomenter of violence." I would say  point blank,' That is a lie. I'm not for wanton violenc e, I'm for 
justice . I feel that if white p eople were at tacked by Negroes-if  the forces o f law prove un able, or 
inadequa te, or reluct ant to protect those whites f rom those Negroes-th en those white p eople 
should pr otect a nd defend themselves  from those Negroes, u sing arms i f necessary . And I feel 
that when the law  fails to protect N egroes from whites' at tack, then those Negroes s hould u se 
arms , if necess ary, to defend themselves."
 
"Malcol m X Advocates Armed Negroes! "
 
What was wrong  with th at? I'll tell you what was wrong.  I was  a black m an talking a bout physical defense ag ainst t he white man. The white m an can lynch an d burn and bomb and beat
 Negroes-that's all right: "H ave patienc e" . . ."The customs ar e entrenc hed" . . ."Things are getti ng 
better."
 
Well, I believe it's a crim e for anyon e who is b eing brutalized t o continue to acce pt that brutality 
without doing so mething to  defend himself. If that's h ow "Christian " philoso phy is interpre ted, if 
that's what G andhian philoso phy teaches , well, then, I will call them crimin al phil osop hies.
 
I tried in every  speec h I made to clarify  my new positi on regarding white p eople-"I don't speak 
against the sinc ere, wel l-meaning, good white p eople. I have lear ned that there _are_ some. I 
have le arned that not all white p eople ar e racists. I am speaking  against a nd my fight is agains t 
the white _r acists_. I  firmly believe  that Negroes have t he right t o fight against t hese racists , by 
any me ans that are necess ary."
 
But the white re porters kept wanting  me linke d with that word  "violence ." I doubt if I had one 
interview without having to deal with th at accusation .
 
"I _am_ for violenc e if non-violence means we contin ue postponing a solutio n to the American 
black man's pr oblem-just to _avoid_ violence . I don't go f or non-violence i f it also means a 
delayed solu tion. To me a delayed s olutio n is a non-solutio n. Or I'll say it a nother way. If it mu st 
take violence to ge t the black ma n his h uman rights in this c ountry, I'm _for_ violence exac tly as 
you kn ow the Irish, the Poles, o r Jews  would be if they were fl agrantly  discriminat ed against. I am 
just a s they would be in that case , and they would be  for violenc e-no matter what the 
conseque nces, no matter who was h urt by  the violence ."
 
White society  _hates_ to hear a nybody , especi ally a black ma n, talk a bout the crime the white 
man has perpetrated on the black man. I have always  understo od that's wh y I have been so 
freque ntly calle d "a revolutio nist." It sounds a sif _I_ have do ne some crime! W ell, it may be  the 
American black m an does need to become invol ved i n a _real _ revolution . The word for 
"revolutio n" in Ger man is _U mwalzung_. W hat it means is a  complete overt urn-a complete 
change. The overthrow  of King Farouk in Egypt an d the succession o f Preside nt Nass er is an 
exam ple o f a true revolution. It means the destroy ing o f an old system, and its re place ment with a 
new system. Another exa mple is the Algeria n revolution , led by Ben Bella ; they threw  out the 
Frenc h who ha d been there over 100 years. So  how do es anybo dy sound talking ab out the N egro 
in America wa ging some "r evolution "? Yes, he is co ndemning a system-bu t he's n ot trying to 
overturn t he system, or to destroy it. The Negro's s o-called "r evolt" is m erely  an asking  to be 
_accep ted_ into the existing s ystem! A _true_ Negro revolt might e ntail, for insta nce, fighting  for 
separat e black sta tes within t his co untry -which s everal grou ps an d individuals have a dvocat ed, 
long be fore Elijah M uhammad came al ong.
 
When the white m an came into this c ountry, he certainly  wasn't demonstrati ng any "non-
violence." In fact, the very man whose n ame symb olizes no n-violence h ere today has st ated:
 
"Our na tion was born in gen ocide whe n it e mbraced the doctrine that the original American , the 
Indian, was  an inferior rac e. Even before there we re large numbers of Negroes on  our shores, t he 
scar o f racial h atred had alrea dy disfigured colonial socie ty. From t he sixteenth century forward, 
blood flowed in b attles over racial su prem acy. We are per haps th e only nation wh ich tried a s a 
matter of national policy  to wipe ou t its indigeno us populatio n. More over, we elevate d that tragic 
experienc e into a noble cr usad e. Indeed, even today we h ave not permitted ourselves to reject o r 
to feel remorse f or this s hameful epis ode. Our literat ure, o ur films, our drama, our folklore all exalt 
it. Our childre n are still taugh t to respect the violenc e which  reduced a red-skinn ed people o f an 
earlier cult ure in to a few fr agmented grou ps her ded into impoverished reservations. " 
"Peaceful coexistenc e!" That's another on e the white man has always been quick to  cry. Fine! B ut 
what have been the deeds of the white ma n? During  his e ntire a dvance through hist ory, he has 
been waving th e banner o f Christia nity . . . and carry ing in his o ther hand the sword and the 
flintlock . 
You can go right b ack t o the very  begin ning of Christianity . Cat holicism, t he genesis o f Christia nity 
as we kn ow it to be presently constitu ted, with its hierarchy , was co nceived in Africa-by th ose 
whom t he Christian c hurch c alls "The Des ert Fat hers. " The Christian c hurch became infected with 
racism whe n it e ntered white E urope. The Christia n church ret urned to Africa u nder the banner o f 
the Cross-conqu ering, killing,  exploiting, pillaging,  raping, b ullying,  beating- and teaching white 
suprem acy. This is how the white m an thrus t himsel f into the position o f leadership o f the world-
through th e use of naked physical p ower. And he was totally inadequa te spiritually. Mankind's 
history has proved f rom one era to another that the true criterion o f leadership is s piritual. Me n 
are a ttracted by spirit. By  power, men are _forced_. Love is enge ndered by spirit. By power , 
anxieties are cre ated.
 
I am in agree ment one hundred per ce nt with  those r acists who say  that no governm ent laws ever 
cam _force_ bro therh ood. The only true wo rld solutio n today is governments guide d by tru e 
religion-o f the spirit. Here in r ace-torn America , I am convinced that the Islam reli gion is 
despera tely needed, particularly  by the Americ an bl ack m an. The black man needs to reflect that 
he has been America's most ferven t Christian-an d where has it gott en hi m? In fact, in t he white 
man's h ands, in the white m an's interpreta tion . . . where h as Christia nity bro ught t his _wor ld_?
 
It has brough t the non-white two- thirds o f the human population to rebellion. Two-thirds o f the 
human populatio n today is telling th e one-third mi nority white ma n, "Get out!" And the white ma n 
is leavin g. And as he leaves, we seethe non-white p eoples r eturning in a rus h to their original 
religions , which had been labeled "pagan " by th e conquering  white man. Only one religion-Isla m-
had the power  to stand and fight the white m an's Christianity  for a _thousand years_! Only Islam 
could ke ep white C hristianit y at bay.
 
The Africans ar e returning  to Islam an d other indigen ous r eligions. The Asians ar e returning  to 
being Hindus, Buddhists an d Musli ms.
 
As the Christian Crus ade once went E ast, now th e Islamic Crusa de is going West. With the East-
Asia-close d to Christianity , with Africa ra pidly bei ng converte d to Islam, with Eur ope rapidly 
becomi ng un-Christian , gener ally today it is a ccepted that the "Christia n" civi lization of Americ a-
which is p ropping up the white rac e aro und the wor ld-is Christianity's  remaining  strongest bastion .
 
Well, if _this_ is s o-if the so-c alled "C hristianity" now bei ng practice d in America d isplays  the best 
that world  Christianity  has left to offer-no  one in his right mi nd should n eed any m uch greater 
proof that very close at hand is th e _end_ of Christianity.
 
Are you aware that some Prot estant theologians, in their w ritings, a re using the phrase " post-
Christian er a"-and they me an _now_?
 
And what is t he greatest single reas on for this Christian c hurch's f ailure? It is its failure to combat 
racism. It is t he old "You sow, you rea p" story . The Christian c hurch sowed racism-
blasphemously; now it r eaps racism.
 
Sunday mo rnings in t his year  of grace 1965, imagine the "Christian c onscie nce" of congregati ons 
guarde d by de acons barring the door to black would-be  worshipers, t elling them "You can't e nter 
_this_ Ho use o f God!"
 
Tell me , if you can, a sadder iro ny than that St. Augus tine, Florida-a city  namedfor the black 
African sain t who saved C atholicism from heresy-was rec ently  the scen e of bloody  race rio ts.
 
I believe  that God now is giving the wor ld's s o-called " Christian " white s ociet y its l ast o pportunity 
to repent a nd atone for the crimes of exploiting  and enslav ing the world's  non-white peoples . It is 
exactl y as when God gave Ph araoh a chance to repent. But Pharaoh persiste d in h is refusal to 
give justice t o those whom he oppress ed. And, we know, God finally destroyed P haraoh. 
Is white America re ally sorry for her crimes ag ainst t he black p eople? Do es wh ite America have 
the capacity  to repent-an d to atone? Does the capacity  to repent, to atone, exist in a majority, in 
one-hal f, in eve n one-third of America n wh ite socie ty?
 
Many  black m en, the victims-hi f act most black men-would like to  be able to forgive,  to forget, t he 
crimes.
 
But most America n wh ite people seem not to have it in them to make any serious atonement-to 
do justice to the black man.
 
Indeed, how _can_ white s ociety  atone for enslavin g, for raping,  for unmanning, f or otherw ise 
brutalizing _millions_ of human beings, f or centuries? What atonement would the Go d of Justice 
demand for the robbery of the black pe ople's lab or, their lives, th eir true identities, t heir c ulture, 
their history -and even their human dignity?
 
A desegre gated cup of coffee, a theater, public t oilets-th e whole ra nge o f hypocritical 
"integration "-these ar e not atonement.
 
After a while in America, I returned abroad-and this time, I spent eighteen weeks in the Middle 
East and Africa. 
The world le aders with whom I had private audiences t his time incl uded Preside nt Gamal Abdel 
Nasser , of Egypt; Presid ent Julius K . Nye rere, of Tanzani a; Presi dent Nnamoi Aziki-we, of 
Nigeria; O sagyefo Dr. Kwam e Nkru mah, of Ghana; Pr eside nt Sekou Toure, of Guinea; Pr eside nt 
Jomo K enyatt a, of Kenya; a nd Prim e Minister Dr . Milto n Ob ote, of Ugan da.
 
I also met with relig ious le aders-A frican, Arab , Asian, Muslim, a nd non-Muslim. And in all o f these 
countries, I talked with Afro-Am erica ns an d whites o f many pro fessio ns an d backgrou nds.
 
An America n white a mbassa dor in o ne African country was Africa's most res pected American 
ambassad or: I'm glad t o say that this was  told to me by one ranking  African leader. We talked for 
an entire a fternoon. Based on what I  had heard of him, I had to believe him whe n he told me that 
as long as he was on  the African continent, he never t hought in t erms of race, t hat he dealt with 
human beings, n ever noticing t heir color . He s aid h e was mo re aware o f language di fferences 
than of color di fferences. He said t hat only when h e returned to America would h e become aware 
of color di fferences.
 
I told hi m, "What you ar e telling me  is that it isn't the Americ an white _ man_ who is a racist , but 
it's th e American political, economic, a nd social _ atmosphere_ that automatically nouris hes a 
racist psychology  in the wh ite ma n." He agreed .
 
We both agreed that American society  makes it next t o impossible for humans to meet in America 
and not be consci ous o f their col or differences . And we both agree d that if racism could be 
removed, America c ould o ffer a societ y where rich a nd poor co uld tr uly live like h uman beings.
 
That disc ussion with th e ambassador gave me  a new insight- one which  I like: that the white m an 
is _not_ inh erently evil, but America's racist society  influences him  to act evilly. The societ y has 
produce d and nourishes a  psychology  which brings ou t the lowest, most base part of human 
beings.
 
I had a totally different kind of talk w ith another white man I met in Africa-who, to me, pers onified 
exactl y what t he ambass ador and I had disc ussed . Throughou t my trip, I was of course aware 
that I was under co nstant surveillance . The agen t was  a particularly  obvious and obnoxious on e; I 
am not sure for what age ncy, as he never identified it, or I  would say  it. Anyway, this o ne finally 
got u nder my skin when I  found I couldn't seem to eat a meal in the hotel without seeing hi m 
somewhere ar ound watching m e. You would h ave thought I  was John Dil-linger  or so mebody. 
I just got u p from my br eakfast one morning an d walked over t o where h e was an d I told him I 
knew he was following me, and if he wante d to know anything,  why didn't he ask m e. He s tarted 
to give me one of those too-lofty-to-descend-t o-you attitudes. I told him  then right t o his face he 
was a fool, that he didn't k now me, or what I  stood for, so that made him one of those people who 
let somebody else do their thi nking; an d that no matter what jo b a man had, at least h e ought t o 
be able to think for hims elf. That stung hi m; he let me have it.
 
I was, t o hear him tell it, anti-Am erican, un-A merica n, seditio us, s ubvers ive, an d probably 
Com munist. I  told him that what he said only proved h ow little he underst ood about me. I told him 
that the only thing th e F.B.I. the C.I .A., or a nybody else could ever find me guilty of, was being 
open-mi nded. I said I was se eking  for the truth, and I was  trying to wei gh-obj ectivel y-everything 
on its own m erit. I said what I was agains t was  strait-jacket ed thinking, a nd strait-jacke ted 
socie ties. I said I respected every  man's right to believe whatever  his in telligenc e tells him is 
intellectu ally sound, a nd I exp ect everyone e lse to res pect my right t o believe likewise.
 This su per-sleut h then got o ff on my " Black Musli m" religious b eliefs. I asked him hadn't his 
headqu arters bo thered to brief him-that my a ttitudes a nd beliefs were ch anged ? I told him that the 
Islam I b elieved i n now was  the Islam which  was taught in Mecc a-that there was no  God but 
Allah , and that Muh ammad ibn Abdullah who lived in the Holy  City of Mecc a fourteen hundred 
years  ago was  the Last Mess enger o f Allah.
 
Almost from the first I had been guessing ab out something; a nd I took a chance-an d I really 
shook u p that "super-sleuth." Fro m the consist ent subjectivity in jus t about every thing he asked 
and said, I  had deduced something, a nd I told hi m, "You know , I think you're a Jew with an 
Anglici zed n ame." His involunt ary expression told me I'd hit the button. He ask ed m e how I knew. 
I told hi m I'd had so m uch experie nce with how Jews  would attack m e that I usually could ide ntify 
them. I told h im all I held ag ainst t he Jew was th at so many Jews  actually were hypocrit es in t heir 
claim t o be friends of the Americ an bl ack m an, and it burned me up to be so often called "anti-
Semitic" when I spoke things I knew to be the absolute truth about Jews. I t old h im that, yes, I 
gave the Jew credit for being among all ot her whites t he most active, and the m ost vocal, 
financier , "leader" a nd "liber al" in t he Negro  civil rights m ovem ent. But I said a t the same time I 
knew that the Jew played these roles f or a very  care ful stra tegic  reason: the more prej udice i n 
America c ould b e focused upon the Negro, t hen the more the white Ge ntiles' pr ejudice would 
keep diverte d off the Jew. I said that to me, one proof that all the civil rights p osturing of so ma ny 
Jews  wasn't si ncere was th at so often in the North the quickest segre gationists were Jews 
themselves. Look at prac tically everything  the black ma n is trying to "integrate" into for ins tance; if 
Jews  are not the actual owners, or are not in c ontrolling po sitions , then they have m ajor 
stock holdi ngs or they are otherw ise in powerf ul leverage po sitions-an d do they really  sincerely 
exert th ese influences ? No!
 
And an eve n clearer pr oof for me of how Jews truly  regard Negroes, I said , was what i nvariably 
happened wherever  a Negro m oved in to any white r eside ntial ne ighborhood that was thickly 
Jewish. Who would always  lead the whites' exod us? The Jews! Ge nerally in these sit uations, 
some whites s tay put-you jus t notice who t hey are: they're Irish Ca tholics,  they're It alians; they're 
rarely ever  any Jews.  And, ironically , the Jews  themselves o ften still have tr ouble b eing 
"accep ted."
 
Saying  this, I know I'll hear "a nti-Se mitic" from ever y directio n again . Oh, yes! Bu t truth is tr uth.
 
Politics d ominated the Americ an sc ene while I was traveling  abroad this ti me. In Cairo a nd again 
in Accra, the Americ an pr ess w ire serv ices reach ed me with trans-Atl antic c alls, asking whom d id 
I favor, Johnson-or G oldwater?
 
I said I felt that as far as the American black m an was concerne d they were b oth just about the 
same. I felt that it was  for the black m an only  a question of Johnson, the fox, or G oldwater , the 
wolf. 
"Conservatism" in America's po litics means "Let's k eep the niggers  in their place." And 
"liberalism" m eans "Let's k eep the _knee_-grows  in their place-but tell them we'l l treat them a little 
better; let's f ool them more, with m ore promises. " With these choices, I felt that the Americ an 
black man only needed to choose which o ne to be eaten by, the "liberal" f ox or the "conservative" 
wolf-becaus e both of them would eat him.
 
I didn't go for Goldwater a ny more than for Johnso n-except t hat in a  wolf's den, I'd alwa ys kn own 
exactl y where I stood; I'd watch the dangero us wo lf closer th an I would t he smooth, sly  fox. The 
wolf's ver y growling would keep m e alert a nd fighting  him to survive, whereas I _might _ be lulle d 
and fooled by th e tricky  fox. I'll give you a n illustra tion o f the fox. W hen the assassi natio n in D allas 
made Johnso n Preside nt, who was th e first p erson he calle d for? It wasf or his b est friend, 
"Dick y"-Richard Russell o f Georgia. Civil rights was "a moral issue, " Johns on was d eclaring  to 
everybody-while  his b est friend was the Southern racist who _ led_ the civi l rights op positi on. How 
would so me sheri ff sound, declaring hi msel f so agai nst b ank robbery-and Jesse James h is be st 
friend?
 
Goldwater as a man, I respected for speaking o ut his tru e convictions-so mething rarely  done in 
politics t oday. He wasn't whispering  to racists an d smiling  at integrationists . I felt Gold-water 
wouldn't h ave risked his un popular stand withou t conviction . He f latly told bl ack me n he wasn't f or 
them-a nd there is this to consi der: alwa ys, the black p eople h ave adva nced further when they 
have s een they had to rise up against a system  that they clearly  saw was outright agains t them. 
Under the steady  lullabies sung by f oxy liberals, the North ern Negro b ecame a beggar. But the 
Southern Negro, f acing th e honestly snarling  white m an, rose up to battle that white m an for his 
freedom-long be fore it happened in the Nort h.
 
Anyway, I didn't feel that Goldwater was  any better for black me n than Johns on, or vi ce-versa. I 
wasn't in t he Unite d States at election ti me, but if I had been, I wouldn' t have p ut myself  in the 
position o f voting f or either candidate for the Preside ncy, or of reco mmending to any black m an to 
do so. It has turned out that it's J ohnson in t he White Ho use-an d black votes were a major f actor 
in his winning as decisivel y as he want ed to. If it had been Goldwater, all I  am saying is that the 
black people would at least have k nown th ey were de aling  with an honestly growling wolf , rather 
than a fox who c ould h ave t hem ha lf-digeste d before they even knew  what was  happening. 
 
 
I kept having  all ki nds o f troubles trying to develop the kin d of Black N ation alist organization I 
wante d to build for the America n Negro. W hy Black Na tionalism? W ell, in the competitive 
American society , how can there ever  beany white-bl ack solid arity before there is first some black 
solidarity? I f you will remember, in my childh ood I had been expose d to the Bl ack Na tionalist 
teachings o f Marcus G arvey-which, in fact, I had been told had led to my f ather's m urder. Even 
when I was a follower  of Elijah Mu hammad, I had been strongly  aware o f how th e Black 
Natio nalist p olitical, e conomic a nd social p hilosophies ha d the ability  to ins till within black men the 
racial dignity , the inc entive, a nd the confidence that the black race n eeds today to get u p off its 
knees, a nd to get o n its feet, and get rid o f its sc ars, a nd to take a s tand for itsel f.
 
One of the major tr oubles th at I was  having  in buil ding the organization t hat I want ed-an  all-black 
organization whose ultim ate obj ective  was to help cre ate a society  in wh ich there co uld exist 
honest white-black br otherhood-was  that my earlier p ublic im age, my ol d so-calle d "Bl ack 
Muslim" image, kept blocking  me. I was try ing to gradually  reshape that image. I was tr ying to turn 
a corner , into a new regard by  the public, e speci ally Negroes ; I was n o less angry than I had 
been, but at the same time the true brotherhood I had seen in the Holy  World had influenced m e 
to recognize  that ang er can blind human vision.
 
Every free moment I could find, I did a lot of talking  to key people whom I knew around Harle m, 
and I made a lot of speeches, saying: " True Isla m taught me that it tak es _all_ o f the religious, 
political, economic, p sychol ogical, a nd racial ingredie nts, or ch aract eristics, t o make the H uman Family and the Hu man Society  complete.
 
"Since I  learned the _truth_ in M ecca, my d earest friends h ave co me to includ e _all _ kinds-s ome 
Christians, Jews, Buddhists , Hind us, agn ostics, a nd even a theists! I  have f riends who are c alled 
capitalists, S ocialists, a nd Communists! S ome of my f riends ar e moderates, c onservati ves, 
extremists-so me are eve n Uncle Toms! My friends to day are bl ack, br own, red, yellow, and 
_white_! "
 
I said to Harle m stre et audiences that only when m ankind would submit t o theOne Go d who 
creat ed all-only then would ma nkind even approac h the "peace" of which so much _talk_ could 
be heard . . . but toward which s o little _ action_ was seen.
 
I said that on the American raci al level, we had to approac h the black m an's strug gle ag ainst t he 
white man's racis m as a human problem , that we had to forget hypocritical p olitics an d 
propagan da. I said th at both rac es, a s human beings, h ad the obligation, the res ponsi bility, of 
helping to correct America's hu man problem. The well -meaning white people, I said, had to 
combat, actively and directly , the racis m in o ther white people. And the black p eople h ad to build 
within t hemselves m uch greater awaren ess t hat along with equ al rights t here had to be the 
bearing  of equal res ponsi bilities.
 
I knew, better than m ost Negroes, h ow many white p eople tr uly wanted to see America n racial 
problems solved. I knew that many whites we re as frustrated as Negroes. I'll bet I got fifty letters 
some d ays from white people. The white people in m eeting au diences would t hrong around m e, 
asking me , after I had addresse d them so mewhere , "What _can_ a sincer e wh ite pers on do?"
 
When I say that here now , it ma kes m e think ab out that little co-e d I told you ab out, the one who 
flew from her New  Englan d college d own to New York and came up to me in the Natio n of Islam's 
resta urant in Harle m, and I told h er that there was "n othing" s he could d o. I regret t hat I told her 
that. I wish that now I k new her name, or where I c ould telephone her , or write to  her, and tell h er 
what I t ell wh ite people now when t hey present themselves a s bei ng sincere, and ask me , one 
way or another, the same thing t hat she ask ed.
 
The first thing I tell t hem is t hat at least where my  own partic ular Black N ation alist organization, 
the Organization o f Afro-America n Unity , is concern ed, they can't _ join_ us. I have th ese very 
deep feelings that white people who want t o join black organi zatio ns ar e really  just taki ng the 
escapist way  tosalve their c onscie nces. By vi sibly hovering ne ar us , they are "proving" t hat they 
are "with us." But the hard truth is this _isn't _ helping to  solve  America's racist pro blem . The 
Negroes ar en't t he racists. W here the really sincere white people have got to do their "proving" o f 
themselves is n ot among t he black _victims _, but out on the battle lines o f where America's 
racism re ally _is_-an d that's in t heir own h ome communities; America's racism is among t heir own 
fellow  whites. That's where th e sinc ere whites who re ally mean to accomplish s omething have got 
to work.
 
Aside from that, I mean nothing against any sincere whites when I say that as members o f black 
organizations, generally  whites' ver y presence s ubtly  renders the black organization a utomatically 
less e ffective. Eve n the best white m embers w ill slow  down th e Negroes' discover y of what they 
need to do, and particularly  of what t hey can do-for themselves, working  by themselves, am ong 
their own ki nd, in their own communities .
 
I sure do n't want to hurt anybo dy's feelings, bu t in fact I'll even go s o far as to say that I never 
really  trust the kin d of white people who are always  so anxious to  hang aro und Negroes, or to 
hang around in Negro co mmunities. I don't trust the ki nd of whites who love h aving Negroes 
always  hanging aro und them. I don't know-this f eeling m ay be a throwback to the years when I 
was hustling in H arlem and all of those red-faced, drunk wh ites in t he afterhours clubs were 
always  grab bing hold of some N egroes an d talking  about "I just want you to know  you're  just a s 
good as I am-"  And then they got back in their taxicabs a nd black limo usines and went b ack downt own to the places where they lived  and worked, where no blacks except s ervants ha d 
better get caught. But, anyway, I know that ever y time that whites j oin a black organi zatio n, you 
watch, pr etty soon the blacks wi ll be leaning on the wh ites to  support it, and before you know  it a 
black may be  up front with a ti tle, b ut the whites, b ecause of their money, are the real controllers.
 I tell sincere white people, "Work in conjunctio n with  us-ea ch of us working  among o ur own kin d." 
Let sinc ere white in dividuals f ind all other white p eople they can who feel as they do-and let them 
form their own all-white grou ps, to wo rk try ing to  convert o ther wh ite people who are thinki ng and 
acting so racist. L et sincere whites go an d teach non-violence t o white p eople!
 
We will completely respec t our white co-wo rkers. They will deserve every  credit. W e will give 
them every credit. W e will meanwhile b e working  among our own kind, in our own black 
communities-sh owing and teaching black m en in way s that only other black men can-th at the 
black man has got to help him self. Working se parat ely, the sincer e wh ite people and sincere 
black people actually will be workin g togeth er.
 
In our m utual si ncerit y we might b e able to show a road to the salvation of America's ver y soul. It 
can only  be salva ged if human rights a nd dignity , in full, are exten ded to black men. Only such 
real, m eaningful actio ns as those which ar e sinc erely motivated from a deep sense of humanism 
and moral res ponsibilit y can get at  the basic ca uses that produc e the racial explosions in America 
today. Otherw ise, the racial explosi ons ar e only going  to grow  worse. Cert ainly nothing is ever 
going  to be solved by throw ing up on me and other so-calle d black "extre mists" and 
"demagogues " the blame for the racism that is in America .
 
Sometimes , I have d ared to dream to, mysel f that one day, history  may even s ay that my voice-
which d isturb ed the white ma n's smugn ess, a nd his arroganc e, and his c omplace ncy-that my 
voice helped to save America from a grave, p ossibly  even a fatal catastrop he.
 
The goal ha s alwa ys be en the same, with the approaches to it as different a s mine and Dr. Martin 
Luther King's  non-violen t marching, t hat dramatizes th e brutality  and the evil  of the white man 
against defenseless b lacks. And in the racial clim ate of this c ountry today, it is a nybo dy's guess 
which o f the"extrem es" in approach t o the black man's pr oblems might _person ally_ m eet a fatal 
catastro phe first-"non-violen t" Dr. King, or so-called "violent " me.
 
*     *     *
 
Anything I d o today, I regard as urge nt. N o ma n is given bu t so mu ch time to accomplish 
whatever  is his lif e's work. M y life in particul ar never ha s stayed fixed in o ne position f or very long. 
You have se en how through out my life, I have o ften known  unexpect ed dr astic ch anges.
 
I am only facing th e facts when I know that any mo ment of any day , or any night, could bring me 
death. This is p articularly  true sinc e the las t trip t hat I made abroad. I have seen the nature o f 
things that are happening, a nd I have heard things fr om sources which are reliable.
 
To speculate about dyin g doesn't dis turb m e as it might s ome people. I never have felt that I 
would li ve to become an old m an. Eve n before I was a M uslim- when I was a h ustler in the gh etto 
jungle, a nd then a crimin al in pris on, it always  stayed o n my mi nd that I would die a violent death. 
In fact, it ru ns in my f amily. My father and most of his bro thers d ied by violenc e-my father 
becaus e of what h e believed in . To come right down t o it, if I take the kin d of things in which I 
believe, t hen add to that the kind o f temperament that I have, pl us the one hundred per cent 
dedicati on I have t o what ever I believe in-th ese are ingredi ents which m ake it jus t about 
impossible f or me to die of old age.
 
*     *     *
 
I have g iven t o this book so mu ch of what ever ti me I have because I feel, and I hope, that if I 
honestly and fully tell my lif e's a ccou nt, read objectively it might pr ove to be a testim ony of some social value . 
I think t hat an objective  reader may s ee how in the soci ety to which I was expos ed as a black 
youth h ere in America, f or me to wind up in a priso n was  really just a bout inevitable. It happens to 
so m any t housan ds of black youth .
 
I think t hat an objective  reader may s ee how when I heard "The white m an is th e devil," when I 
played b ack what had been my own experie nces, it was  inevitable that I would respo nd positivel y; 
then the next twel ve years o f my lif e were devo ted and dedicated to propagating t hat phrase 
among t he black p eople.
 
I think, I hope, that the objective rea der, in following my life-the life of only one ghetto-cre ated 
Negro-may gain a better pict ure a nd underst anding than he has pr eviously  had of the black 
ghett oes which ar e shaping t he lives  and the thinki ng of almost all o f the 22 million Negroes who 
live in America.
 
Thicker e ach year in these ghett oes is t he kind of teen-ager th at I was-with the wrong kinds of 
heroes, and the wrong  kinds o f influences. I am not saying th at all of them b ecome the kin d of 
parasite t hat I was. F ortun ately, by far most do not. But still, the small fr action who d o add up to 
an annual total of more a nd more costly, dangerous you thful criminals. The F.B.I. not long ago 
releas ed a report o f a shocking  rise in crime each successi ve year sinc e the end of World War II-
ten to twel ve per ce nt each year. The report di d not say so in so many words, b ut I am saying that 
the majority  of that crime incr ease is annually spawned in the black gh ettoes which th e American 
racist soci ety permits t o exist. I n the 1964 "long, hot summer" riots in major cities across t he 
Unite d States, the socially  disin herited black ghett o youth were always at the forefront.
 
In this year , 1965, I am certai n that more-and worse-riots ar e going  to erupt, in yet more cities, i n 
spite of the conscienc e-sal ving Civil Rights Bill. The reasonis t hat the _cause_ of these riots, the 
racist m alignancy  in Americ a, has been too long unattended.
 
I believe  that it would be almost impossible t o find anywhere in America a  black ma n who has 
lived f urther down in the mu d of human society than I have; or a  black ma n who has been any 
more ignora nt than I have be en; or a  black ma n who has suffered more ang uish duri ng his life 
than I have . But it is o nly after the deepest d arkness th at the greatest joy can come; it is only after 
slavery and prison that the sweetest appreciatio n of freedom c an come.
 
For th e freedom of my 22 million bl ack br others and sisters h ere in Americ a, I do believe t hat I 
have f ought the best that I knew how, and the best that I could, with the shortco mings  that I have 
had. I know that my shortc omings are many.
 
My greatest lack h as been, I believe, that I don't have th e kin d of academic e ducatio n I wish I h ad 
been able to get-to h ave b een a lawyer, perhaps. I do believe t hat I might have m ade a goo d 
lawyer. I have alwa ys loved verbal b attle, and challe nge. You can believe me  that if I had the time 
right n ow, I would no t be one bit a shamed to go b ack into any New York City public scho ol an d 
start where I left off at the ninth grade, and go o n through a degree. B ecause I don't begin to be 
academically  equip ped for so many of the interests t hat I have. F or insta nce, I love la nguages. I 
wish I were a n accomplishe d linguist. I  don't know  anything mo re frustrating th an to be around 
people talking so mething you ca n't understa nd. Especiall y when t hey are people who lo ok jus t 
like you. I n Africa, I heard original m other tongu es, s uch a s Hausa, and Swahili, bei ng spok en, 
and there I was  standing like s ome little b oy, waitin g for someone to tell m e what had been sai d; I 
never w ill forget h ow ignora nt I felt.
 
Aside from the basic African dial ects, I  would tr y to learn Chin ese, because itlo oks as i f Chines e 
will be the most powerful political la nguage o f the future. And already  I have begu n studying 
Arabic, wh ich I think is going to be the most powerf ul spiritual langu age of the future.
 
I would j ust like t o _study_. I mean ranging st udy, because I have a  wide-o pen mind. I'm intereste d in a lmost a ny subject you can me ntion. I know this is the reason I have come to really 
like, a s indiv iduals, s ome of the hosts of radio or tel evision p anel programs I h ave be en on, and to 
respect their mi nds-be caus e even if they have be en almost s teadily in dis agreement with m e on 
the rac e issue , they still have kept their minds open and objective about the truths of things 
happening in t his wor ld. Irv Kupcin et in Chicago, a nd Barry  Farber , Barry  Gray  and Mike W allace 
hi New  York-people like them. They also let m e see that they respec ted my mind-in a way  I know 
they never re alized. The way  I knew  was that often they would invite my op inion on subjects o ff 
the rac e issue . Sometimes, a fter the programs , we would sit aro und and talk ab out all kin ds of 
things, c urrent events a nd other things, f or an hour or m ore. You see, m ost whites, eve n when 
they cre dit a N egro with so me intelligence , will still feel that all he  can talk about is th e rac e issu e; 
most whites n ever feel that Negroes c an contribut e anything t o other areas of thought, and ideas. 
You jus t notice h ow rarely you will ever he ar whites aski ng any Negroes what th ey think a bout the 
problem of world he alth, or t he space rac e to land m en on the moon.
 
*     *     *
 
Every morning whe n I wake u p, now, I regard it a s having an other b orrowed day. In any city, 
where ver I go , making speeches, h olding m eetings  of my orga nizatio n, or a ttending to other 
business, black m en are watching  every move I  make, awaiting  their ch ance to kill me. I have 
said publicly many tim es that I know that they have th eir orders. Anyone who c hooses n ot to 
believe what I  am saying doesn't know  the Muslims in the Nati on of Islam. 
But I am also bless ed with f aithful followers  who ar e, I believe, as dedicated to me  as I once was 
to Mr. Elijah Muhammad. Those who would h unt a man need to remember that a jungle also 
contains those who h unt the hunters.
 
I know, too, that I could suddenly die at the hands of some white racists. Or I  could di e at the 
hands of some Negro hire d by the white m an. Or it c ould be some br ainwashe d Negro acti ng on 
his own id ea that by elimin ating me  he would b e helping out the wh ite ma n, becaus e I talk a bout 
the white m an the wa y I do.
 
Anyway, now, each day I live as i f I am already dead, and I tell you what I would like for you t o do. 
When I _am_ dead-I say it that way because from the things  I _know_, I  do not exp ect to live  long 
enough t o read this b ook in its f inished form-I want you t o just watch a nd see if I'm not right in 
what I s ay: that the white m an, in his pr ess, is going  to identify m e with "h ate."
 
He wi ll make use of me dead, as he has m ade use of me alive, as a convenient symbol o f 
"hatred"-an d that will help him to esca pe facing t he truth that all I  have b een doing is h olding up  a 
mirror  to reflect, to show, the hist ory of unspeakabl e crimes that his race h as committed ag ainst 
my race.
 
You watch. I will be labeled as, a t best, an "irresp onsibl e" black m an. I have alwa ys felt about this 
accusatio n that the black "le ader" whom white men consid er to be "responsible" is invaria bly the 
black "leader" who never gets a ny results. You only  get ac tion as a black man if you are regarded 
by the white man as "irresp onsibl e." In fact, this much I had learned when I  was just a  little b oy. 
And sinc e I have b een some kind o f a "leader" o f black p eople h ere in the racist s ociety  of 
America, I  have b een more reass ured e ach tim e the white m an resist ed m e, or attack ed me 
harder-because each time m ade me more certain t hat I was on  the right track in the America n 
black man's b est interes ts. The racistwhite m an's oppositio n automatically  made me know that I 
did offer the black ma n something worthwhi le.
 
Yes, I have c herishe d my  "demagogue " role. I know that socie ties o ften have killed the people 
who have h elped to change those s ocieties . And if I can die h aving brought a ny light, having 
expos ed any meaningful truth that will help to destroy the racist ca ncer t hat is maligna nt in the 
body of America- then, all of the credit is due to Allah. Only the mistakes h ave be en mine.
 
  
EPILOGUE
ALEX HALEY
 
During  nineteen fifty-nine, when t he public was becoming aware o f the Muslims after the New 
York telecast "The Hate That Hate Pro duced," I was in San Francisc o, about to retire after twenty 
years  in the U.S. Co ast G uard. A friend return ed from a visit to her Detr oit ho me and told m e of a 
startling "b lack m an's" religion, " The Natio n of Islam," to which, to  her surprise, h er entire f amily 
was converted . I list ened with incred ulity to how a "mad scientist Mr. Yacub" had geneticall y 
"graf ted" the white rac e from an original bl ack pe ople. The organization's l eader was  describe d as 
"The Ho norable Elija h Muh ammad" and a "Minister Malc olm X" was  apparently chief of staff.
 
When I entered a civilian wr iting care er in New  York City , I collecte d, around Harle m, a good deal 
of provocative ma terial a nd then proposed an article about the cult to the _R eader's Digest_. 
Visiting  the Muslim res taura nt in Harlem , I asked how I c ould meet Minister Malcolm X, who was 
pointed out talking  in a telephone booth right behind me . Soon he came out, a gangling,  tall, 
reddish- brownskin ned fellow, at that time thirty-five years  old; when my p urpos e was  made 
known, h e bristled, his eyes sk ewering  me from behind thehorn-r immed glasses. "You're another 
one of the white m an's tools s ent to spy!" he accused me sharply . I said I had a legitimate writing 
assignm ent and showed him my lett er from the magaz ine stating  that an objective article was 
wante d, one that would b alance what the Muslims s aid o f themselves  and what t heir a ttackers 
said about them. Malcolm X snorte d that no white man's pr omis e was  worth t he paper it was o n; 
he would ne ed time to decide if he would c ooperate or n ot. Mea nwhile, h e suggested that I could 
attend some of the Harle m Temple Num ber 7 meetings ("temples " have since b een renamed 
"mosques ") wh ich were o pen to non-Muslim N egroes.
 
Around the Muslim's res taurant, I met some o f the converts, a ll of them neatly dress ed and 
almost e mbarrassingl y polite. Their m anners a nd miens re flected the Spartan personal d iscipline 
the organization demanded, and none of them would u tter a nything  but Nati on of Islam clichs. 
Even excelle nt weath er was  viewed as a blessing  from Allah, with corollary  credit du e to "The 
Honorable Elijah Mu hammad."
 
Finally , Minister Malcolm X told m e that he would n ot take pers onal responsibility . He sai d that I 
should t alk a bout an article w ith Mr . Muhammad pers onally. I expressed willingness , an 
appointment was made, and I flew to Chicago . The slightly  built, s hy-acting, s oft-voiced Mr. 
Muhammad inv ited m e to dinner with his immedi ate family in his m ansion. I was aware t hat I was 
being carefully sized u p while  he talked pri maril y of F.B.I. and Internal R evenue Service cl ose 
survei llance of his orga nizatio n, and of a rumore d forthcoming Co ngressio nal pr obe. "But I have 
no fear of any o f them; I have all t hat I need-the trut h," Mr. Muhammad said. The subjec t of my 
writing an article somehow never got raised , but Malcol m X proved f ar mor e cooperative  when I 
returned.
 
He would sit with m e at a white- topped table in the Muslim resta urant and answer  guardedly any 
questio ns I aske d between cons tant interruptio ns by  callsfrom the New  York pr ess in t he 
telephone booth. W hen I asked if I could s ee Muslim ac tivities in s ome other citi es, h e arra nged 
with other minist ers for me to attend me etings at temples i n Detroit , Washingto n, and 
Phila delphia.
 
My article e ntitle d "Mr . Muh ammad Speaks" a ppeared in early  1960, and it was  the first featured 
magazine n otice of the phenomenon. A letter quick ly came from Mr. Muhammad appreciating t hat 
the article kept my promise t o be objective, a nd Malcolm X telephoned similar co mplim ents. 
About this ti me, Dr. C. Eric Lincoln's bo ok _The Black Muslims in America _ was  published and 
the Black Muslims b ecame a subjec t of growing int erest. During  1961 and 1962, the _Saturday 
Evening Po st_ teamed me with a white writer, Al Balk, t o do an article; n ext I did a perso nal 
interview of Malcolm X f or _Playboy_ mag azine, which had promise d to print verbatim what ever 
response he made to my questio ns. During th at interv iew of several d ays' duration, Malcolm X repeatedly exclaim ed, after par ticularl y blistering  anti-Christia n or a nti-w hite statements: "Y ou 
know that devil's no t going to  print that!" He was ve ry much taken aback when _Playboy_ ke pt its 
word.
 
Malcolm X began t o warm u p to me somewhat. He was most aware o f the national p eriodicals' 
power , and he had come to regard m e, if still sus piciously , as o ne aven ue of access. Occasio nally 
now he bega n to telephone m e advising me  of some radio , television, or person al sp eaking 
appearanc e he was about to make, or he  would invite m e to attend some Bl ack Muslim bazaar or 
other p ublic a ffair.
 
I was in t his st age of relatio nship with t he Malc olm X  who often described himself on the air a s 
"the angriest bl ack ma n in America" whe n in e arly 1963 my agent brought me  togeth er with a 
publisher who m the _Playbo y_ interv iew had given t he idea of the autobiograp hy of Malcolm X. I 
was asked if I felt I could get the now na tionally known firebrand to consen t to telling th e intimate 
details o f his e ntire li fe. I said I  didn't k now, but I would a sk him .The editor ask ed m e if I could 
sketc h the likely  highlights o f such a book, and as I commenced talking, I realized how little I 
knew about the man pers onally, despit e all my int erviews. I said t hat the qu estion had made me 
aware o f how careful Malcolm X had always  been to play himsel f down an d to play up his leader 
Elijah Mu hammad.
 
All th at I knew, really , I said, was  that I had heard Malcolm X refer in p assing to  his li fe of crime 
and priso n before he became a Black Muslim; that several ti mes h e had told m e: "You wouldn't 
believe my p ast," and that I had heard others s ay that at one time he had peddled dope and 
women and committe d armed rob beries.
 
I knew that Malcolm X had an almost fanatical o bsession a bout time. "I have less p atience with 
someone who doesn't wear  a watch t han with anyon e els e, for this type is not time-consci ous," he 
had once told me . "In all our deeds, the proper value and res pect for time d etermin es succ ess or 
failure ." I knew how th e Black Muslim m embership was said to increas e where ver Malcol m X 
lectured, and I knew  his prid e that Negro pris oners i n mo st pris ons were discovering  the Muslim 
religion as he had when h e was a convict. I k new he professed to eat only what a  Black Muslim 
(preferably his wif e Betty) had cooked and he drank i nnumera ble c ups o f coffee which he 
lightened with crea m, commenting w ryly, "Coffee is t he only thing I like integrat ed." Over  our 
luncheon table, I told the edi tor and my agent how Malcolm X co uld u nsettle n on-Muslims-as , for 
instance , once whe n he offered to drive m e to a subway, I bega n to light a cigaret te and he drily 
[sic] o bserved, "That would m ake you t he first person ever t o smoke in this au tomobile."
 
*     *     *
 
Malcolm X gave  me a startle d look when I asked hi m if he would tell his life story for publica tion. It 
was one of the few tim es I have ever se en him uncertain . "I will have to give a book a lot of 
thought ," he finally said. Two days lat er, he telephoned me to meet him agai n at the Black Muslim 
resta urant. He said, "I'll agree . I think my li fe story  may help people to apprecia te better how M r. 
Muhammad salva ges black p eople. But I don't want my m otives f or this m isinter prete d by 
anybo dy-the Natio n of Islam must get every  penny th at might co me to me." Of course , Mr. 
Muhammad's agree ment would b e necessary , and I would have t o ask M r. Muhammad mysel f.
 
So I flew again t o see Mr . Muh ammad, but this ti me to Phoenix, Arizona , where th e Na tion o f 
Islam ha d bought him the house in the hot, dry clima te that relieved his severe bro nchial 
conditio n. He a nd I talked alone this ti me. He t old m e how his organization had come far with 
largely uneducated Muslims and that truly giant strides f or the black m an could be  made if his 
organization were ai ded by some of the talents which  were availa ble in t he black race. He sai d, 
"And one of our wo rst needs is wr iters"-b ut he did not press m e to answe r. He suddenly beg an 
coughing, and rapidly grew worse an d worse u ntil I r ose f rom my s eat and went t o him, alarmed, 
but he wa ved me away , gasping  that he would b e all right. Between gasps , he told me he felt that 
"Allah approves" the book. He s aid, "M alcolm is one of my mo st outstanding mi nisters." After arranging  for his chauffeur to return me  to the Phoenix airport, Mr. Muh ammad quickl y bade me 
good-bye a nd rushed from the room co ughing.
 
Back East, Malcol m X carefully read and then signed the publicatio n contrac t, and he withdrew 
from his wallet a piece of paper filled with his spr awling lo nghan d. "This is t his book's d edication ," 
he said . I read: "This book I dedicat e to The Honorable Elijah Mu hammad, who found me here in 
America in the mu ck and mire o f the filthiest civilization a nd socie ty on this earth, and pulle d me 
out, cle aned m e up, and stood m e on my feet, and made me the m an that I am today."
 
The contract pr ovided that all mo nies accruing t o Malcol m X "shall be madepayable by t he ag ent 
to 'Muha mmad's Mosque No . 2,'" but Malcolm X f elt this was ins ufficient. He d ictated to me a 
letter to type for his signat ure, which I d id: "Any and all monies repres enting my co ntract ed share 
of the financial re turns s hould b e made payable by t he lit erary agent to Muhammad's Mosque No . 
2. These paym ents should b e mailed to the following address: Mr . Raymond Sharrief f, 4847 
Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago 15, Illinois. "
 
Another let ter was  dictated, this one an agree ment betwee n him an d me: "Nothing ca n be in this 
book's m anuscript t hat I didn't say, and nothing ca n be left out that I want in it."
 
In turn, I asked Malcolm X to sign f or me a personal pl edge t hat however  busy he was, h e would 
give me a priorit y quota of his ti me for the planned 100,000-word "a s told to" book which would 
detail his e ntire life. And months later, in a  time o f strain be tween us, I asked for-and he gave-his 
permission t hat at the end of the book I could wr ite comments o f my own a bout him which would 
not be subject to his rev iew.
 
Malcolm X promptly did begin t o pay me two-an d three-h our vis its, parking his b lue Oldsmobile 
outside the wo rking stu dio I then had in Gr eenwich V illage. He always  arrived aro und nine or ten 
at night c arrying his flat tan leather brie fcase which al ong w ith his sch olarly look gave hi m a 
resembla nce t o a hard-w orking  lawyer. Inevitably, he was tired after his l ong busy  day, and 
sometimes h e was cle arly exhausted.
 
We got o ff to a very poor s tart. To use a word he like d, I think bo th of us were a bit "spooky." 
Sitting right th ere a nd staring at  me was the fiery Malc olm X  who could be  as acid toward 
Negroes who a ngered h im as he was against whites in gen eral. O n television , in pr ess 
conferences, and at Muslim r allies, I had heard hi m bitterly  attack other Negro w riters as "Uncle 
Toms," "yard Negroes, " "black m en in white cl othes." And there I sat s taring  at him, proposing to 
spend a year pl umbing his inn ermost secr ets when h e had developed a near ph obia for secrecy 
during his years o f crim e and his years  in the Muslim hierarchy . My twenty  years  in military 
service a nd my Christian religious p ersuasi on di dn't help, either; he often jeere d publicly  at these 
affiliations f or Negroes. And although h e now would in directl y urge m e to write for national 
magazines a bout the Muslims, he had told m e several ti mes, in various way s, that "you b lacks 
with pr ofessional a bilities o f any kind will one of these days  wake  up and find out that you m ust 
unite under the leadership o f The Hon orable Elijah Mu hammad for your own salvation ." Malc olm 
X was also convince d that the F.B.I. had "bugged" my studio; he probably sus pected that it m ay 
even h ave be en done with my c ooperatio n. For the first several weeks, h e never entered the 
room where we  worked without exclai ming,  "Testing, te sting- one, two, three. . . ."
 
Tense inci dents occ urred. O ne night a  white friend was  in the studio when Malc olm X  arrived a 
little e arlier  than anticip ated, and they passe d each other in t he corridor . Malcolm X's ma nner 
during all o f that sessio n suggeste d that his wo rst doubts had been confirmed. Another ti me whe n 
Malcolm X sat haranguing me  about the glories o f the Muslim organization , he was gesturing  with 
his p assp ort in h is ha nd; he saw that I was trying to rea d its p erforated number and suddenly he 
thrus t the passport t oward m e, his n eck f lushed re ddish : "Get the number straight , but it won't be 
anything t he white d evil doesn't alre ady know. He issue d me  the passport."
 
For per haps a month I was a fraid we we ren't going  to get any b ook. Malcolm X was still stiffly addressing me  as "Sir! " and my n otebook c ontained almost nothing b ut Black Muslim philos ophy, 
praise of Mr. Muh ammad, and the "evils" o f "the white d evil." He would bristle when I tried t o urge 
him that the propose d book was _his_ li fe. I was thinking th at I might have t o advise t he publisher 
that I simply couldn't s eem to get t hrough to my s ubjec t when t he first note of hope occurred . I 
had notice d that while Malcol m X was talking,  heoften si multaneously  scrib bled with his re d-ink 
ball-poi nt pen on any ha ndy pa per. Sometimes it was th e margin o f a newspap er he brought in, 
sometimes it was on index cards t hat he carried in the back of a small, re d-backed appointment 
book. I began le aving t wo white paper n apkins by  him every time I served h im m ore coffee, and 
the rus e wo rked when h e sometimes scribble d on the napkins, which I retrie ved when h e left. 
Some exam ples ar e these:
 
"Here lies a YM, killed by a BM , fighting f or the WM, who killed all t he RM. " (Deco ding that wasn't 
difficult, knowing Malcolm X. "YM" was f or yello w ma n, "BM " for black m an, "WM" for white man, 
and "RM " was  for red ma n.)
 
"Nothing ever  happened withou t cause. Caus e BM c onditi on W M won't f ace. WM obsess ed with 
hiding his guilt."
 
"If Christianity  had asserte d itsel f in Germa ny, six million Jews would h ave li ved."
 
"WM so quick t o tell BM 'L ook what I have done for you!' No ! Look what you have d one _to_ us!"
 
"BM d ealing with W M who p ut our eyes out, now he condemns us because we ca nnot see."
 
"Only pers ons r eally changed h istory  those who ch anged men's thinking ab out themselves. Hitler 
as well  as Jesus, S talin as well  as Buddha . . . Hon. Elija h Muh ammad. . . ."
 
It was t hrough a  clue from one of the scribblings  that finally I cast a  bait that Malcolm X to ok. 
"Woman who cries all t he time is only because she knows sh e can get away  with it, " he had 
scribble d. I somehow raise d the subject ofwom en. Suddenly, between sips of coffee and further 
scribbling  and doodling,  he vente d his criticisms a nd skepticisms o f wome n. "You never can fully 
trust any woman," he said. "I've got t he only one I ever m et whom I  would trus t seventy- five per 
cent. I've t old h er that," he said. "I've tol d her like I t ell you I've se en too many men destroyed by 
their wives, or t heir wom en.
 
"I don't _comple tely_  trust a nyone ," he went on, "not even mysel f. I have se en too ma ny men 
destroy themselves. Ot her p eople I trust from not at all t o highly , like The Hon orable Elijah 
Muhammad." Malcolm X lo oked squarel y at me. "You I trust about twenty -five per c ent."
 
Trying to  keep Malc olm X  talking, I mined the woma n theme for all it was  worth. Triumphantly, he 
exclaime d, "D o you k now wh y Benedict Arnold turned traitor-a wom an!" He s aid, " Whatever else 
a wom an is, I don't care who the woma n is, it s tarts with her being vain. I 'll prove it, so mething 
you ca n do anytim e you want, and I know  what I'm talking a bout, I've done it. You think o f the 
hardest-lo oking,  meanest-acti ng wom an you k now, one of those wom en who n ever smiles. Well, 
every day you see that wom an you l ook h er right in the eyes and tell her 'I think you're be autiful,' 
and you watch what happens. The first day sh e may c urse you o ut, the sec ond day , too-but you 
watch, you k eep on, after a while one day she's going to start smiling  just a s soon as you co me in 
sight."
 
When Malcolm X left that night, I  retrieved n apkin scribblings th at further documented how he 
could be  talking  about one thing and thinking  of something else:
 
"Negroes have t oo m uch righteo usness. W M says,  'I want t his pi ece o f land, how do I get those 
couple o f thousand BM on it off?'"
 
"I have wif e who un derst ands, or even i f she doesn't she at least pretends." "BM s truggle n ever gets open support f rom abroad it needs unless BM f irst forms own united 
front."
 
"Sit down, t alk with  people with br ains I  resp ect, a ll of us want s ame thing, do  some 
brains torming. "
 
"Would be shocking  to reveal names of the BM le aders who have s ecretl y me t with THEM." ( The 
capitalized letters stood for The Honorable Elijah Mu hammad.)
 
Then one night, Malc olm X  arrived n early  out on his feet from fatigue. For two h ours, he paced 
the floor deliverin g a tirad e agains t Negro lea ders who were at tacking Elijah Muhammad and 
hims elf. I don't know  what gave m e the ins piration t o say once when he paused for breath, "I 
wonder i f you' d tell m e something about your mother?"
 
Abruptly  he quit p acing, a nd the look he  shot at me made me sense t hat somehow the chance 
questio n had hit hi m. W hen I look ba ck at it now, I believe I m ust have caught him so physically 
weak  that his defenses were vulnera ble.
 
Slow ly, Malcolm X began t o talk, n ow walkin g in a tight circle. "She was alwa ys standing over t he 
stove, tryin g to stre tch what ever we  had to eat. We stayed so hungry  that we were  dizzy. I 
remember the color o f dress es sh e used to wear-th ey were a kin d of faded-out gray. . . ." And he 
kept on talking  until d awn, so tired t hat the big f eet would often almost s tumble in their pacing. 
From this str eam-o f-consci ousn ess re miniscing  I finally got ou t of him the foundation for this 
book's b eginning ch apters, "Nightm are" and "Masco t." After that night, he never again hesit ated 
to tell m e eve n the most intim ate details o f his p ersonal life, over  the next two years. His t alking 
about his m other trig gered something. 
Malcolm X's mo od ranged from somber to  grim as he rec alled h is child hood. I remember his 
making a great point of how he learned what h ad been a cardinal aware ness o f his ever since: 
"It's th e hinge th at squ eaks t hat gets t he grease." When his narrati on re ached his moving  to 
Boston to live with his ha lf-sist er Ella, Malcolm X beg an to laugh ab out how "squ are" he had been 
in the gh etto stre ets. " Why, I'm telling you thi ngs I have n't thought ab out sinc e then!" he would 
exclaim. Then it was  during  recalling  the early  Harlem days that Malcolm X really got carried 
away. One night, s uddenly, wildly, he jumped up from his chair and, incre dibly, the fearsom e black 
demagogu e was  scat-singin g and popping his fingers, "r e-bop-de-bop-bla p-blam-"  and then 
grabbing a vertical pi pe with on e hand (as the girl par tner) h e went j ubilan tly lindy-hopping 
around, his c oattail an d the long legs an d the big feet flying as they had in those Harlem d ays. 
And then almost as suddenly, Malcol m X caught h imself and sat back d own, a nd for the rest o f 
that session he was decidedly grum py. Later on  in the Harlem narrative, h e gre w somber again. 
"The only thing I consider ed wrong  was what I got ca ught d oing w rong. I had a jungle m ind, I was 
living in a jungle, and everything  I did was  done by insti nct to surv ive." B ut he stresse d that he 
had no regrets a bout his crimes , "because it was  all a res ult of what h appens to thousands up on 
thousands of black m en in the wh ite ma n's C hristian wor ld."
 
His enjoyme nt res umed when the narrative  entered his pris on days. "Let me tell you h ow I'd get 
those white d evil convicts a nd the guards , too, to do anything I want ed. I'd whisper t o them, 'If you 
don't, I'll start a  rumor t hat you're  really  a light N egro just p assing  as white.' That shows  you what 
the white d evil thinks ab out the black m an. He'd rather die than be thought a  Negro!" He told m e 
about the reading he  had been able to do in priso n: "I didn't know what I was d oing, bu t just by 
instinc t I like d the books with in tellect ual vitamins ." And another time: "In the hectic pa ce of the 
world today, there is no  time for meditation, or f or deep thought . A prison er has time that he can 
put to goo duse . I'd put priso n sec ond to college a s the best place for a man to go if he needs to 
do some thinking. I f he's _ motivated_, in p rison h e can change his li fe."
 
Yet another ti me, Malcolm X reflected, "Once a man has been to pris on, h e never looks at hims elf 
or at other p eople the same ag ain. The 'squares' out here whose boat has been in smooth waters 
all th e time turn u p their noses at an ex-con. But an ex-con can keep his h ead up when t he 'squares' sink ."
 
He scribbl ed that night (I k ept both my notebooks a nd the paper na pkins d ated): "This W M 
creat ed and dropped A-bo mb on non-whites; W M now calls 'Re d' and lives  in fear of other W M he 
knows may bo mb us."
 
Also: "Learn wisdom from the pupil of the eye th at looks u pon all t hings an d yet t o self is blin d. 
Persia n poet."
 
At intervals, Malcolm X would m ake a great point of stressing  to me, "Now, I don't want a nything 
in this bo ok to make it s ound that I think I' m somebody important." I would ass ure hi m that I would 
try not to, and that in any even t he would b e checking th e manuscript p age by pag e, and 
ultim ately the galle y pro ofs. At other ti mes, he would e nd an attack u pon the white m an and, 
watching  me take the notes, exclai m. "That devil's  not going  to print that, I don't car e what h e 
says!" I would point out that the publishers ha d made a binding co ntract and had paid a sizable 
sum in a dvanc e. Malcol m X would say, "You trust them, and I don't. You st udied what h e want ed 
you to learn about him  in sc hools, I studied him in the stre ets a nd in priso n, where you s ee the 
truth."
 
Experienc es which  Malcolm X had had during  a day could f lavor his interv iew mood. The most 
wistful, tender a necdotes ge nerally  were told on days when s ome incid ent had touched him. 
Once, for inst ance, he told m e that he had learn ed that a Harlem c ouple, n ot Black M uslims, h ad 
named their newb ornson "Malcol m" after him . "What do you know about _that_?" he kept 
exclaiming. And that was th e nigh t he went b ack t o his own boyho od ag ain an d this time rec alled 
how he used to lie o n his ba ck on  Hect or's Hill and think. That night, too: "I'll never f orget the day 
they elected me  the class presi dent. A girl named Audrey Slaugh, whos e father own ed a car 
repair shop, nominated m e. And a boy named James Cotton seconded the nomination . The 
teacher aske d me to leave the roo m while  the class vot ed. When I returne d I was the class 
presid ent. I couldn't believe it. "
 
Any interesting  book which Malcol m X had read could get him going about his love  of books. 
"People d on't realize  how a man's whole lif e can be changed by _o ne_ book." He ca me back 
again a nd again to the books t hat he had studied whe n in priso n. "Did you ever rea d _The Loom 
of Language_ ?" he aske d me and I said I hadn't. "You should. Phil ology, it's a  tough scie nce-all 
about how wo rds can be recognized, n o matter where you f ind them. N ow, you take 'Caes ar,' it's 
Latin, in Latin it's pronounced like 'K aiser,' with a hard C. B ut we anglici ze it by pro nouncing a soft 
C. The Russia ns say  'Czar'  and mean the same thing. Another R ussian d ialect says 'Tsar.' Jakob 
Grimm  was one of the foremost p hilologists, I studied his 'Grim m's Law' in pris on-all ab out 
conson ants. Phil ology is relate d to the scie nce of etymology , dealing  in roo t words. I dabbled in 
both of them."
 
When I turn that pag e in my n otebook, the next b ears a  note that Malc olm X  had telephoned me 
saying "I 'm going t o be out of town for a few days." I ass umed that as had frequently been the 
case before, he had speaking  engage ments or o ther Muslim b usiness to attend somewhere and I 
was glad for the respite in which to get my no tes separated under the chapter headings  they 
would fi t. But when Malc olm X  return ed this ti me, he reported trium phantly, "I have something to 
tell you t hat will surprise you. Ever since we discusse d my mo ther, I've been thinking a bout her. I 
realized th at I had blocke d her ou t of my mi nd-it was  just u npleasa nt to think a bout her h aving 
been twenty-som eyears in that mental ho spital. " He said, "I don't want to take the cre dit. It was 
really  my sister Yvonne who thought it might b e possi ble to  get h er ou t. Yvonn e got my br others 
Wilfred, Wesley and Philbert t ogeth er, and I went out there, too. It was  Philb ert who really 
handled it.
 
"It made me face something about myself ," Malcolm X said. "My  mind had closed about our 
mother. I simply didn't feel the probl em c ould be solved, s o I had shut it out. I had built u p 
subconsci ous d efenses. The white ma n does this. He s huts out of his m ind, and he builds up subconsci ous d efenses against anything h e doesn't want t o face up to. I've just become aware 
how close d my mi nd was now th at I've opened it u p again.
 
That's on e of the characteristics I d on't like a bout mysel f. If I meet a problem I feel I can't solve, I 
shut it o ut. I make believe that it d oesn't exist. But it exists."
 
It was my tur n to be deeply touche d. Not long afterward, h e was again away for a few days. 
When he returned this time, he said th at at his bro ther P hilbert's home, "we ha d dinner with our 
mother for the first time in a ll those years! " He s aid, " She's sixt y-six, and her memory  is better 
than m ine and she looks you ng and healthy. She has mor e of her teeth than those who were 
instru mental in sending her to the instit ution ."
 
*     *     *
 
When something ha d angered Malcolm X during  the day, his face would b e flushed re dder when 
he visited me, and he gener ally would s pend m uch of the session lashing ou t bitterly . When some 
Muslims were sh ot by Lo s Angeles p olicemen, one of them being killed, Malcolm X, u pon his 
return from a trip he  made there, was  fairly apoplectic for a week. I t had been in this m ood that he 
had made, in Lo s Angeles , the statement which c ause d him to be heavily censure d by me mbers 
of both rac es. "I've just h eard some good news!"-re ferringto a  plane crash a t Orly  Field in Paris in 
which thirty-odd white Americ ans, mostly from Atlanta, Georgia, had been killed i nstantly. 
(Malcolm X  never pu blicly recanted this statement, to my kn owledge, but much later h e said to 
me simply, "That's one of the things I wish I had never said.")
 
Anytime the name of the pr esent Federal J udge Thurgood Marshall was  raised, Malcolm X still 
practic ally spat fire in m emory  of what the judge had sai d years  before whe n he was the 
N.A.A.C.P . chief attorney: "The Muslims are run by a  bunch of thugs orga nized from prisons and 
jails and financed, I am sure, by s ome Arab grou p." The only time that I have ever h eard Malcolm 
X use what might b e constru ed as a curse word, it was  a "hell" used in respo nse to a statement 
that Dr . Martin L uther King m ade that Malcolm X's talk brought " misery  upon Negroes. " Malcol m 
X explo ded to me, "How in the hell c an my talk d o this? I t's alwa ys a Negro res ponsible, n ot what 
the white m an does!" The "extre mist" o r "demagogue " acc usati on invariably  would b urn Malcolm 
X. "Yes, I' m an extre mist. The black rac e her e in N orth America is in extre mely  bad conditio n. You 
show me a black m an who isn't an extremist and I'll sh ow you o ne who needs p sychia tric 
attention!"
 
Once when h e said, "Arist otle s hocke d people. C harles Darw in outrage d people. Aldous H uxley 
scandalized millions !" Malc olm X  immediately  followed the statement with "D on't p rint that, people 
would thi nk I'm trying to link myself  with them." Another tim e, whe n something provoke d him to 
exclaim, " These Uncl e Toms ma ke me think ab out how the Pr ophet Jesus was critici zed i n his 
own country!" Malcolm X promptly got u p and silently  took my notebook, tore out that page and 
crum pled it and put it into his p ocket, and he was consi derably subdued during  the remain der o f 
that session .
 
I remember one time we talk ed and he showed me  a newspa per clippi ng reporting where a Negro 
baby had been bitten by a rat. Malcolm X said , "Now, just re ad that, jus t think of that a minute! 
Suppose it was _your _ child! Where's that sluml ord-on some beach in Mia mi!" H e continued 
fuming thr ougho ut our int erview. I did not go with hi m when la ter that day he address ed a Negro 
audience in Harlem a nd an incid ent occurred which  Helen Dudar reported in the _N ew York 
Post_.
 
"Malcol m sp eaking in Harlem s tared down a t one of the wh ite rep orters pr esen t, the only whites 
admitted to the meeting, and went o n, 'Now, there's a report er who hasn't t aken a note in ha lf an 
hour, but as soon as I start talking  about the Jews,  he's busy taki ng notes to prove t hat I'm anti-
Semitic.'
 "Behind the report er, a male voice spoke up, 'Kill the bastard, kill th em all.' The young ma n, in his 
unease, smiled n ervousl y and Malc olm je ered, 'Look a t him laugh. He's re ally not laughing, he's 
just laughing  with his teeth.' An ugly  tensio n curle d the edges o f the atmosphere . Then Malcol m 
went on : 'The white m an doesn't kn ow how to  laugh . He jus t shows his t eeth. But _we_ k now how 
to laugh. We laugh d eep down, fr om the bottom up.' The audience laughe d, deep down, fr om the 
bottom up and, as suddenly as Malcolm h ad stirred it , so, skillfully and swiftly, he deflected it. It 
had been at once a masterful and shabby  performance."
 
I later he ard somewhere, or read, that Malcolm X tel ephoned an apology to the rep orter. But this 
was the kind o f evide nce which c aused m any close observers o f the Malc olm X  phenomenon to 
declare in a bsolute serious ness that he was th e only
 
Negro in America who co uld ei ther s tart a  race riot-or stop one. When I once quot ed this t o him, 
tacitly  inviting  his comment, he told m e tartly, "I don't know if I could s tart o ne. I don't know if I'd 
want to  stop one." It was th e kin d of statement he relish ed m aking.
 
*     *     * 
Over  the months, I had grad ually come to establish so mething o f a telephone acquai ntance with 
Malcolm X's wife, whom I  address ed as "Sister B etty," as I  had heard the Musli ms do . I admired 
how she ran a home, with, then, three sm all daughters, a nd still manage d to take all o f the calls 
which came for Malcolm X, surely as m any c alls as would pr ovide a job for an average 
switchb oard operator. Sometimes when he was with me , he would telephone home and spend as 
much as five mi nutes rapi dly jotting o n a pad the various messages which ha d been left for him .
 
Sister B etty, generally  friendly enough on the phone with m e, sometimes would exclaim in 
spontaneous indignati on, "The man never gets a ny _sleep_!" Malcol m X rarely put in less than an 
18-hour workday . Often when h e had left my studio a t four A.M. a nd a 40-mi nute drive  lay 
between hi m and home in East E lmhurst, L ong I sland, he had aske d me to telephone him there 
at nine A.M. Usu ally this would b e whe n he wante d me  to accom pany him so mewhere , and he 
was going to  tell m e, after rev iewin g his commitments, when and where h e want ed m e to meet 
him. (There were times when I didn't get a n aw ful lot of sleep, mysel f.) He was  always 
accompanied, e ither by some of his Muslim colleagu es like J ames 67X (th e 67th ma n named 
"James" who h ad joined Harle m's Mosque Num ber 7), or Ch arles  37X, or by me, but he never 
asked m e to be with hi m when t hey we re. I went with hi m to college a nd universit y lect ures, t o 
radio and television stations f or his br oadcasts , and to public a ppearances in a variety of 
situations and loc ations.
 
If we were  driving somewhere, m otorists alo ng the high way would wave to Malcolm X, t he faces 
of both whites a nd Negroes s pontaneously aglo w with the wonder ment that I had seen evoke d by 
other " celebrities." N o few airline h ostesses h ad come to know him, because he flew so m uch; 
they smiled pr ettily at him, he was in t urn the esse nce o f courtly  gentlemanlin ess, a nd inevitably 
the word  spread and soon an unusual f low o f bathroom traffic would develo p,passing  where he 
sat. Whenever we arrived at  our destinati on, it became familiar t o hear " There's Malcolm X!" 
"_Where_?" "The tall one." Passers- by of both races stare d at him. A few of both rac es, m ore 
Negroes than wh ites, would s peak or nod to him in greeting. A high perc entage o f white pe ople 
were vis ibly uncomfortable in h is pres ence, especi ally within t he confines o f small are as, s uch a s 
in elevators. " I'm the only  black man they've ever be en close to who t hey kn ow speaks t he _truth_ 
to them," Malc olm X  once explain ed to me. "It's their guilt  that upsets them, not me." He sai d 
another tim e, "The white ma n is afraid of truth. The truth takes the white ma n's breath and drains 
his stre ngth-you  just watch his face get red a nytime you tell hi m a little tru th."
 
There was  something about this m an when h e was in a  room with pe ople. He commanded the 
room, whoever else was present. Eve n out of doors; once I remember in H arlem he sat on a 
speaker's st and between C ongressm an Adam Clayton Powell an d the former Man hattan Bor ough 
Presid ent Hulan Jack, and when t he street rally  was over t he crowd focus was chiefly on Malcol m 
X. I remember a nother time that we h ad gone by railwa y from New York City to Philad elphi a where he  appeared in the Philadelphia Co nvention Hall on the radi o sta tion WCAU program of Ed 
Harvey. "You are the man who has said 'All Negroes are angry  and I am the angriest o f all'; is t hat 
correct ?" asked Har vey, on the air, introducing  Malcolm X, a nd as Malcol m X said crisply , "That 
quote is correct! " the gathering crowd  of bystanders star ed at him, riveted .
 
We had ridden to Phila delphia in reserved parl or car se ats. " I can't get ca ught o n a coach, I could 
get int o trouble on a coach," Malcolm X had said. Walking t o board the parl or car, we had pass ed 
a dining car t oward which h e jerk ed his head, "I used to work  on that thing." Riding t o our 
destina tion, he conversati onally  told m e that the F.B.I. had tried t o brib e him for information about 
Elijah Mu hammad; that he want ed me to be sure and read a new bo ok, _Cris is in Black a nd 
White_ by Charles Silb erman-"o ne of the ver y few white wr iters I know  with the courage t o tell his 
kind the trut h"; and he asked me  to make anote to please telephone the _N ew York Post's_ 
feature writer Helen Dudar and tell her h e thought ver y highl y of her rec ent series-he did not want 
to commend her d irectly .
 
After the Ed Harve y Show was  conclud ed, we t ook t he train t o return t o New York City. The parlor 
car, packed with businessm en behind their n ewspapers, co mmuting ho meward a fter their 
workdays, was  electric with  Malcolm X's pres ence. After the white-jacket ed Negro porter had 
made several trips u p and down t he aisle, h e was in t he middle o f another trip when Malcol m X 
_sotto-voced _ in my ear, "He used to work  with m e, I forget his n ame, we worked right on  this 
very train toge ther. He knows  it's me. He's trying to make up his m ind what t o do." The porter 
went on  past u s, poker-faced. But when he came through again, M alcolm X su ddenly lea ned 
forward  from his s eat, smiling at the porter. "Why, sure, I  know who you are !" the porter su ddenly 
said, loudly. "You wash ed dis hes right o n this trai n! I was just telling  some o f the fellows  you were 
in my car h ere. We all follow you!"
 
The tension on the car c ould have b een cut with a knife. Then, soon, the porter re turned to 
Malcolm X, his voice expansive. " One of our guests would like to meet you." N ow a you ng, clean-
cut white man ros e and came up, his ha nd exte nded, and Malcolm X rose and shook th e 
proffered hand firmly. Newspa pers dr opped just b elow eye-level  the length of the car. The young 
white man expl ained distinc tly, loudly, that he had been in t he Orien t for a while, and now was 
studying at Colum bia. "I don't agre e with everything  you say," he told Malcolm X, " but I have t o 
admire your pres entation."
 
Malcolm's voice i n reply  was cordi ality itself. "I don't think you c ould search America , sir, and find 
two men who agre e on ever ything." Subsequ ently, to another white m an, an older bu siness man, 
who came u p and shook h ands, he said evenly , "Sir, I know how you f eel. It's a  hard thing to 
speak o ut against m ewhe n you are agreeing w ith so much that I say." And we rode on into New 
York under, now , a gen eral op en gazing.
 
In Washingto n, D.C., Malcolm X slash ed at the government's reluc tance to take positive  steps in 
the Negro's be half. I gather t hat even the White Hous e took notice , for not long a fterward I le ft off 
interviewing Malcol m X for a few days  and went t o the White House to do a _Playboy_ int erview 
of the then White House Press S ecret ary Pierre S alinge r, who grimac ed spontaneously when I 
said I was  writing the life story  of Malc olm X. Another time I le ft Malcol m X to interv iew the U.S.
 
Nazi Par ty Com mander George Lincoln Rockwel l, who f rankly stated that he admired the courage 
of Malcolm X, a nd he felt that the two o f them should sp eak t ogether across the Unit ed States, 
and they could thus begin a r eal sol ution to the race problem-on e of volun tary separation o f the 
white and black rac es, wi th Negroes ret urning  to Africa. I report ed this to Malcol m X, who snort ed, 
"He must think I' m nuts! What am _I_ going to  look like going  speaking  with a _devil_!" Yet 
another tim e, I went o ff to Atlanta and interviewed f or _Playboy_ D r. Marti n Luther King. He was 
privately intrigued t o hear little- known thi ngs about Malcolm X th at I told him; for publicatio n, he 
discuss ed him with reserve, a nd he did say that he would so metime like to  have a n opportunity to 
talk with hi m. He aring  this, Malcol m X said drily , "You think I o ught to send him a telegram with my 
telephone number?" (Bu t from other things th at Malcolm X said to me at various tim es, I deduced that he actually had a reluct ant admiratio n for Dr. King.)
 
Malcolm X and I reache d the point, ultimately, where we shared a mutual camara derie t hat, 
although it was never verbally express ed, was a warm on e. He was  for me unques tionably one of 
the most engaging  personalities I  had ever m et, and for his p art, I gathered, I was someone he 
had learned he could express hims elf to, with ca ndor, withou t the likeliho od of hearing it re peated, 
and like any person who li ved a mid tension, he enjoyed b eing aro und someone, another m an, 
with who m he  could p sychically  relax. W hen I made trips now , he always  aske d me to telephone 
him when I would be returning  to New York, and gen erally, if he could sque eze it i nto his 
schedule, he met me at the airp ort. I would se e him co ming alo ng with his l ong, ganglin g strid es, 
and wearing  the wide, toothy, good-na tured grin, and as he drove m e into New York City he would 
bring  me up to date on things of interest that had happened sinc e I left. I remember one incid ent 
within t he airport that showed m e how Malc olm X  never lost his racial p erspective. Waiting for my 
baggage, we  witness ed a touching family reuni on sc ene as p art of which s everal c herubic littl e 
childre n rom ped and played, exclaimi ng in another la nguage. " By tomorrow night, they'll know 
how to say their f irst E nglish word-_nigger_," observed Malcolm X.
 
When Malcolm X made long trips, s uch a s to San Fra ncisco or L os Angeles, I did not go al ong, 
but frequently, usually very late a t night, he would t elephone me, and ask h ow the book was 
coming  along, and he might set up the time for our next in terview upon his re turn. One call t hat I 
never w ill forget ca me at close t o four A.M., wak ing m e; he must have just got ten up in Los 
Angeles . His voice said, "Alex Haley?" I said, sle epily, "Yes? Oh, _hey_, Malcol m!" His voice s aid, 
"I trust you seventy  per cent"-and then he hung up. I lay a short time thinking  about him and I 
went ba ck to sle ep feeling wa rmed by that call, a s I still am warme d to remember it . Neith er of us 
ever mentioned it.
 
Malcolm X's gro wing res pect for individual whites seemed to be res erved f or those who i gnored 
on a personal b asis t he things he  said about whites an d who j ousted with hi m as a _man_. He, 
moreove r, was co nvince d that he could tell a lot about any p erson by listening. " There's a n art to 
listening wel l," he told m e. "I listen cl osely  to the sound of a man's voice when he's speaking. I 
can hear sinc erity." The newspap er pers on who m he  ultimately came to admire pro bably more 
than any other was  the _New  York Times_' M. S . Handler . (I was  veryhappy  when I learn ed that 
Handler ha d agre ed to write this b ook's Introduc tion; I know that Malcolm X would h ave liked 
that.) The first ti me I ever he ard Malc olm X  speak o f Handler , whom he had rec ently  met, he 
bega n, "I was talking with  this d evil-" and abruptly  he cut himsel f off in obvious em barrass ment. 
"It's a report er named Ha ndler , from the _Times_-" he res umed. Malcolm X's resp ect for the man 
steadily incre ased , and Handler, for his p art, was an influence u pon the inner Malcolm X. "H e's 
the most genuin ely unpreju diced white man I ever met," Malcolm X said to  me, speaking  of 
Handler mo nths la ter. "I have a sked him things and tested him. I have liste ned to him talk, 
closely ."
 
I saw Malcolm X too m any ti mes exhilara ted in after-lect ure gi ve-and-take with pr edominantly 
white student bodies at colleges a nd universities to ever believe t hat he nurtured at his core any 
blanket white-h atred. "The young  whites , and blacks, t oo, are the only hope that America h as," he 
said to me once. "The rest of us have always  been living in a  lie."
 
Several Negroes c ome to mind now who I  know, in one way or another, had vastl y impressed 
Malcolm X. (Some others c ome to mind who m I k now he has vastly abhorred, but these I wi ll not 
mention.) P articularly  high in h is esteem, I know, was the great photograph er, usually associa ted 
with _Life_ magaz ine, Gordon Parks . It was Malcol m X's  direct in fluence with Elijah Muha mmad 
which go t Parks p ermitted to enter and photograph for publicatio n in _ Life_ the highl y secret self-
defense training  program o f the Black M uslim Fruit o f Islam, making Parks, a s far as I know, the 
only non-Muslim who ever  has witnessed this, except f or policem en and other ag ency 
repres entatives  who had feigned "joining" the Black Muslims t o infiltrat e them. "His success 
among t he white man never has made him lose t ouch with black reality ," Malc olm X  said o f Parks 
once. 
Another pers on toward whom Malc olm X  felt similarl y was the actor OssieDav is. Once in the 
middle o f one of our interv iews,  when we  had been talki ng about something else, Malc olm X 
suddenly ask ed m e, "Do you kn ow Ossie D avis?" I said I d idn't. He said, "I ough t to introduce you 
sometime, that's o ne of the finest black m en." In Malc olm X's  long de alings  with the staff of the 
Harlem weekly  newspap er _Amsterdam News_, he  had come to admire Executive  Editor Ja mes 
Hicks  and the star feature writer Ja mes Booker. He s aid that Hicks  had "an open mind, and he 
never pa nics f or the white m an." He th ough t that Booker was  an outstanding rep orter; h e also 
was highly  impress ed with Mrs.  Booker when he met her.
 
It was h e who in troduc ed me to two of my f riends t oday, Dr. C. Eric Lincoln who was  at the time 
writing the book _The Black Muslims in Americ a_, and Louis L omax who was then writing  various 
articles a bout the Muslims. Malc olm X  deeply respected the care and depth which Dr . Lincoln was 
putting int o his res earch . Lomax, h e admired f or his f erreting ear and eye f or hot news. " If I see 
that rasc al Lo max ru nning so mewhere, I'll grab my hat and get behind him," Malcolm X said once, 
"because I know he's o nto something." Author James B aldwin Malcolm X als o admired . "He's so 
brilliant he confuses t he white man with wo rds on paper." And another time, "H e's u pset the white 
man more than anybo dy except The Honorable E lijah Mu hammad."
 
Malcolm X had very little go od to say of Negro  minist ers, ver y possibly  because mo st of them had 
attacke d the Black Muslims . Excepti ng reluctant admira tion o f Dr. Martin L uther
 
King, I heard hi m speak well of only one other, The Reveren d Euge ne L. Callend er of Harlem's 
large Presbyterian Church of the Mast er. "He's a preacher , but he's a  fighter for the black m an," 
said Malcolm X. I later l earne d that somewhere t he direct, forthright Reveren d Calle nder h ad 
privately cornered Malc olm X  and had read him the riot act a bout his gen eral at tacks u pon the 
Negro clergy. Malcolm X also admired The Reverend Adam Clayton P owell, i n hisCo ngress man 
political r ole: " I'd think about retiring  if the black ma n had ten like h im in Washingto n." He h ad 
similar f eelings about the N.A .A.C.P . lawyer, now a New York State Assemblyman, Percy  Sutton, 
and later Su tton was ret ained as his pers onal attorney. Among N egro e ducators, o f whom 
Malcolm X met many in his college a nd universit y lect uring,  I never h eard him sp eak well  of any 
but one, Dr. Kenneth B. Clark. " There's a black m an with br ains gon e to bed," Malc olm X  told me 
once, b riefly lapsing  into h is old vernacular . He h ad very distinct res ervatio ns about Negro 
profession al int elligentsi a as a category . They were the source from which most of the Bl ack 
Muslims' a ttack ers came. It was f or this re ason that some of his m ost bristling  counter-at tacks 
against "these so-calle d educated Uncle Thomases, P h.D." were flung ou t at his audienc es at 
Negro institu tions of higher learni ng.
 
Where I witnesse d the Malcol m X who was happiest a nd most at ease am ong m embers of our 
own race was when s ometimes I chanced to accompany him  on what h e like d to call "my little 
daily rounds" ar ound the stree ts of Harlem , among t he Negroes t hat he said the "so-called black 
leaders" spok e of "as black ma sses statistics." O n these tours, Malcol m X generally  avoid ed the 
arterial 1 25th Street in H arlem; he plied the sid e stre ets, e speciall y in those areas wh ich were 
thickest wi th what he described as "the black m an down in the gutt er where I came from," the 
poverty -ridde n with a high i ncide nce o f dope addicts and winos.
 
Malcolm X here in deed was a hero. Stridi ng along th e sid ewalks, h e bathed all who m he  met in 
the boyish grin, a nd his co nversa tion with a ny who c ame up was quie t and pleasant. "It's jus t 
what th e white d evil wants you t o do, brother," he might t ell a wino, " he wants you t o get dr unk s o 
he will have an  excuse to put a club up beside your he ad." Or I remember once he halted at a 
stoop to gree t several old er women : "Sisters, l et me ask you so mething," he said 
conversati onally , "have you ever kn own _ one_ white man who ei ther d idn't do something to you, 
or take s omething from you ?" One among t hat audienceexclaim ed after a moment, "I sure 
_ain't_!" whereu pon all o f them join ed in laught er an d we wa lked on with  Malcolm X waving back 
to cries  of "He's _ right_!"
 I remember that once in the early evening we  rounded a corn er to hear a man, shabbily dress ed, 
haranguing  a small crowd aro und his s peaki ng platform of an upturned oblong wood en box with 
an America n flag al ongside. "I don't res pect or b elieve in this damn flag, it's t here becaus e I can't 
hold a public meeting withou t it unless I  want t he white m an to put me in jail. And that's what I'm 
up here to talk about-these crackers get ting rich off the blo od and bones of your  and my pe ople!" 
Said Malcolm X, grinning, "H e's _working_!"
 
Malcolm X rarely  exch anged any words with th ose Negro men with shiny , "processe d" hair 
without giv ing them a nudge. Very genially : "Ahhhh, brother, the white devil  has taught you t o hate 
yourself  so much that you pu t hot lye in your h air to make it l ook m ore like his h air."
 
I remember another st oopful of wome n alongside t he door of a small grocer y store where I h ad 
gone for something, l eaving Malcolm X talking  across t he stree t. As I came o ut of the store, o ne 
woman was excite dly describing for the rest a Malc olm X  lecture sh e had heard in M osque 
Num ber 7  one Sunday. "Oooooh, he _burnt_ that white man, burnt him _u p_, chile . . . chile, he 
told us we d esce ndin' f rom black ki ngs an' qu eens-L awd, I didn't know  it!" Another wom an asked , 
"You believe t hat?" and the first vehe mently responded, "Yes, I _do_!"
 
And I remember a lone, almost ragged guitarist h uddled on a sid e stre et playing an d singing  just 
for himsel f when h e glanc ed up and instantly  recognized the oncoming, striding  figure. "H uh-
_ho_!" the guitarist exclaime d, and jumping up, he snapped into a mock salu te. "My _man_!"
 Malcolm X loved it . And they loved h im. There was no question about it: whet her h e was 
standing t all beside a street lamp c hatting with winos, or whether h e was fi ring his radi o and 
television br oadsides t o unseen millions o f people, or wheth er he was titillating small a udiences of 
sophisticat ed whites with his s mall-talk s uch a s, "My  hobby is stirring up  Negroes, t hat's sp elled 
_knee_-grow s the way  you liber als pronounce it "-the ma n had charisma , and he had _power_. 
And I was not the only  one who a t various t unes ma rveled at how he  could c ontin ue to rec eive 
such an aweso me a mount of international perso nal p ublicity  and still seas on lib erally practic ally 
everything he  said , both in public a nd privately, with credit and hosannas to  "The Ho norable Elija h 
Muhammad." Often I made side notes to myself  about this . I kept, in e ffect, a double-entry set of 
notebooks . Once, noting me switching fr om one to the other, Malcol m X curiousl y ask ed m e what 
for? I told hi m some reas on, but not that one notebook was things  he said for his book and the 
other was  for my various p erson al ob servations a bout him; very likely  he would h ave be come 
self-conscious. "You must have w ritten a million words  by now," said M alcolm X. " Prob ably," I 
said. "This white man's craz y," he mused. "I'll prove it t o you. Do you thi nk I'd publicize so mebody 
knocking  me like I d o him?"
 
*     *     *
 
"Look, tell m e the truth," Malcol m X said to me one evening, "yo u travel  around. Have you he ard 
anything? "
 
Truthfully, I told him  I didn't know what he  had reference t o. He dr opped it and talked of something 
else.
 
From Malcolm X hi msel f, I had seen, or heard, a  few un usual things  which h ad caused me some 
little private won der an d speculatio n, and then, with nothing to hang t hem onto, I had dis misse d 
them. One day in his car, we ha d stopped for the red light a t an intersec tion; another car with a 
white man drivin g hadstopped alongside, a nd when t his white m an saw Malc olm X, he  instantly 
called across t o him, "I don't bl ame your pe ople for turning t o you. I f I were a  Negro I'd follow  you, 
too. Keep up the fight!" Malcolm X said to the ma n very sincerely, "I wish  I could h ave a white 
chapter of the people I m eet like you ." The light ch anged , and as both cars dr ove on, Malcolm X 
quickl y said to me, firmly, "Not only don't write that, never repeat it. Mr. Muhammad would h ave a 
fit." The significant thing ab out the incide nt, I later reflected, was that it was  the first ti me I had 
ever heard hi m speak of Elijah Mu hammad with anythi ng less than reverence.
 About the same tim e, one of the scribblings o f Malcolm X's that I had retrie ved had read, 
enigm atically , "My life has always been one of changes." Another ti me, this was in S eptember,
 
1963, Malcolm X had been highl y upset about something during an  entire sessi on, and when I 
read the _Amsterd am News_ f or that week, I guess ed that he had been upset about an item in 
Jimmy Booker's c olum n that Booker h ad heard that Elijah Muha mmad and Malcol m X were 
feuding. (B ooker was lat er to reveal that after his col umn was  written, he had gon e on vacatio n, 
and on his return he learned that Malcol m X "storme d into the _Amsterdam News_ with three 
followers  . . . 'I want to see Jimmy Booker. I don't like what he wrote. There is no  fight betwee n 
me and Elijah Mu hammad. I believe in Mr. Muhammad and will lay down my li fe for him.' ")
 
Also, now and then, when I chanc ed to meet a few ot her k ey Muslims, mainly when I was with 
Malcolm X, but when he was  not immediately present, I thought I detected either in su btle 
phrasing,  or in m anner, something less than total ad miratio n of their f amous colleague-an d then I 
would tell mysel f I had misint erpret ed. And during  these d ays, D r. C. Eric L incoln and I would t alk 
on the phone fairly often. We rarely  would f ail to mention how it s eemed almost certain that seeds 
of trouble lay  in the fact that however  much Malc olm Xpraise d Elijah M uhammad, it was  upon 
dramatic, articula te Malc olm X  that the communicati ons m edia and hence t he gener al public 
focused the great bulk o f their a ttention. I never dre amed, though, what Malcolm X was act ually 
going  through. He n ever breathed a word, at least not to me, until the actual ri ft became public.
 
When Malcolm X left me at around two A.M. o n that occ asion , he asked me to call hi m at nine 
A.M. The telephone in the home in East Elmhurst rang co nsidera bly longer t han usual, a nd Sister 
Betty, when s he answered, sounded straine d, choke d up. W hen Malcolm X ca me on, he, too, 
sounded different. He ask ed me, "Have you heard the radio or seen the newspa pers? " I said I 
hadn't. He s aid, "Well, do!" and that he would call m e later.
 
I went a nd got t he papers. I  read with  astonish ment that Malcolm X had been susp ended by 
Elijah Mu hammad-th e stated re ason bei ng the "chickens coming  home to roost" remark th at 
Malcolm X recently  had made as a  comment upon the assassin ation of Presid ent Kennedy.
 
Malcolm X did telephone, after about an hour, and I met him at the Black Muslims' newspa per 
office in Harle m, a couple of blocks f urther up  Lenox Avenue from their mosque and resta urant . 
He was  seated behind his light-brown  metal desk a nd his br own h at lay before him on the gree n 
blotter. He wore a dark s uit wi th a vest, a white s hirt, th e inevitable le aping- sailfish clip h eld his 
narrow  tie, and the big f eet in the shined black sh oes p ushed the swivel chair pendulously  back 
and forth as he talked into the telephone.
 
"I'm alwa ys hur t over any ac t of disobedienc e on my part concerning M r. Muhammad. . . . Yes, sir-
anything The Hon orabl e Elijah M uhammad does is all right wi th me. I believe a bsolutely  in his 
wisdom and authority ." The telephone would ring agai n inst antly  every  time h e put it down. "Mr. 
Peter G oldm an! I haven't h eard your  voice in a good while! W ell, sir, I just should h aveke pt my big 
mouth shut." To the _N ew York Times_: " Sir? Yes-he  suspended me  from making public 
appearanc es for the tune being, which I  fully understa nd. I say  the same thing to you t hat I have 
told others, I 'm in comple te submission t o Mr. Muhammad's judgm ent, because I have alwa ys 
found his ju dgme nt to be based on sound thinking." To C.B.S.: "I think th at anybody  who is in a 
position t o disci pline o thers should first learn t o accept disciplin e himsel f."
 
He br ought it off, the image o f contrite ness, t he best be could-thr ougho ut the harshly  tryin g next 
several  weeks. Bu t the back of his ne ck was  reddish ever y tim e I saw him. H e did not yet pu t into 
words h is obvious fury at the public h umiliation . We did very little interv iewin g now, he was so 
busy on telephones els ewhere ; but it did n ot matter too mu ch because by now I had the bulk of 
the needed life story ma terial in hand. When he did find some time to visit me , he was ver y 
preoccupi ed, and I could _feel_ him rankling w ith anger an d with in activity, but he tried har d to 
hide it.
 He scribbl ed one night, "Y ou have n ot converted a man because you h ave silenc ed him. John 
Viscou nt Morley ." And the same night, a lmost illeg ibly, "I was going downhill until h e pick ed m e 
up, but the more I think of it, we  picke d each other up ."
 
When I did not see him for several d ays, a letter c ame. "I have cancelled all public appearanc es 
and speaki ng engagem ents for a number of weeks. S o within t hat perio d it s hould be possible t o 
finish this b ook. With the fast pace of newly develo ping incide nts today, it is e asy for something 
that is d one or said t omorrow to be outdated eve n by sunset on the same d ay. Malcol m X."
 
I presse d to get the first chapter, "Night mare ," into a shape that he could rev iew. When it was 
ready in a  readable ro ugh draft, I telephoned hi m. He ca me as quickly  as he could drive from his 
home-which ma de me see how grinding an  ordeal it was to him to just be sitting at home, 
inactive, a nd knowing his temperam ent, my s ympathies went out to Sist er Betty.
 
He p ored over the ma nuscript p ages, ra ptly the first ti me, then draw ing ou t his red-ink b all-point 
pen he read through the chapter again , with the pen occasio nally stabbing a t something. "Y ou 
can't bl ess Allah!" he exclaime d, changing "b less" to "praise. " In a place that referred t o himsel f 
and his brothers a nd sisters, h e scra tched red through "we kids ." "Kids are go ats!" he exclaime d 
sharply.
 
Soon, Malcolm X and his family flew to Miami. Cassi us Cla y had ext ended the inv itation as a sixth 
wedding  anniversary  present to Malcol m X and Sister Betty, and they had accepted most 
gratefully. It was Sister Be tty's first vacation in the six years o f the taut regime n as a Black Muslim 
wife, and it was f or Malcolm X bo th a saving of face and something to _do_.
 
Very soon after his arriva l, he telegrap hed me his p hone number at a motel. I calle d him  and he 
told me , "I just want t o tell you something. I'm  not a betting ma n anymor e, but if you are, you be t 
on Cassius t o beat List en, and you wi ll win." I laughe d and said h e was prej udice d. He s aid, 
"Remember what I t old you when the fight's over." I received later a  picture p ostcard, t he pictur e 
in vivid colors be ing of a chimp anzee a t the Monkey  Jungle in Miami. M alcolm X ha d written on 
the reverse sid e, "One hundred years a fter the Civil War, and these _chimp anzees_ get mo re 
recognitio n, res pect and freedom in Americ a than our p eople d o. Bro. Malcolm X." Another ti me, 
an envelo pe came, and insid e it was  a clip ping of an Irv Kupcine t column in t he Chicago _S un-
Times_. Malcol m X's  red pen had encircled a n item which re ad, "Insiders ar e predicting a s plit in 
the Black Muslims. M alcolm X, o usted as No. 2 man in the organi zation, m ay form a splint er 
group to oppose Elijah Mu hammad." Alongside the item, Malcolm X ha d scrib bled "Imagine 
this!! !"
 
The night o f the phenomenal u pset, whe n Cla y _did_ beat Liston, Malcol m Xtelep honed me , and 
sounds of excitement were in the background. The victory  party was in his motel suite, Malcolm X 
told me . He described what was happening, me ntioned some of those who were pr esent, and 
that the new heavyweight ki ng was "in the next room, my be droom here" taking  a nap. After 
reminding me  of the fight prediction h e had made, Malc olm X  said t hat I should lo ok forward n ow 
to Clay's "quick d evelopment into a major world figure. I don't know if you re ally realize th e world 
significance that this is th e first _M uslim_ champion."
 
It was t he following morning when Cassius Clay gave the press i nterv iew which res ulted in 
national he adlin es that he was actually a "Black M uslim," and soon after, the newsp apers were 
carrying pictures o f Malc olm X  introducing th e heavy weight ch ampion to various African diplom ats 
in the lobbies of the Unit ed N ations headqu arters in New  York City . Malcolm X toured Cla y about 
in Harle m, and in other places, functioning, h e said, a s Cla y's "friend and relig ious advisor ."
 
I had now move d upstate to finish my wo rk on the book, a nd we talked on the telephone every 
three or f our days. He s aid things  suggesti ng that he might never be  returned to his f ormer Black 
Muslim p ost, and he now began to say things  quietl y critical o f Elijah Mu hammad. _Playboy_ 
magazine a sked me  to do an interview for them with the new champion Cassi us Clay , and when I confidently asked Malcolm X to  arrange f or me the needed introd uctio n to Clay, Malcolm X 
hesitan tly said, "I think you ha d better ask somebody  else t o do that." I was highl y surprise d at the 
reply , but I had learned never t o press hi m for information. And then, ver y soon after, I received a 
letter. "Dear Alex Haley:  A quick n ote. Would you pre pare a properly worde d lett er that would 
enable me  to change t he reading of the contract s o that all remaining proc eeds now would go t o 
the Muslim M osque, Inc., or in t he case of my death then to go directly  to my w ife, Mrs. Betty X 
Little? The sooner this le tter or contract is c hanged, the more easily I will rest." Und er the 
signature of Malcolm X, t herewas a P.S.: "How is it p ossible to write on e's a utobiograp hy in a 
world so fast-changing as this? "
 
Soon I read in the var ious newsp apers t hat rum ors we re being heard of threats o n Malcolm X's 
life. Then there was  an article in the _Amsterda m News_: The captio n was  "Malcol m X Tells O f 
Death Threat," and the story report ed that he had said t hat former clos e associat es of his in the 
New York mosque h ad sent out "a special squ ad" to "try to kill me  in cold b lood. Thanks to Allah, I 
learn ed of the plot from the ver y same br others who ha d been sent out to murder m e. These 
brothers h ad heard m e repres ent a nd defend Mr. Muh ammad for too long for them to swallo w the 
lies ab out me withou t first asking  me some qu estions for their own clari ficatio n."
 
I telephoned Malcolm X, and expresse d my pers onal conc ern for him . His voice  sounded weary . 
He said th at his "u ppermost in terest " was th at any money which m ight co me due him in the future 
would go directly  to his new organization, or to his wif e, as the letter h e had signed and mailed 
had specified. He told me, "I know I've got t o get a will made for mysel f, I never did b ecause I 
never have had anything to will to anybo dy, but if I don't have on e and something ha ppened to 
me, there could be a mess." I express ed concern for him, and he told m e that he had a loaded 
rifle in his home, and "I can take care of myself ."
 
The "Muslim Mosque, I nc." to which Malcolm X had referred was  a new organization which h e 
had formed, which a t that time consiste d of perhaps forty or fifty Muslims who h ad left the 
leadership of Elijah Mu hammad.
 
Through a clos e associat e of Cassius Clay, who m Malcol m X had finally suggested to me, my 
interview appointment was arra nged with th e heavy weight ch ampion, and I flew down to  New 
York City to do the interview for _Playboy_. Malcol m X was "away  briefly," Sist er Betty said o n the 
phone-and shespoke br usquely . I talked with one Black Muslim la dy whom I  had known be fore 
she had joined, and who h ad been an admirer o f Malcol m X. She had elect ed to remain in t he 
original fold, "but I'll tell you, br other, what a lot in the mo sque a re saying,  you kn ow, it's like if  you 
divorce d your hu sband, you'd s till like t o see hi m once in a while." During  my interv iews with 
Cassius Clay  in his t hree-ro om s uite at Harlem's Theresa Hotel, inevitably  the qu estio ns got 
around to Clay's Muslim m embership, t hen to a query about what h ad happened to his formerly 
very close relati onshi p with M alcolm X. Evenly , Clay said, "Y ou jus t don't buck Mr. Muh ammad 
and get away with it. I don't want t o talk about him  no more."
 
Elijah Mu hammad at his he adqu arters in C hicago g rew "emotionally affected" whe never  the 
name of Malcolm X had to be raised i n his pr esence, one of the Muslims in Clay 's entourage t old 
me. Mr. Muha mmad reportedly  had said , "Brother Malcolm got to be a _big_ m an. I made him 
big. I was ab out to ma ke him a _gre at_ man." The faithful Black Muslims predicted that soon 
Malcolm X would b e turned upon by the defectors f rom Mosqu e Nu mber 7  who h ad joine d him: 
"They will feel betrayed." Said others, "A great chas tisem ent of Allah will fall upon a hyp ocrite. " 
Mr. Muhammad reporte dly had said a t another ti me, "Malc olm is d estroyin g himsel f," and that he 
had no wish whatever  to see M alcolm X die , that he "would ra ther s ee him live  and suffer his 
treac hery."
 
The general f eeling a mong Harlemit es, n on-Muslims, with who m I talked was  that Malcol m X had 
been powerf ul and influential e nough a  minister th at event ually he would split t he mosque 
membership into two hostile ca mps, and that in New  York City  at least, Elija h Mu hammad's 
unqu estio ned rule would b e ended. 
Malcolm X returned. He said t hat he had been in Bo ston and Phila delphia. He spent a mple time 
with m e, now during t he day, in Room 1936 in t he HotelAm ericana . His old total ease was no 
longer wi th him. As if it was t he m ost natural t hing in t he world to do, at sudden intervals  he would 
stride t o the door; pulling  it open, he would lo ok up  and down th e corridor, then shut the door 
again. "If I'm alive  when this book comes ou t, it will be a miracle ," he said by wa y of expl anation. 
"I'm not saying it distr essing ly-" He leaned forward an d touched the buff gold be dspread . "I'm 
saying it like I  say that's a bedspre ad."
 
For th e first ti me he talked with me  in some detail about what had happened. He said t hat his 
statement about Preside nt Kennedy's  assassi natio n was  not why he had been ousted from the 
Muslims. " It wasn't the reason at all. No body  said anything when I  made stronger statements 
before." The real reason, h e said, was "jealousy in Chicago, a nd I had objected to the immoralit y 
of the ma n who professed to be more moral t han anybody."
 
Malcolm X said that he had incre ased the Na tion o f Islam membership f rom about 400 when he 
had joined to around 40,000. "I don't think t here were m ore than 400 in the country when I  joined, 
I really don't. They were mo stly older p eople, a nd many of them couldn't eve n pro nounce Mr. 
Muhammad's na me, and he stayed m ostly in the backgrou nd."
 
Malcolm X worked h ard n ot to show  it, but he was u pset. "There is nothing mo re frightful than 
ignoranc e in a ction. Goethe," he scrib bled o ne day. He hi nted about Cassius Clay a couple o f 
times, a nd when I responded only with an ecdotes ab out my int erview with Clay , he finally ask ed 
what Cla y had said o f him. I dug out the index card o n which t he questio n was  typed in advanc e 
and Clay's  response was be neath in lo ngha nd. M alcolm X star ed at the card, t hen out of the 
window, and he got u p and walked ar ound; o ne of the few times I  ever  heard his voice betray his 
hurt was when he said , "I felt like a blood big-brot her to him." He p aused. "I'm not against h im 
now. He's a f ine young man. Smart. He's j ust le t him self be used, led astray."
 And at another ti me there in t he hotel ro om he came the nearest t o tears t hat I ever s aw him, and 
also the only  time I ever h eard him us e, for his rac e, one word. He h ad been talking  about how 
hard he had worked building u p the Muslim organization in the early days when h e was fi rst 
move d to New York City, whe n abr uptly  he exclai med hoarsely , "We had the _best_ orga nizatio n 
the black ma n's ever h ad-_niggers_ rui ned it!"
 
A few days  later, however , he wrote in on e of his me mo books this, which h e let me read, 
"Childre n have a less on adults sh ould learn , to not be ashamed of failing, b ut to get up  and try 
again. Most o f us adults ar e so afraid, so cautious , so 'safe,' and therefore so shrinking  and rigid 
and afraid t hat it is why  so m any h umans fail. Mos t middle-age d adults h ave resigned themselves 
to failure ." 
 
 
Telephone calls ca me frequently for Malc olm X  when he was  in the room with m e, or he would 
make calls; he  would t alk in a covert, guard ed manner, clearly not wishing me  to be able to follow 
the disc ussion. I took to going in to the bathroom a t these times, and closing t he door, emerging 
when t he m urmuring  of his voice ha d stopped-hoping that made him more c omfortable. Later, he 
would tell m e that he was he aring  from some Musli ms who we re still ostensibly Elijah 
Muhammad's followers. "I 'm a marked ma n," he said o ne day, after such a call. "I've h ad highl y 
placed people tell me  to be ver y careful every move I  make." He thought a bout it. "Just as lo ng as 
my family doesn't get hur t, I'm not fright ened for myself ." I have th e impressio n that Malcolm X 
heard in advanc e that the Muslim o rganizatio n was  going  to sue to make him vacate the home he 
and his family lived in .
 
I had become wor ried that Malc olm X, bit ter, would want t o go b ack t hrough t he chapters in which 
he had told o f his Black M uslim days an d re-edit them in some way . The day before I left New 
York City to return u pstate, I raised my concern to  Malcolm X. "I have t hought about that," he 
said. "There ar e a lot o fthings I could s ay that pass ed through my  mind at times eve n then, things I saw an d heard, but I threw them out of my mi nd. I'm going to let it st and the wa y I've told it. I 
want th e book to be the wa y it was."
 
Then-March 26 , 1964-a n ote came from Malcolm X: "There is a chance that I may ma ke a quick 
trip to several ver y importan t countries i n Africa, incl uding a p ilgrimage t o the Muslim Holy  Cities 
of Mecca a nd Medi na, b eginning a bout April 13 th. Keep this t o yoursel f."
 
While abr oad, Malcol m X wrote l etters and postcar ds to almost everyone h e knew  well. His  letters 
now were signe d "El-Hajj Malik El-Sh abazz."
 
Then, in mid-May, Sister Be tty telephoned me , her voice ju bilant : Malcolm X was returning.  I flew 
to New York City. On May  21, the phone rang in my ho tel ro om and Sis ter Be tty said, " Just a 
minute, please-, " then the deep voice sai d, "H ow are you?"
 
"Well! El-Hajj  Malik  El-Shabazz! How are _you_ ?" He sai d, "Just a little bit tire d." He h ad arrived 
on a Pan-A merica n Airlines flight a t 4:30. He was going  to have a  press conference a t seven P.M. 
at the Hot el Theresa. "I'll pick you u p at 6:30 at 135th and Lenox, on  the uptown si de-all ri ght?"
 
When the blue Ol dsmobile s topped, and I got in, El-Hajj Malcol m, br oadly  beaming, wore a 
seersucker suit , the red hair needed a barber's a ttention, and he had gro wn a  beard. Also in t he 
car was  Sister B etty. It was th e first ti me we had ever seen each other after more than a year  of 
talking several tim es a week on  the telephone. We smile d at each other. She wore  dark glasses , 
a blue maternity  suit, and she was  pregna nt with what would b e her fourth child.
 
There mu st have be en fifty still and television p hotograp hers an d reporters jockey ing for positi on, 
up front, and the rest of the Skyl ine Ballro om was f illing with Negro f ollowers  of Malcolm X, or his 
well-wishers, an d the curious . The room lit u p with  flickering  and flooding li ghts as h e came in the 
door squir ing Sist er Betty, holding her ar m tenderly , and she was  smiling  broadly in h er prid e that 
this m an was her m an. I recognized th e _Times _ 'M.S. H andler and intr oduc ed mysel f; we warmly 
shook h ands and commandeered a little two- chair ta ble. The report ers in a thick s emicircle be fore 
Malcolm X seated on the podium fired questio ns at  him, and he gave the impressi on that all o f his 
twelve years'  oratorical  practice had prepared hi m for this n ew image.
 
"Do we correctly underst and that you n ow do not think th at all whites are evil?"
 
"_True_, sir! My trip to Mecca h as opened my eyes. I  no longer subscribe to racism. I have 
adjusted my thi nking  to the point where I  believe that whites are human beings"-a signi ficant 
pause-" as lo ng as this is bor ne out by their h umane attitude toward Negroes. "
 
They picke d at his "r acist" image. "I'm _not_ a racist. I'm not condemning whites f or being whites, 
but for their deeds. I condemn what whites c ollecti vely have done to our people c ollecti vely."
 
He al most continu ally flashed about the room the ingratiating boyish s mile. He would pick a t the 
new reddish b eard. They asked hi m about that, did he plan to keep it? H e said he hadn't decided 
yet, he  would h ave to see if he could get used to it or not. Was he maneuvering  to now join t he 
major civil rights le aders who m he had previously bitt erly attacke d? H e answered that one 
sidewa ys: "I'll explain it t his wa y, sir. If some men are in a car, driving with a destina tion i n mind, 
and you k now they are going t he wrong  way, but they are convinced they are going t he right wa y, 
then you get int o the car with them, and ride with th em, talking -and finally when t hey see they are 
on the wron g road, not getting where t hey were in tending, th en you tell t hem, and they will listen 
toyou _ then_, what road to take." He h ad never be en in better form, wei ghing, p arrying, 
answering  the questio ns.
 
The _Times_' Ha ndler , beside me, was  taking notes an d muttering un der h is bre ath, "Incredible! 
Incre dible! " I was thinking th e same thing. I was  thinking,  some o f the time, that if a pebble were 
dropped from the window behind Malcolm X, it would have s truck on  a sidewalk  eight f loors bel ow where years  before h e had skulk ed, s elling dope.
 
As I resu med writing  upstate, periodic n otes ca me from Malcolm X. "I hope the book is 
proceeding rapidly, for eve nts co ncerni ng my li fe happen so swiftly, much of what has alrea dy 
been written can easily  be outdated from month to mo nth. In life, nothing is permanent; not eve n 
life itself (smile). S o I would advise you t o rus h it o n out as fast as possible. " Another no te, special 
deliver y, had a tone of irritation with m e: he had rec eived from the publish er a letter which 
indica ted that he had received a  $2500 check whe n the book contract was signed , "and therefore 
I will be expect ed to pay _personal_ inc ome tax on  this. As you k now, it was  my repeated 
specific ation that this e ntire tr ansac tion was t o be made at that time directly  with an d to the 
Mosque. In fact, I have never s een that check t o this ver y day."
 
The matter was straight ened out, and I sent Malcol m X some rough chapters to read. I was 
appalle d when t hey were soon returned, red-inked in ma ny places where he  had told of his 
almost father-and-son relatio nship with Elijah Muhammad. Telephoning Malcol m X, I remind ed 
him of his pr evious d ecisio n, and I stress ed that if those chapters co ntained such telegraphing to 
readers o f what would lie a head, then the book would automatically be robbed of some of its 
buildi ng suspense and drama. Malcol m X said, gruffly, "Whose book is t his?" I told h im "yo urs, o f 
course," and that I only made the objection in my po sition a s a writer. He said that he would have 
to think about it. I was heart-sick a t the prosp ect that he might want to  re-edit the entire b ook into 
apolemic against Elijah Mu hammad. But late that night, Malc olm X  telephoned. "I'm sorry . You're 
right. I was up set about something. Forget what I  wante d change d, let what you alre ady had 
stand." I never again gave hi m chapters t o rev iew unless I was w ith him. Several tim es I would 
covertl y watch him  frown and wince as he read, but he never again a sked for any change in what 
he had originally  said . And the only thing that he ever in dicate d that he wished had been different 
in his life came when he was  reading the chapter "Laura." He said , "That was a smart gi rl, a 
_goo d_ girl.  She tried her b est to make something out of me, and look what I started her into-
dope and prostitu tion. I wrecked t hat girl."
 
*     *     *
 
Malcolm X was busy, busy, busy; he could not visit my h otel room often, and when he did, it 
shortly would get th e feeling o f Grand Ce ntral S tation. It seemed that whe n the telephone was no t 
ringing f or him, he was calling so meone els e, co nsulting t he jotted numbers i n his ever- ready 
memorandum bo ok. Now he  had begu n to talk a  great deal with various p eople from the Middle 
East or Africa who were in New York. Some of these c ame to see him at the hotel roo m. At first, I 
would sit by th e window  engrossed in reading wh ile they talke d by th e room's d oor in low  tones. 
He was  very apologetic when this occurred, and I told hi m I felt no sensitivity about it; then, 
afterwards, I would ge nerally  step out into the hallwa y, or perhaps tak e the elevator d own to the 
lobby, then watch the elevators until I saw the visitor le ave. One day , I remember, the phone had 
rung st eadily  with such callers as C.B.S., A.B.C., N.B.C., every New York City paper, the London 
_Daily  Express_ , and numerous in dividuals-he  and I had gotten no work at all a ccomplishe d; then 
a televis ion camera crew arri ved and filled the roo m to tape an interview with Malcolm X by 
A.B.C.'s co mmentator Bill Beutel. As the crew  was se tting up its floodlights o n trip ods, a Dayton , 
Ohio, radio st ation called , wishing to  interview Malcolm X by telephone. He aske d me to ask th em 
to call him  the following day at his sister Ella's home in Boston. Then the Ghana Ministry  of 
Information calle d. I turned with a note to Malc olm X  to whom the commentator B eutel ha d just 
said, "I won't ta ke m uch of your  time, I just h ave a few probably stupid questio ns." Glancing  at my 
note, Malcolm X said to Beutel, "O nly the unasked questio n is st upid," and then to me, "Tell them 
I'll call th em back, pl ease ." Then just a s the televis ion cameras bega n rolling,  with Beutel and 
Malcolm X talking,  the telephone rang agai n and it was _Life_ magazine rep orter Marc Cra wford 
to whom I whispered what was happening. Cra wford, undaunted, ask ed if the open receiver  could 
be plac ed where he could hear the interv iew, and I complie d, relieved t hat it was on e way  to let 
the interview proc eed without interru ption .
 
The manuscript copy which  Malcolm X was given to  review was in b etter sh ape now , and he pored through page by p age, in tently, and now an d then his head would raise with so me 
comment. "You know," he said o nce, "wh y I have be en able to have some e ffect is be cause I 
make a study of the weakness es of this c ountry and because the more the white man yelps, t he 
more I know  I have struck a  nerve. " Another time, he put down up on the bed the ma nuscript h e 
was reading, a nd he got u p from his chair and walked back a nd forth, stroki ng his chin, then he 
looked at me. "You know this p lace here in t his ch apter where I t old you how I put the pistol up to 
my head and kept pulling  the trigger and scared t hem so when I  was starting th e burglary ring-
well," he paused, "I don't know if I ough t to tell you t his or n ot, but I want to tell t he truth." He eyed 
me, specul atively. "I palmed the bullet." We laughe d togeth er. I said , "Okay, give th at page h ere, 
I'll fix it." Then he consid ered, "No , leave it that wa y. Too many pe ople would b e so quick to say 
that's what I 'm doing t oday, bluffing."
 
Again when reading about the peri od when he had disc overed the prison library , Malcol m X's 
head jerked up. "Boy! I never wi ll forget t hat old aar dvark! " The next eveni ng, he came in to the 
room and told me that he had beento the Muse um of Natur al Histor y and learned something 
about the aardvark. "Now , aardvark  actually means 'earth h og.' That's a good exam ple o f root 
words, as I was telling  you. When you st udy the scienc e of philology, you le arn the laws 
governing how a cons onant can lose its sh ape, but it keeps its id entity from language to 
langu age." What astonishe d me here was that I knew that on that day, Malcol m X's  schedule had 
been crushing, invol ving both a television a nd radio appearanc e and a live  speech, yet he had 
gone to find out something ab out the aardvark.
 
Before long, Malcol m X called a  press conference, and announced , "My  new Orga nizatio n of 
Afro-A merica n Unity  is a non-reli gious and non-sectarian group orga nized t o unite Afro-
Americans for a constructive  program toward at tainment of human rights. " The new OAAU's to ne 
appeared to be one of milita nt black n ationalism . He s aid to the qu estions of various reporters in 
subseque nt interviews that the OA AU would se ek to convert the Negro po pulation from non-
violence t o active self-defense agains t white suprem acists acr oss America . On the subject of 
politics h e offered an enigma , "Whether you us e bullets or ballo ts, you've  got to  aim we ll; don't 
strike a t the puppet, strike a t the puppeteer." Did h e envision any sp ecial are a of activity? "I'm 
going  to join in t he fight where ver Negroes ask f or my help." What about allianc e with other Negro 
organizations? He said th at he would consider f orming so me united front with certain s elect ed 
Negro leaders. He conc eded under questi oning th at the N.A. A.C.P . was "doing some goo d." 
Could any wh ites join h is OA AU? " If John Brown we re alive, m aybe him." And he answered his 
critics  with suc h statements a s that he would send "armed guerr illas" into Mississippi. "I am dead 
serious . We will send them not only to Mississ ippi, bu t to any place where black p eople's lives  are 
threatened by white bigots. As far as I am conc erned, Mississippi is anywhere so uth of the 
Canadian bor der." At another ti me, when Evel yn Cu nningh am o f the _Pittsburgh Co urier_ ask ed 
Malcolm X in a kidding way, "Say something startling  for my colu mn," he told her, "Anyon e who 
wants to  follow  me and my m ovem ent has got to be ready to got o jail, t o the hospital, a nd to the 
cemetery before he can be truly  free." Evel yn Cu nningh am, printing th e item, commented, "He 
smile d and chuckle d, but he was in dead earnest. "
 
His fourth child, yet an other d aught er, was born a nd he and Sis ter B etty named the baby Ga milah 
Lumumbah. A young waitress n amed Helen Lanier, at Harlem's Twenty Two Club where Malc olm 
X now often asked people to meet him, gave him a layett e for the new ba by. He was ver y deeply 
touched by th e gest ure. " Why, I hardly  know that girl!"
 
He was  clearly  irked whe n a _New  York Times_ poll a mong New  York Cit y Negroes re flected that 
three-fourths h ad named Dr. Martin L uther King as "doing th e best work for Negroes ," and 
another on e-fifth had voted f or the N.A.A.C. P.'s Roy  Wilkins, while only  six per cent had vot ed for 
Malcolm X. "Brother," he said t o me, "do you r ealize that some o f history's great est le aders n ever 
were rec ognized until they were safely in the grou nd!"
 
One morning in m id-su mmer 1964, Malcolm X telephoned me  and said t hat he would b e leaving 
"within th e next two or thr ee days" f or a planned six weeks abr oad. I heard from him first in Cairo, about as the pre dicte d "long, ho t summer" bega n in e arnest, with riots a nd other u prisings  of 
Negroes occ urring in s uburban Phil adelphia, in Roc hester, in Bro oklyn, in Harlem , and other 
cities. The _N ew York Times_ r eport ed that a meeting o f Negro int ellectu als ha d agre ed that Dr. 
Martin L uther King c ould s ecure the allegianc e of the middle and upper classes of Negroes, b ut 
Malcolm X alone could sec ure the allegiance o f Negroes at the bottom. "The Negroes respect Dr . 
King an d Malc olm X  becaus e they sense in t hese men absolut e integrity and know they will never 
sell th em out. Malc olm X  cannot be corru pted and the Negroes kn ow this and therefore res pect 
him. They also know  that he comes from the lower de pths, a s they do, and regard h im as one of 
their own. Malcolm X is going  to play a formidable r ole, b ecause the racial struggle  has now 
shifted to the urban Nort h . . .if Dr. King is c onvinced that he has sacri ficed ten years o f brilliant 
leadership , he will be forced to revise h is concep ts. There is o nly one directio n in which he  can 
move, and that is in t he directio n of Malcolm X." I s ent a clip ping of that story to Malcolm X in 
Cairo.
 
In Washingto n, D.C. a nd New York City, at least, powerf ul civ ic, private, and governm ental 
agenci es an d individuals were keenly interested in what Malcolm X was  saying abroad, and were 
speculati ng upon what would he say, and possibly  do, when h e returned to America. I n upstate 
New York, I rec eived a telephone call fr om a close f riend who said h e had been ask ed to ask m e 
if I would come to New  York City  on an appointed day to meet with "a  very high go vernment 
official" who was  interes ted in Malcol m X. I did fly down to the city . My friend acc ompanied m e to 
the offices o f a large  private foundation well  known f or its activities and donations in t he civil-
rights a rea. I met the foundation's presid ent and he introduc ed me to the Jus tice De partment Civil 
Rights Section h ead, Burke Marshall. Marsh all was chiefly interest ed in Malcolm X's fi nances, 
partic ularly how his exte nsive traveling  since his Black M uslim ou ster h ad been paid for. I told him 
that to the best of my knowledge t he several p ayme nts from the publisher h ad financed Malcol m 
X, along with  fees he rec eived for some speech es, a nd possible d onations that his organization 
received, a nd that Malcolm X ha d told m e of borrow ing mo ney fr om his Sister Ella for the current 
trip, a nd that rec ently the _Saturday  Evening Post_ had bought t he condensati on rights o f the 
book for a substantial su m that was soon to be received. Mars hall listen ed quie tly, intently, and 
asked a few questio ns co ncerni ng other aspects o f
 
Malcolm X's life, then thanked me . I wrote to Malcolm X in Cairo th at night about the interv iew. He 
never me ntioned it.
 
The _Saturday  Evening Post_ flew photographer J ohn Launois to Cairo to  loca te Malc olm X  and 
photograph hi m in color . The magazine's S eptember 12issu e appeared, and I sent a copy by 
airmail to Malcol m X. W ithin a few days, I received a stinging  note, expressi ng his anger a t the 
magazine's e ditorial regardi ng his life story. (The editorial's op ening sentence read, "If Malcolm X 
were not a Negro, his au tobiography  would be little m ore than a journal o f abnormal p sychology, 
the story of a burglar, dope pusher, addict and jailbird-w ith a family history of insanity-who 
acquires m essia nic delusions a nd sets forth to preach an upside-down relig ion of 'brotherly ' 
hatred.") I wrote t o Malc olm X  that he could not fairly hold me respo nsible f or what t he magazine 
had written in a separate e ditorial opinion. He wrote an  apology , "but the great est car e mu st be 
exercised in the future."
 
His return from Africa was  even more a uspicious t han when h e had returned from the H ajj 
pilgrimage to Mecca. A large group of Negroes, his f ollowers  and well-wishers, ke pt gat hering  in 
the Overseas Arrival Buil ding at Kennedy Airport. When I entered, white men with ca meras were 
position ed on the seco nd level, t aking pict ures o f all the Negroes who en tered, and almost as 
obvious were Negro pl ain-clothesmen m oving  about. Malcolm's gree ters ha d draped across t he 
glass overlooking  the U.S. Customs I nspectio n line some large clo th banners o n which were 
painted in b old letters, " Welcome Hom e, Malcolm. "
 
He came in sight, stepping int o one of the Customs I nspectio n lines ; he heard the cheering  and 
he look ed up, smiling  his pl easure.
 *     *     *
 
Malcolm X wante d to "huddle" with  me to fill me in on details from his trip that he want ed in the 
book. H e said that he was gi ving me only the highlights, because he felt that his care fully kept 
diary  might be turned into another b ook. We had intensive sessions in my ho tel ro om, where he 
read what h e selecte d from the diary , and I took notes. "What I want t o stress is th at I was trying 
to internatio nalize  our problem," he said to me, "to make the Africans feel their_kins hip_ with us 
Afro-A merica ns. I made them _think_ about it, that they are our blood br others, a nd we all c ame 
from the same foreparents. That's why the Africans loved me, the same wa y the Asians loved me 
becaus e I was relig ious."
 
Within a few days, h e had no more time to see m e. He would c all and apologize;  he was beset by 
a host of problems , some o f which h e mentioned, and some of which I heard from other p eople. 
Most i mmediat ely, there was  disco ntent within his orga nizatio n, the O AAU. His having stayed 
away almost three tim es as long as he had said h e would b e gone had sorely  tested the morale 
of even his key members, and there was  a general f eeling that his i nteres t was  insufficient to 
expect his followers' int erest t o stay high. I heard from one member that "a gro wing disillusion " 
could be  sensed througho ut the organi zation.
 
In Harlem a t large, in the bars a nd resta urants , on the street corners and stoops , there c ould be 
heard m ore blunt criticism o f Malcol m X than ever be fore in his career. There were, var iously 
expresse d, two prim ary complain ts. O ne was that actually Malcol m X only talked , but other civil-
rights o rganizatio ns were  _doing_. " All he's _ ever_ done was talk, CORE a nd SNCC an d some of 
them people of Dr. King's ar e out getting beat over th e head." The second major co mplai nt was 
that Malc olm X  was hi msel f too confused to be seriously  followed any longer . "He doesn't kn ow 
_what _ he believes in. No s ooner d o you h ear o ne thing than he's sw itched to something else." 
The two complain ts we re not helping the old firebrand M alcolm X im age any, nor were th ey 
genera ting the local p ublic i nteres t that was b adly needed by his small, young O AAU.
 
A court ha d made it clear t hat Malcolm X and his family would h ave to vacate t he Elmhurst h ouse 
for its return to the adj udge d legal owners, Elija h Muh ammad's Natio n of Islam. And other 
immedi ate probl ems which Malcol m X faced incl uded finances. Among his other expe nses , a wif e 
and four daugh ters ha d tobe supported, along with at least o ne full-tim e OA AU o fficial. Upon his 
return from Africa, o ur age nt for the book had delivered to me for Malcolm X a check for a sizable 
sum; soon afterward Malc olm X  told me , laughing  wryly, "It's _eva porat ed_. I don't know where! "
 
Malcolm X plunged into a welter o f activities. He wrote a nd telephoned dozens o f acceptances t o 
invitations t o speak, pr edominantly  at colleges and universities-bo th to exp ound his philos ophies 
and to earn the $150-$3 00 honorariums a bove tr aveling  expe nses. W hen he was in New York 
City, he spent all t he time he could in his O AAU's sp arsel y furnishe d office on the m ezzanin e floor 
of the Hot el Theresa, tryin g to do something a bout the OAAU's k notty pro blems. " I'm not exposi ng 
our size in n umbers, " he eva ded the query  of one reporter. "You know , the strongest part of a tree 
is the root, and if you exp ose t he root, the tree dies. W hy, we have m any 'inv isible' m embers, o f 
all types. U nlike ot her le aders, I've  practic ed the flexibility  to put mysel f into contact with every 
kind of Negro in the country."
 
Even a t mealtimes , at his favorite Twenty Two Club , or els ewher e in Harle m, he could scarcely 
eat for the people who ca me up asking f or appointments to discuss with hi m topics ra nging fr om 
personal p roblems t o his opinions on internatio nal issu es. It seemed not in hi m to say "No" to 
such requests . And aides of his, volunteering  their ti me, as often as not had to wait le ngthy 
perio ds to get his ear for matters im porta nt to the OAAU, or to himsel f; often, even t hen, he most 
uncharac teristicall y showed an impatience with th eir questio ns or t heir suggestio ns, a nd they 
chafed visibly . And at least o nce weekl y, generally  on Sunday eve nings,  he would ad dress a s 
many Negroes as word o f mouth and mimeographed advertising co uld dr aw to hear him  in 
Harlem's Audubon Ballroom on West 166th Street between Br oadway and St. Nicholas Avenue, 
near New  York Cit y's famous Colu mbia-Presbyterian Me dical Cen ter. 
Malcolm X for some re ason suddenly beg an to deliver a spate of attacks agains tElijah 
Muhammad, making mo re bitter a ccusations of "relig ious fakery" and "immoralit y" than he ever 
had. Very possi bly, Malc olm X  had gro wn incre asingl y incens ed by the immi nenc e of the court's 
deadlin e for him to have t o move his wife and four little daughters f rom the comfortable home in 
which they ha d lived f or years in Elmhurst. And Sister B etty was again pregn ant. "A home is really 
the only thing I've ever pr ovided Betty since we've  been married, " he had told me , disc ussing  the 
court's order, "and they want to take that away. Man, I can't ke ep on putting her through ch anges, 
all sh e's pu t up with- man, I've _go t_ to love t his woma n!"
 
A rash of death threats were an onym ously  telephoned to the polic e, to var ious newspapers, to the 
OAAU office, and to the family's home in El mhurst. W hen he went to court again, f ighting to keep 
the house, he was guard ed by a phalanx o f eight O AAU m en, twenty  uniformed policem en, and 
twelve plai n-clothes detectives. The court's de cision was th at the ord er to vacate would not be 
altered. When Malcolm X reache d home in Long Island, one of his followers, t elephoning him 
there, got , inst ead, a telephone company operator who s aid that the OL 1-63 20 number was 
"disc onnected." A carloa d of his O AAU f ollowers, raci ng to Long Isl and, found Malcol m X and his 
family perfectly safe. Inquiry  of the telephone company revealed that a "Mrs. S mall" had called 
and requ ested that the serv ice for that number be disco nnected, "for vacati on." The OAAU 
followers  drove ba ck to  Harlem . There was  an ensuing confrontation between them and followers 
of Elijah Mu hammad in front of the Bl ack Muslim resta urant at 116th Street and Lenox Avenu e. 
The incide nt wou nd up with polic emen who rus hed to the scene finding two guns in the O AAU 
car, and the six OA AU men were arrest ed.
 
Malcolm X had a date to speak i n Boston, but he was too busy to go , and he sent an OAAU 
assist ant who s poke inst ead. The car re turning hi m to the Boston Airport was bl ocke d at the East 
Boston Tunnel by  another car . Reporte dly, men with knives  rushe d out of the block ade car , but 
the Malcol m X forcess howed a shotgun, a nd the attackers dis persed .
 
Malcolm X steadily accused the Black Muslims as the source o f the various a ttacks and threats. 
"There is n o grou p in t he Unite d States mo re able to carry out this t hreat than the Black Muslims, " 
he said . "I know, because I taugh t them myself ." Asked why he had attacked the Black Musli ms 
and Elija h Muh ammad when t hings ha d seemed to be cooled down, h e said, " I would not have 
revealed any of this if they ha d left me alone." He le t himsel f be photograp hed in his home 
holding an automatic c arbine rifle with a full double clip of ammunition that he said h e kept ready 
for action against any po ssible a ssassin ation efforts. "I have ta ught my wife to use it, and 
instruct ed her to fire on anyon e, white, b lack, or yel low, who tries t o force h is wa y inside. "
 
I went t o New York City in Dece mber for Malcol m X's  reading of final ad ditions to the manuscript, 
to includ e the latest develo pments. He was f urther than I had ever  seen hi m from his old assur ed 
self, it seemed to me. He k ept saying th at the press was m aking li ght of his st atements a bout the 
threats o n his life. "They ac t like I' m jiving!" He brought up again the _Saturday  Evening Post_ 
editorial. "Y ou can't trust the publishing people, I don't care what th ey tell you." The agent for the 
book sent to my h otel a c ontract d ealing w ith foreign p ublica tion rights which ne eded Malcolm X's 
and my signat ure. I  signed it as he observed and handed the pen to him. He lo oked sus piciously 
at the contract , and said, " I had better show  this t hing to my lawyer," and put the contract in h is 
inside coat pocke t. Dri ving in Harlem a bout an hour lat er, he suddenly  stopped the car across t he 
stree t from the 135th Street Y.M.C.A. B uilding. W ithdrawing the contract, he signed it, and thrust it 
to me. "I'll trust you, " he said, a nd drove o n.
 
With Christm as approaching, u pon an impulse I b ought for Malcolm X's two  oldest d augh ters two 
large dolls, with p ainted br own complexions, the kind o f dolls th at would "walk" when h eld by the 
left hand. When Malcol m X nextcam e to my roo m in the Hot el Wellington, I said, "I've go tten 
something for you t o take to Attallah and Qubila h for Christmas gifts," and I "walke d" out the dolls. 
Amazeme nt, then a wide g rin spread over  his face. "Well, what d o you know  about that? Well, 
how about that!" He bent to exa mine the dolls. His  expression s howed h ow touched he was. "Y ou know," he said after a while, "this isn't s omething I'm proud to say, but I don't think I've ever 
bought o ne gift for my c hildren. Everything  they play  with, e ither Betty got it for them, or 
somebody  gave it t o them, never me . That's not good , I know it. I've  always  been too _busy_."
 
*     *     *
 
In early  January, I flew from upstate New  York to  Kennedy Airport where I t elephoned Malcol m X 
at home and told hi m that I was waitin g for another pl ane to Kansas City  to witness t he swearing-
in of my younger bro ther G eorge who h ad recently been elec ted a Kansas S tate Senator. "Tell 
your brother for me to remember u s in t he alley," Malc olm X  said. "Tell him that he and all of the 
other m oderate Negroes who ar e getti ng somewhere need to always  remember that it was us 
extremists who m ade it possible. " He s aid that when I was ready to leave  Kansas , to telephone 
him saying when I  would arrive  back in Ne w
 
York, and if he could we  could get toge ther. I did this, a nd he met me at Kennedy Airport . He h ad 
only a little while, h e was so press ed, he said; he had to leave that afternoon himsel f for a 
speaking engage ment which ha d come up. So I made reservatio ns for the next f light b ack 
upstate, then we  went ou tside and sat and talked in his car in a parking lot . He t alked about the 
press ures on  him every where he turned, and about the frustrations , among t hem that no one 
wante d to accept a nything relating t o him excep t "my old 'hate' and 'violence' image. " He said " the 
so-calle d mo derate" civil rights o rganizatio ns avoid ed hi m as "too milita nt" and the "so-calle d 
milita nts" avoide d him  as "too moderate.""They won't le t me turn the comer!" he once exclaim ed, 
"I'm caught i n a tr ap!"
 
In a happier ar ea, we t alked about the coming ba by. We laughed about the four gir ls in a  row 
alrea dy. "This one will be the boy ," he said. He beamed, "If not, the _next_ o ne!" When I said it 
was close to time for my plane to leave, he said he had to be get ting on, too. I said, "Give my b est 
to Sister B etty," he said that he would, we shook hands an d I got o utside and stood as he backe d 
the blue Ol dsmobile f rom its parking sp ace. I called o ut "See you!" and we waved as he started 
driving away . There was  no way to know that it was  the last time I would see him alive.
 
*     *     *
 
On January 19, Malcolm X ap peared on the Pierre Berton televis ion show in Ca nada and said , in 
response to a question about integration and intermarriage:
 
"I believe in recogniz ing every human being as a human being- neither white, bl ack, br own, or red; 
and when you are d ealing with hu manity as a family there's n o ques tion o f integratio n or 
intermarriage. I t's just o ne human being m arrying another human being or on e human being living 
around and with an other h uman being. I may s ay, though, t hat I don't think it s hould ever be  put 
upon a black m an, I don't think t he burden to defend any positio n should ever be put upon the 
black man, because it is t he white m an collec tively who ha s shown that he is hostile t oward 
integratio n and toward int ermarriage a nd toward th ese other strid es toward o neness. So as a 
black man and especially  as a black American, any stand that I formerly took, I don't think t hat I 
would have t o defend it because it's still a reaction to the soci ety, and it's a  reaction that was 
produce d by th e societ y; and I think that it is t he socie ty that produced this t hat should be 
attacke d, not the reaction that develops a mong th e people who ar e the victims o f that negative 
socie ty."
 From this, it would be  fair to say that one month before his death, Malcol m ha d revised his views 
on intermarriage to  the point where he regarde d it a s sim ply a personal ma tter.
 
*     *     *
 
On the 28th of January, Malcolm X was on  TWA's Flight No . 9 from New York that landed at about 
three P.M. in L os Angel es. A speci al police intelligence squad saw Malcol m X gree ted by two 
close friends , Edward Br adley  and Allen Jamal, who dr ove him to the Statler- Hilton Hot el where Malcolm X checke d into Ro om 1 129. Said Br adley , "As we en tered the lobby , six men came in 
right a fter us. I recognized t hem as Black Muslims. " When Malcol m X returned downstairs to the 
lobby, he "practically  bumped into the Muslim entourage. The Muslims were st unned. Malcolm's 
face froze, b ut he never brok e his gait. Then, we kn ew we  were facing trouble." Malcol m X's 
friends drove hi m to pick u p "two f ormer s ecretaries o f Elija h Muh ammad, who (h ad) filed 
paternity  suits agai nst hi m," and they went to  the office o f the color ful Los Angeles a ttorney 
Gladys Roo t. Mrs. Ro ot sai d that Malcolm X ma de accusati ons a bout Elija h Mu hammad's 
conduc t with various f ormer secret aries.
 
After din ner, Malcol m X's two f riends dr ove him back to the hotel. "Black Muslims were all over  
the place," Bra dley related. "Some were in cars a nd others st ood around near the hotel. They ha d 
the hotel completely surrou nded. Malcolm sized u p the situa tion and jumped out of the car . He 
warned m e to watch out and ran in to the lobby. He went t o his room an d remained there for the 
rest o f his stay in Lo s Angeles ."
 
The car in which Malcol m X left the hotel, bound for the airport , was  followed, s aid Br adley . 
"Hardly  had we got on  the Fre eway when we saw two  carloa ds of Black Muslims f ollowing us. 
The cars st arted to pull al ongside. Malcolm picke d up my walking cane and stuck it out of a back 
window as i f itwere a  rifle. The two cars f ell behind. We picked up speed, pull ed off the airport 
ramp, and roare d up to the front of the terminal. The police were waiting  and Malcolm was 
escorted to the plane through an undergroun d passagewa y. Then I saw Malcolm to the pla ne."
 
Chicago p olice were wa iting when t he plane landed at O'Hare Airport t hat night a t eigh t o'clock . 
Driven t o the Brist ol Hotel, Malcolm X checke d in, and the adjoining  suite was taken by members 
of the police force who would k eep him under st eady guard for the next thr ee days in Chicago. 
Malcolm X testified at the office o f the Attorney Ge neral of the State of Illinois which  had been 
investigating the Natio n of Islam. Another day h e appeared on the televis ion program of Irv 
Kupcine t; he describe d attempts that had been made to kill him. He sai d he had on his de sk a 
letter naming th e persons assigne d to kill him. When polic e returned Malcolm X to his h otel "at 
least 15 grim-faced Negroes (we re) loit ering nearby ." Whispered Malc olm X  to Detec tive 
Sergea nt Edward McClellan, "Those are all Black Muslims. At least two of them I recognize  as 
being from New York. Elijah s eems to know ever y move I make." Later, in his r oom, he told the 
detective, " It's o nly going to  be a matter o f time before they catch up with  me. I know too much 
about the Muslims . But their thr eats are n ot going  to stop me from what I am determine d to do." 
After that night sp ent in the hotel, Malcol m X was police-escort ed back t o O'Hare where h e 
caught a plane to New  York City 's Ke nnedy Airport.
 
Right away, he was served with  a court or der o f eviction f rom the Elmhurst home. He t elephoned 
me upstate. His voice was strain ed. He told m e that he had filed an appeal to the court ord er, that 
on the next day he was going t o Alabama, and thence to Engla nd and Franc e for sc heduled 
speech es, a nd soon after returni ng he would go to Jackso n, Mississippi, t o address the 
Mississippi Fre edom Dem ocratic P arty, on February 19. Then he said-th e first ti me he had ever 
voiced to me  such a n admission-"Hal ey, my nerves are s hot, my brain's tired. " He said t hat upon 
his ret urn from Mississippi, h e would like to comeand spend two or three days in the town where I 
was, and read the book's ma nuscript agai n. "You say  it's a quiet t own. Just a  couple of days o f 
peace and quiet , that's what I need." I said that he knew he  was welco me, b ut there was no  need 
for him to tax himsel f reading through the long book again, as it had only a few very  minor ed iting 
changes sinc e he had only recently  read it. "I just want t o rea d it o ne more time," he said, 
"because
 
I don't expec t to read it in finished form." So we  made a tentative agree ment that the day after his 
projec ted return from Mississ ippi, he  would f ly upstate to visit for a weeke nd with me . The 
projec ted date was t he Saturday  and Sunday of February  20-21. 
 
Jet magazine re ported Malcol m X's  trip to Selma, Alabama, on the invitation of two me mbers o f 
the Student Nonviolent Coordi nating Co mmit tee. Dr. Marti n Luther King was  in a S elma jail when Malcolm X's arri val se nt officials o f Dr. King's Southern Christian Leadership Co nference "into a 
tailspin ." Quickly , the SCLC's Exec utive Direct or Reverend Andrew  Young and Reveren d James 
Bevel me t with Malcol m X, urging hi m no t to incit e any incid ents an d cautioning him  that his 
presence could ca use violenc e. "H e liste ned with a smile," said Miss Faye B ellamy , secretary  of 
the SNCC, who a ccom panied Malcolm X to  a Negro church where he would ad dress a mass 
meeting. "Remember this: n obody puts words  in my mo uth," he told Miss Bell amy. He t old her 
that "in about two weeks" he planned to start S outhern recruiting  for his Harlem-ba sed OA AU. At 
the church where h e would speak, Malc olm X  was seated on the platform next t o Mrs. Martin 
Luther King, to  whom h e leaned and whispere d that he was " trying to help," she told _ Jet_. "He 
said he wanted to present a n altern ative; th at it might b e easier f or whites to  accept Martin's 
proposals a fter hearing  him (Malcol m X). I didn't understa nd him at first," said Mrs. King. " He 
seemed ra ther a nxious t o let Martin k now he was no t causing tro uble or making it difficult, but that 
he was tryin g to make it easier. . . . Later, in the hallway, he reitera ted this. He se emed si ncere. . . 
." 
Addressing th e mass m eeting Malcolm X reporte dly shouted: "I don't advocat e violence , but if a 
man steps on my toes, I'll st ep on his." . . ."Whites better be  glad Martin Luther King is rallying the 
people becaus e other forces are waiting  to take over if he fails."
 
Returned to New York City, Malcol m X soon flew to France . He was sch eduled t o speak be fore a 
Congress o f African Students. But he was formally advised t hat he would n ot be permitte d to 
speak a nd, moreover , that he could consi der hi msel f officially barre d forever from Fra nce a s "an 
undesira ble p erson ." He was  asked to leave-an d he did, fuming with indigna tion. He f lew on  to 
London, and reporters o f the British Bro adcasting Corpor ation took hi m on  an interviewing tour in 
Smethwick, a town ne ar Birmingh am with a large  colore d populatio n. Nu mero us resid ents raised 
a storm of criticism t hat the B.B.C. was  a party to a "fanning of racis m" in the already  tension-
filled community. On this vis it, he spok e als o at the London School of Economics.
 
Malcolm X returned to New  York Cit y on Saturday, February 13th. He was asle ep with his family 
when a t about a quarter o f three the following Sunday morning, a t errifying  blast awak ened them. 
Sister B etty would t ell me later that Malcol m X, barking co mmands and snatching up  screa ming, 
fright ened children, got the family safely out of the back d oor in to the yard. Someone had thrown 
flaming Molotov cockt ail gasoline b ombs through th e front picture window . It took t he fire 
department an hour to extinguish the flames. Half the house was destroyed. Malcolm X ha d no 
fire ins uranc e.
 
Pregna nt, distraugh t Sist er Betty and the four little d augh ters went t o the home of close f riends. 
Malcolm X steeled himsel f to catch a plane as sche duled that morning to speak in D etroit. H e 
wore an open-necked sweater shirt u nder his s uit. Immediately  afterward, h e flew ba ck to New 
York. Monday morning, amid a flurry of emergency re-ho using pla ns for his family. Malcolm X was 
outraged whe n he learned that Elija h Muh ammad's New  York Mosque N umber 7 Minister Ja mes 
X had told the press th at Malcolm X him self had fire-bombed the home "to get publicity."
 
Monday nigh t, Malcol m X spoke to an audience i n the familiar Audubon Ballroo m. If he had 
possesse d the steel n erves  not to become rattled in p ublic b efore, now he was: " I've reached the 
end of my rop e!" he shouted to the audience o f five hu ndred. "I wouldn't care for myself  if they 
would no t harm my family!" He d eclar ed flatly, "My house was  bombed by t he _M uslims_ !" And he 
hinted at revenge. "There a re hunters; t here are a lso those who h unt the hunters!"
 
Tuesday, February  16th, Malcol m X telephoned me. He sp oke very  briefly, saying  that the 
complicatio ns following the bombing of his ho me had thrown  his pl ans s o awr y that he would b e 
unable to visit me  upstate o n the weeken d as he had said h e would. He said he  had also h ad to 
cancel his p lanned trip t o
 
Jacks on, Mississippi, which h e was going  to try  and make later. He said he had to hurry to an 
appointment, and hung u p. I would re ad later where a lso o n that day , he told a cl ose a ssocia te, "I 
have b een marked for death in the next five days. I have t he names of five Bl ack Muslims who have b een chose n to kill me. I will announce them at the meeting." And M alcolm X tol d a friend 
that he was going  to apply to the Police De partm ent for a permit t o carry a pistol. "I don't know 
wheth er they w ill let me have one or not, as I served time in priso n."
 
On Thursday he told a  reporter, in an interview which did not appear u ntil a fter his death: "I'm m an 
enough t o tell you th at I can't put my finger on exactl y what my ph ilosophy is n ow, but I'm 
flexible."
 
The black board in t he OAAU office counsel ed m embers and visitors t hat "Bro.Malcol m Sp eaks 
Thurs. Feb. 18, WINS Station, 10:30 P.M." Earlier  Thursday , Malc olm X  discuss ed locating 
another ho me with a real est ate dealer. On Friday , he had an appointment with G ordon Parks , the 
_Life_ magazine p hotograp her-author whom he had long admired a nd resp ected. "He a ppeared 
calm and somewhat respl endent with his goatee and astrakha n hat," Parks would rep ort lat er in 
_Life_. "Muc h of the old hostility  and bitterness s eemed to have l eft him, but the fire and 
confidence were still th ere." Malcol m X, speaking  of the old Mosque N umber 7 days, said , "That 
was a bad scene, brother. The sickn ess a nd madness o f those days- I'm glad to be free of them. 
It's a  time for martyrs now. And if I'm to be one, it will be in the cause o f brotherhood. That's the 
only thing t hat can save this country. I've learn ed it the har d wa y-but I've le arned it. . . ."
 
Parks a sked Malcolm X if it was really true that killers  were after him. "It's as true as we are 
standing h ere," Malcol m X said. * 'They've trie d it tw ice in the last two weeks." Parks a sked him 
about polic e pro tectio n, and Malcolm X laughed , "Brother, nobody can protect you fr om a Muslim 
but a Muslim-or so meone train ed in Muslim t actics. I  know. I invent ed many of those tactics."
 
Recalling  the incid ent of the young wh ite college gir l who h ad come to the Black Muslim 
resta urant and asked "What can I _do_?" and he told h er "N othing," a nd she left in tears, Malc olm 
X told G ordon Parks, " Well, I've lived t o regret t hat incide nt. In many p arts o f the African continent 
I saw wh ite stu dents h elping bl ack pe ople. Something like this kills a l ot of argu ment. I did m any 
things as a Muslim th at I'm sorry for now. I was a zombie t hen-like all Muslims-I was hypn otized, 
pointed in a  certain dir ection and told to march. Well, I guess a man's en titled to make a fool of 
hims elf if he's re ady to pay the cos t. It cost me twelve years."
 
Saturday mo rning, h e drove Sis ter B etty to see a real estate man. The house that the man then 
showed them that Malcol m X particularly  liked , in a  predominantly  Jewish ne ighborhood also on 
Long Islan d, require d a $ 3000 down p aymen t. Sis ter Be tty indicat ed her approval, t oo, and 
Malcolm X told the real es tate ma n he thought they would t ake it . Driving Sist er Betty back t o the 
friends' ho me where sh e was  stayin g with  the childre n, they estimated that it would c ost them 
about another $ 1000 to make the m ove. H e stayed until mid-afternoon with Sis ter Be tty at the 
friends' ho me, talking.  He told h er that he realiz ed that she had been under pr otract ed grea t 
strain, and that he was sorry about it. When he got his h at to leave, to  drive into Manh attan, 
standing in t he hallwa y, he told Sister B etty, "We'll all be toget her. I want my family with m e. 
Families shouldn' t be separat ed. I'll never ma ke another long trip witho ut you. W e'll get s omebody 
to keep the children . I'll never le ave you s o long again."
 
"I couldn't help but just break ou t grinning," Sister B etty would lat er tell m e.
 
She figured that he must have s topped at a nearby drugstore t o use the telephone booth when I 
later told her that Malcolm X had telephoned m e upstate at about 3:30 that afternoon.
 
For th e first ti me in nearly  two years, I d id not recogni ze immediat ely that the voice  on the other 
end of the phone belonged to Malcolm X. He sounded as if he had a heavy, deep cold. He t old 
me that in the middle of the night he and some friends had helped a moving company's  men take 
out of the other house all of the family's furniture a nd other b elongings salvageabl e after the fire-
bombing-before a sheriff's eviction p arty would set the things out on the sid ewalk. " Betty and I 
have b een looking  at a house we  want to  buy"-he  tried a chuckle-"you know  nobody's going  to 
_rent_, not to _me_, these days! "He said, " All I've got is a bout $150," and that he needed a $3000 down-paym ent plus $ 1000 moving  costs ; he asked if I thought t he publisher would 
advanc e him $4000 ag ainst t he projec ted profits from the book. I said that when o ur age nt's 
offices op ened on Monday morning, I would t elephone and I knew thathe would query  the 
publisher t o see if it couldn't be arranged , then Monday nigh t I would c all him back and let him 
know.
 
He said th at he and Sist er Be tty had decided that although t hey were going to  pay f or the house, 
to avoid po ssible tr ouble th ey had gotten the agreem ent of his sist er Ella who li ved in Boston to 
let the house be bought in her n ame. He s aid that he still owe d $1500 to his sister Ella which s he 
had loaned hi m to make one trip abroad. Event ually they would change th e house's title into 
Sister B etty's na me, he said, or maybe into the name of their old est d augh ter, Attallah.
 
He digresse d on the dangers h e faced. "But, you k now, I'm going to  tell you s omething, brother-
the more I keep thinking a bout this thi ng, the things that have been happening lat ely, I'm not all 
that sure it's t he Muslims. I know what th ey can do, and what t hey ca n't, a nd they can't d o some 
of the stuff recently  going o n. Now, I'm going t o tell you, the more I keep thinking a bout what 
happened to me in Franc e, I think I'm  going  to quit s aying it's th e Muslims ."
 
Then-it se emed to me such an odd, abrupt change of subjec t: "You know, I'm glad I've b een the 
first to establish o fficial ti es be tween Afro-A merica ns an d our blood bro thers i n Africa." And saying 
good-bye, h e hung u p.
 
After that telephone call, Malcol m X drove on into Man hattan and to the N ew York Hilto n Hot el 
between 53rd a nd 54th Streets a t Rock efeller Ce nter. He check ed the blue Olds mobile int o the 
hotel garage a nd then, in the lobby , he check ed himself in and was assigned a twelf th-floor room, 
to which a  bellma n acc ompanied him.
 
Soon some Negro m en entered the gian t hotel's b usy lobby . They b egan a sking  various bellmen 
what roo m Malc olm X  was in . The bellmen, of course, n ever would answer th at qu estion 
concerning any guest-a nd consi dering  that it wasMalcolm X whom practic ally everyone who re ad 
New York City newspa pers kn ew was  receiv ing constant death threats, the bellm en quick ly 
notified the hotel's s ecurity  chief. From then until Malcolm X checke d out the next d ay, extra 
security vigilance was continuously ma intained on the twelf th floor. During th at time, Malcol m X 
left the roo m only once, to have d inner in the hotel's lob by-level, d imly lit Bourbon Room.
 
Sunday mo rning at  nine o'cl ock, Sist er Betty in Long Islan d was  surprised when her hu sband 
telephoned her and aske d if she felt it would be too much trouble f or her to get all o f the four 
childre n dress ed and bring th em to the two o'clock meeting t hat afternoon at the Audubon 
Ballroo m in Harlem . She said, " Of course it won't! " On Saturday he had told her that she couldn' t 
come to the meeting. H e said to her, "You know what h appened an hour ago ? Exactly  at eight 
o'clock, the phone woke m e up. Some man said, 'Wake up, brother' an d hung u p." Malcol m X 
said good-bye to  Sister Betty.
 
And four hours la ter, Malcolm X left his r oom and took an elevator d own to the lobby, where h e 
checked out. He got his c ar and in the cle ar, warm mi dday of Sunday, February 21, he drove 
uptown to the Audubon Ballroo m.
 
*     *     *
 
The Audubon Ballroo m, between Broa dway and St. Nichol as Avenue, on the south side of West 
166th Str eet, is a two-story  building fr eque ntly rented for dances, organi zation functions, and 
other a ffairs. A dark , slen der, pretty young la dy, occu pationally  a rece ptionist an d avoc ationally a 
hardworking  OAAU a ssista nt to Malcol m X, has since told me that she arrived e arly, about 1:30 
P.M. , having  some pr eliminary  work  to do. Entering, sh e saw that the usual 40 0 woo den chairs 
had been set up, with aisles on either side , but no center aisle; the young lady  (she wishes t o be 
nameless) noticed that several p eople were alre ady seated in the front rows, bu t she gave it n o thought since s omealwa ys came early, liking  to get se ats u p close t o the stage, t o savor to the 
fullest the dramatic ora tor Malcol m X. On the stage , behind the speak er's stand, were eight 
straight br own chairs  arrange d in a  row and behind it was  the stage's painted backdro p, a mural 
of a res tful country scene. The you ng lady's resp onsibilities f or this day had incl uded making 
arrange ments a nd subs equen t confirma tions with the sc heduled co-sp eaker, the Reverend Milton 
Galamiso n, the militan t Bro oklyn Pr esbyterian who in 1964 had led the two o ne-day Negro 
boycotts in New  York City  public sch ools, protesting "raci al imbalanc e." She had similarl y made 
arrange ments wi th some o ther promine nt Negroes who were d ue to appeal to the audience for 
their maximu m possible contributio ns to aid the work  of Malc olm X  and his organi zatio n.
 
The people who en tered the ballroo m were  not searche d at the door. In rec ent weeks , Malcolm X 
had become irritable a bout this, s aying "It makes p eople u ncomfortable" and that it remi nded hi m 
of Elijah Mu hammad. "If I can't be safe among my own ki nd, where can I be?" he had once said 
testily. For t his day , also, he had ordered the pr ess-as s uch-barre d, white or black. He was  angry 
at what he interpret ed as "slanted" press treatment recen tly; he  felt especially  that the 
newspa pers h ad not taken seriously  his statements of the personal da nger he  was in. Unit ed 
Press I nternati onal r eport er Stanley  Scott, a Negro, h ad been admitted, h e later s aid, whe n a 
Malcolm lieutenant decided, "As a Negro, you will be allowed t o enter as a  citizen if  you like, but 
you mu st remove your press badge." The same criterio n had applie d to WMCA newsman Hugh 
Simpson. Both he and Scott came early  enough so t hat they obtained seats u p near the stage.
 
Malcolm X entered t he ballroo m at shortly  before two o'clock, trudging  heavily instead of with his 
usual lith e strides , his young la dy assist ant has told me . By this time several ot her o f his 
assist ants were f iltering in a nd out of the small anteroom alongside t he stage. He sat down 
sidewa ys on  a chair , his lo ng legs folded ar ound its bottom, and he leaned one elbow on a kind of 
counter beforea rather ricket y make-up mirror that entertainers u sed when d ances were hel d in 
the ballroom . He wore a dark s uit, white s hirt and narrow dark tie. He sai d to a littl e group of his 
assist ants t hat he wasn't going to  talk about his p erson al tro ubles, "I don't want that to be the 
reason for anyo ne to come to hear me ." He s tood up and paced about the little r oom. He s aid h e 
was going to  state that he had been hasty to accuse t he Black Musli ms o f bombing his ho me. 
"Things have ha ppened since t hat are bigger than what t hey can do. I know what they can do. 
Things have go ne beyond that."
 
Those in the anteroom could he ar the sounds o f the enlarging audienc e outsid e taking seats. 
"The way  I feel, I ought n ot to go out there a t all t oday," Malc olm X  said. "In fact, I'm going  to ease 
some o f this te nsion by telling  the black man not to fight himsel f-that's all a  part of the white m an's 
big maneuver, to keep us fighting am ong o urselves, agai nst e ach other. I'm not fighting anyo ne, 
that's n ot what we're here for." He kept glancing at  his wr ist watch, anticipating t he arrival of 
Reverend Gala miso n. "Whenever you m ake any appointment with  a minister," he said to his 
young  lady assista nt, "yo u have to call them two o r three hours b efore time, becaus e they will 
change t heir mi nd. This is typical o f ministers."
 
"I felt bad, I felt that it was my f ault," the you ng lady told m e. "It was  time for the meeting to start, 
too." She turned to Malcol m X's stalwart a ssistan t Benjamin X, kn own a s a highl y able speaker 
hims elf. "Brother, will you speak?" she ask ed-th en, turning to Malcolm X, " Is it all right i f he 
speaks? And maybe he could intro duce you. " Malcolm X abruptly whirled o n her, and barked, 
"You know you sh ouldn't ask me right in front of him!" Then, collecting hi msel f quickly , he said 
"Okay." Brother Benjamin X  aske d how long he should sp eak. Malcolm X said, glancing again at 
his wr ist watch, " Make it half an hour." And Br other Be njamin X  went thr ough t he door leading 
onto the stage . They heard hi m exp ertly exhorting  the audience about what is ne eded today by 
"the black m an here in these U nited States." 
The Reverend Gala miso n and other notables d ue hadn't arrived by thr ee o'clock. " Brother 
Malcolm looked so disa ppointed," the you ng lady says. "H e said to me 'I don't think any of them 
are c oming, either.' I felt so t errible f or him. It did s eem as if no one cared. I told him 'Oh, don't 
worry, they're just la te, they'll be here.'" (It was also reporte d by another so urce t hat Galamiso n, 
unable to come to the meeting, d id telephone earlier, and that Malcolm X was  told of this b efore he went o ut to speak.)
 
Then Brother Benjami n X's  half-hour was  up, and the young  lady and Malcol m X, alone back 
there in the anteroom, could h ear h im entering  the introductio n: "And now, without further 
remarks, I p resent to you o ne who is w illing to put himsel f on the line f or you, a  man who would 
give his life for you-I want you t o hear, liste n, to understa nd-on e who is a  _trojan_ for the black 
man!"
 
Applaus e ros e from the audience; at the anteroom door, Malcol m X turned and look ed back at his 
young  lady assista nt.
 
"You'll h ave to forgive me  for raising  my voice t o you-I'm just a bout at my wit 's end."
 
"Oh, don't _mention_ it!" she said quickly , "I understa nd."
 
His voice s ounded far away, "I won der if  anybody _really_  underst ands-"  And he walked out onto 
the stage, int o the applause, smiling and nodding a t Bro ther Benjamin X who p assed hi m en 
route to the anteroom.
 
The young  lady had picked up some paperwork  she had to do when Benjami n X came in, 
perspiring. S he patted his h and, saying, " That was good!" Through the anteroom do or, just a jar, 
she and Benjamin X heard the applause diminis hing,  then the familiar  ringing greeting, 
"_Asalaikum _, brothers and sist ers!" 
"Asalaiku m salaam!" some in the audience respo nded.
 
About eight rows  of seats from the front, then, a disturb ance occ urred. I n a sudden sc uffling, a 
man's voice was raised angril y, "Take your hand out of my pocket!" The entire au dience was 
swiveling  to look. " Hold it! Hold it! Do n't get excite d," Malcolm X said crispl y, "Let's cool it, 
brothers-
 
With his own a ttention dis tracte d, it is possi ble that he never saw  the gun men. One wom an who 
was seated near the front says, "The commotion back th ere diverte d me  just for an instant, then I 
turned back to look a t Malc olm X  just in time to see at leas t three m en in the front row  stand and 
take aim and start f iring sim ultan eously. It looked like a firing squa d." Num erous persons la ter 
said they saw  two m en rushi ng toward the stage, on e with a shotgun, the other with two 
revolvers.  Said U.P .I, reporter S tanley Scott: "Shots rang out. Men , wome n and children ra n for 
cove r. They stre tched out on the floor and ducke d under tables. " Radio St ation WMCA reporter 
Hugh Si mpso n said, " Then I heard this mu ffled sound, I saw Malc olm hi t with his ha nds still 
raised , then he fell back over t he chairs be hind him. Everybod y was sh outing. I  saw one man 
firing a gun f rom under his coat behind me  as I hit it [the floor], too. He was  firing like h e was in 
some W estern, runni ng backward toward t he door and firing at the same time."
 
The young  lady who was in t he backstage a nteroom told m e, "It sounded like an  army had taken 
over. Somehow, I knew. I wouldn't go a nd look . I want ed to remember hi m as he was."
 
Malcolm X's ha nd flew to his chest a s the first o f sixtee n shotgun p ellets or revol ver slugs  hit hi m. 
Then the other ha nd flew up. The middle finger o f the left hand was bu llet-sha ttered, and blood 
gushe d from his goatee. H e clutc hedhis ch est. His big b ody suddenly fell back sti ffly, knocking 
over two chairs; his head struck t he stage f loor with a thud.
 
In the bedlam of shouting, screa ming, run ning people, some ran toward the stage. Among th em 
Sister B etty scram bled up from where s he had thrown h er bo dy over h er childre n, who were 
shrieking; sh e ran crying hysterically , "My husband! They're kill ing my hu sband!" An unidentified 
photographer s napped shots o f Malc olm X  prone on the stage f loor with  people bent over him 
snatching a part h is blo ody shirt, lo osening his tie, trying to give  him mouth-to-mouth artificial 
respiratio n, first a wom an, then a man. Said the wom an, who identified herself only  as a registered n urse, "I don't know how I got u p on the stage , but I threw  myself  down o n who I 
thought was Malcol m-but it wasn't. I  was willing to die for the man, I would have t aken the bullets 
myself ; then I saw Malcol m, and the firing had stopped, and I tried to give  him ar tificial 
respiratio n." Then Sist er Be tty came through t he people, hers elf a nurse, and people recogniz ing 
her m oved back ; she fell on her k nees looki ng down on his b are, bulle t-pocke d chest, sobbing, 
"They killed him!"
 
Patrolm an Thomas Hoy , 22, was st ationed outside the Audubon Ballroo m entrance. "I heard the 
shooting a nd the plac e explo ded." He rush ed inside , he saw Malcolm X l ying on the stage , and 
then some people c hasing a man. Patrolma n Hoy  "grabbed the susp ect." 
 
Louis Micha ux, the owner of the Nati onalist Me morial B ooks tore a t 125th Street and Seven th 
Avenue in Harle m, said, " I was arriv ing late at the meeting where Malc olm X  had invited me, I met 
a large number o f people rushing ou t."
 
Sergea nt Alvin Aronoff and Patrolman Louis Angelos h appened to be cruising  by in their radio c ar 
when t hey heard shots. "When we got t here," said Aronoff, "the crowds were pu shing o ut and 
screa ming  'Malcolm's b een shot!' and 'Get 'im , get 'i m, don't let him go!' " The two police men 
grabbed by th e arms aN egro who was be ing kicked a s he trie d to escape. Firin g a warning s hot 
into the air, the policemen pushed the m an into their polic e car , not wanting t he angry crowd to 
close in, and drove hi m quickl y to the polic e sta tion.
 
Someone had run up to the Colum bia-Pres byterian Hospit al's Vanderbilt Clinic em ergency 
entranc e at 167th Street and grabb ed a poles-an d-canvas s tretch er and brought it back to the 
Audubon Ballro om s tage. Malc olm X  was put on the stre tcher a nd an unidentified photographer 
got a macabre pict ure o f him, with his m outh open and his t eeth bared, as me n rushe d him up to 
the hospit al clinic  emergenc y entrance. A hospital sp okes man said later that it was ab out 3:15 
P.M. whe n Malcolm X reache d a third-fl oor operating ro om. He was  "either d ead, or in a  death-
appearing  state," said t he spokes man.
 
A team of surgeons cut through his c hest to attempt to massage the heart. The effort was 
abandoned at 3:30 P.M.
 
Reporters who ha d descended upon the hospital office fired qu estio ns at the spokes man, who 
kept saying  brusquely , "I don't know." Then he took the elevator u pstairs to the emergency 
operating ro om. A small crowd  of friends an d Sis ter Be tty had also pushed into the hospital o ffice 
when t he hospital s pokes man returned. Collec ting himself, he made an announcement: "The 
gentle man you k now as Malcolm X is dead. He died from guns hot wounds . He was ap parently 
dead before h e got her e. He was shot in the chest several  times, a nd once in the cheek."
 
The group filed out of the hospital o ffice. The Negro men were v isibly fighting th eir emotions; o ne 
kept smashi ng his fist into the other cu pped palm. Among th e wom en, many were op enly crying.
 
Mom ents after the news flashed through out Harlem (a nd throughou t the entire world),  a crowd 
bega n to gath er ou tside the Hot el Theresa where Malc olm X'sOAAU h ad its he adqu arters. They 
learn ed over tr ansistor ra dios t hat the man whom t he two police men had taken from the murder 
scene initi ally identified himself as Thomas Haga n, 22 (he was  later i dentified as Talmadge 
Hayer), in whose right trous ers po cket the polic emen had found a .45 calib er cartridge clip 
containi ng four unused cartridges, a nd then at Jewish Me morial Hospit al do ctors h ad reported 
that Hayer ha d been shot in the left thigh, his f orehead was  bruise d and his bo dy was be aten. "If 
we hadn't got ten him  awa y, they would have kicked h im to death," Sergean t Aronoff had said, and 
Hayer h ad been taken to the Bellevue H ospital Pris on W ard. By five P .M. , the crowd in front of 
the Theresa H otel h ad been quietly , carefully dispers ed, a nd the Black Muslim M osque Nu mber 7 
and its r estaurant around the corn er, at 116th Street and Lenox Avenue, had been order ed clos ed 
as a precau tionary measure , on the or ders o f the local 2 8th Precinc t's Cap tain L loyd Sealy, New 
York City's  first Negro to command a precinct. When reporters tel ephoned the Black Muslim resta urant, a man's voice s tated, "No o ne is available to make any statement." When the OAAU 
office in t he Theresa Hot el was  tried, the telephone kept ringing,  unanswered. Precinct Capt ain 
Sealy soon appeared, walking  by hi msel f along 1 25th Street, swinging  his nightstick a nd 
conversing  with people h e met.
 
At the 28th Precinct station h ouse on West 123rd S treet, the forty policemen who we re to have 
gone off duty at four P.M. had been told they must rem ain o n duty, and two f ull busloads o f the 
highl y trained New  York City  Police Tactical Pa trol Force had arrived  at the preci nct. V arious high 
police officials m ade press st atements. A Tactical Pa trol Force Captain, Harry Kaiser , said no 
unusual occ urrences h ad been noted, and he anticipa ted no trouble. Deputy Police 
Com mission er Walter Arm said that "hundreds " of extra p olicem en would be put into the Harlem 
area, inclu ding some m embers of the Bur eau of Special S ervices. An Assistan t Chie f Inspector, 
Harry Taylor , spec ulated that the assassins h ad not rushed from the ballroo m among the cro wd, 
but had kept running past the stage a nd esca ped on 165th Street. In the early evening, t hepolice 
department's Chie f of Detectives P hilip J. Walsh quit a vacation he was on to join the hunt for the 
killers, and he said he  looked forward  to "a long- drawn-ou t investigatio n." Police and reporters a t 
the shooting scene had pictures taken of the stage, with white c halk ma rks now circl ing five bulle t 
holes in t he speaker's st and; there were o ther holes in t he stage's m ural b ackdrop, indica ting 
slugs  or sh otgun p ellets which h ad either miss ed Malcolm X or p asse d through h im. Police 
declined to discuss a  rumor s weeping Harle m that they had some mo tion pict ures which ha d 
been taken in the Audubon Ballroo m as the murder took pl ace. Another ru mor t hat gaine d swift 
momentum was that when Sis ter Be tty had leaned over her husband's b ody, she had removed 
from his c oat pock et a paper on which h e had written the names of those he had supposedly 
learn ed were a ssigned to exec ute h im.
 
Deputy Police Co mmissio ner W alter Arm stresse d that the department h ad made efforts t o 
protect Malc olm X. Twenty  different times the department h ad offered pro tectio n to Malcol m X or 
to some o f his assista nts, and the protection was refused, said Co mmissio ner Arm, and 
sevent een tim es uniformed police guards h ad been offered for the O AAU m eetings at  the 
Audubon Ballro om, the mo st recen t time being "las t Sunday." Asked about the pistol permit th at 
Malcolm X had said p ublicly  he planned to request, Com mission er Arm sai d that as far as he 
knew, Malcolm X ha d never actually filed a requ est.
 
A number of questi ons h ave be en raised . The "suspec t" arreste d by Patrolma n Hoy  as he was 
being chased from the meeting has, at prese nt wr iting, n ot been identified publicly . Dep uty Police 
Com mission er Walter Arm's st atement that Malcol m X refused police pr otection c onflicts d irectl y 
with the statements of many of his ass ociates that during  the week prec eding his assassi natio n 
Malcolm X complained rep eatedly that the police would n ot take his r equests f or protectio n 
seriously . Finally, although police sources said that a special de tail o f twenty  men had been 
assigne d to the meeting and that it had eve n been attended by agen ts of the Bureau of Special 
Services, these men were nowh erein evide nce d uring  or after the assassin ation, and Talmadge 
Hayer, rescu ed from the crowd  and arres ted as a suspect immediately  after the ass assina tion, 
was picked up by two p atrolmen in a squad car cruising  by.
 
On long- distance t elephones, reporters reac hed the Chicago mansion headqu arters o f Elijah 
Muhammad. He would not come to the telephone, but a spokesman of his said t hat Muhammad 
"has no comment today, but he migh t have s omething to say tomorrow ." No st atement could be 
obtained either from Malcolm X's oldest brother, Wilfred X, the Black Muslim m inister o f Mosqu e 
Num ber 1  in De troit. At his h ome, a woma n told re porters t hat Minister W ilfred X was not there, 
that he had not gon e to New  York, a nd she did n't believe  he had any plans to do so. (Minister 
Wilfred X, reached later, said th at he anticipat ed attending the Black M uslim co nvention in 
Chicago o n the follow ing Su nday, and regarding his brother, "My brother is dead and there is 
nothing we  can do to bring  him back .")
 
As dark fell, many Negro m en and wom en assemble d before Louis Micha ux's books tore, where 
most of Harle m's Black Natio nalist p ublic ac tivity centere d. A small group of OAAU m embers opened their Ho tel Theresa h eadquart ers and sat in the room and would not make any 
statements to reporters.
 
The New York _Daily  News_  came o nto the newsstan ds with its cover  page devot ed to "Malcolm 
X Murd ered" over th e photograph of him being borne awa y on the stretch er, and a sub-ca ption, 
"Gunned Do wn at Rally." In Long I sland, where s he had been taken just a fter her father's murder, 
six-year- old At-tallah c arefully wrote a  letter to him, "Dear Da ddy, I love you s o. O dear, O dear, I 
wish you wasn't d ead."
 
*     *     *
 
The body-still  listed as "John Doe " because it had not yet been formally identified-h ad been 
move d late Sunday to the N ew York City Medical Exa miner's o ffice at 520 First Avenu e. The 
autopsy confirmed that shotgun p ellet wou nds in the heart h ad killed Malc olm X. Chie f Medical 
Examin er Dr. Milton Helpern said that death followed the first s awed-off shotgu n blas t which 
caused thirte en wou nds in the heart a nd chest, and he said th at .38 and .45 caliber b ullet wounds 
in the thighs an d legs evide nced that Malcolm X ha d been shot at after he had fallen. Mon day 
morning the official identificatio n was  made at the Me dical Examin er's office by Sister B etty, who 
was accompanied by Percy Sutton, Malcolm X's Bo ston half-sister Mrs.  Ella Collins, and Jos eph 
E. Hall, General Ma nager o f the large Unity  Funeral Hom e in Harlem. Leaving th e Me dical 
Examin er's office at about noon to go an d complete funeral arr angem ents, Sist er Betty told 
reporters, "N o one believed what he said . They never to ok hi m seriously , even a fter the bombing 
of our h ome they said he did it him self!"
 
At the Unity  Funeral Hom e on the east side of Eighth Avenu e between 126th and 127th Streets, 
Sister B etty chose a  six-foot-nine-inch bronze  casket line d with egg-shell vel vet. At her request , 
the funeral would be delayed until the following Saturday , five d ays away . The funeral h ome's 
manager Hall a nnounced to the press th at the body would b e dresse d in a  business suit, and it 
would be  put on vie w un der a  glass shiel d from Tuesday through Friday , then the Saturday 
services would b e at a Harle m ch urch.
 
Soon posted on the funeral home's direct ory was "El-Hajj Malik El-Sh abazz." In  Brooklyn, 
orthodox Mosle m Sheik Al-Hajh Da oud Ahmed Faisal o f the Islamic Mission of America said t hat 
the delayed f uneral services violate d a Moslem  prac tice th at the sun should not set twice o n a 
believer's bo dy, that the Kor an pr escribe d burial i nside twen ty-four hours if possible, a nd Mosle ms 
believed that when a body g rows  cold the soul l eaves it a nd when the body is pu t into the earth it 
comes a live again .In Chicago, where p olicemen we re watchi ng all b us depots, railways, 
terminals, O 'Hare Airport a nd high way entrances , Elijah Muhammad, under heavy guar d in his 
three-story  mansion, said, "Malcol m died according t o his pr eaching. He s eems to  have t aken 
weapo ns as his god . Therefore, we couldn't tolerat e a man like t hat. He preache d wa r. We preach 
peace. We are per mitted to fight i f we are attack ed-th at's t he Script ure, t he Koran, and the Bible, 
too. But we will never be  the aggressor . I don't have t he right to be frightened, because I was 
chosen by Allah . If Allah gives m e up to the hands of the wicked , I am satisfied. My  life is in the 
hands of Allah." The grounds outside t he mansion were  patrolled by b oth Chicago p olice a nd Fruit 
of Islam bo dyguards . More o f both patrolle d before the Univers ity of Islam h igh school, a nd the 
offices of the newspaper _Muhammad Speaks_.
 
Malcolm X's law yer, Asse mblyma n Percy  Sutton, sai d that the polic e now ha d the names of those 
whom Malc olm X  had said pl anned to kill hi m. All over Harlem, reporters we re interv iewing 
people, and microp hones were be ing put before the mouths o f the man-in-th e-street. At police 
precinc t station houses , people bei ng questio ned were leaving by  side e ntrances . Said Assista nt 
Chief Inspector Jose ph Coyle, in charge of Manhattan Nort h detectives, " . . . . a well-planned 
conspiracy . We're doi ng a scre ening proc ess o f the four hundred people who we re in the hall at 
the time." Fifty detectives  were on the case, he said, a nd he had been in touch with p olice in o ther 
cities.
  
Harlem was m ostly asleep when a round the Black Muslim Mosque Num ber 7 , on the top floor o f 
a four-story  building at  116th Street and Lenox Avenue, an explosi ve sound at 2:15 A.M. ripp ed 
the night . Firem en were inst antly  summoned by the four polic emen who h ad been guarding th e 
sidewalk  entranc e to the mosque . Within a few mi nutes flames burst through th e building's  roof 
and leaped thirty feet into the air. For th e next seven h ours firemen would p our water into the 
buildi ng. On a n adjacen t roof they found an empty five-gal longasoline can, a brown, gasoline-
stained shopping b ag, an d oily rags.  Southbound IRT subwa y serv ice was re-rou ted for a while, 
also three bus lines . At the spec tacul ar five-alar m fire's h eight, a  wall of the building colla psed ; it 
smashed two f ire engines a t the curb a nd injure d five fir emen, one seriously , and als o a 
pedestrian who h ad been across t he stree t buying  a newspaper. By daybre ak, when the fire was 
declared " under control," t he Black Muslim mo sque a nd the Gethsemane Ch urch o f God in Christ 
on the floor be neath it were gutt ed, a nd seven stree t-level st ores, inclu ding the Black Muslim 
resta urant, were "t otal losses. " Fire De partment so urces s aid that replacing t he ruined equip ment 
would cos t "around $50,000." Jos eph X of the Black M uslims, who o nce had been the immediate 
assist ant o f Malc olm X, sai d that Elija h Mu hammad's followers ha d two al ternative m osqu es to 
meet in, one in Br ooklyn  and the other in Queens, Long Island. Both these mosques were un der 
continu ous p olice gu ard.
 
Across t he nation in San Fra ncisco o n Tuesday afternoon two police men disc overed a fire 
begin ning in the San Francisco Bl ack Muslim Mosque, a nd quickl y extinguish ed it. Kerose ne had 
been splas hed on the sid ewalk a nd door and set afire.
 
The body of El-Hajj Malik  El-Shabazz originally  had been sche duled to go o n public vie w at 2:30 
P.M. Tuesday. Crowds st ood in line behind police barricad es waiting  to be admitted and the 
police men wherever  one look ed includ ed numerous pa trol c ars and even sharps hooters o n the 
roofs around the Unity  Funeral Hom e. But the telephoned bomb-threats which h ad begun shortly 
after no on made necessary two evac uations o f the funeral h ome for bornb-squad searc hes, 
which p roved f utile. A search was co nduc ted even i n the 43rd S treet offices of the _N ew York 
Times_ after a man telephoned complaining  of an editorial about Malcolm X and said, "Your p lant 
will be destroyed a t four o'clock. "
 At the funeral h ome in Harle m, policem en inspec ted all pa ckages a nd floral pi eces being 
delivered, as well  as the large h andbags of wom en m ourners. I t was  6:15 P.M. when a cordon of 
police men arrived fl anking Sister B etty and four clos e relatives an d friends who entered the 
funeral h ome in a glare o f flashbulbs. "She's a  black Jacqu eline K ennedy," observed a  white 
reporter. "She has class, s he knows  what to do and when , she handles hers elf beautifully."
 
It was 7 :10 P.M. whe n the family party emerge d and left. After ten m inutes, the first o f the waiting 
public was admitted. Between then and an hour b efore midnight, two thousand people, includi ng 
scores o f whites, had filed past the open coffin in which th e body lay dressed in a dark business 
suit, a white s hirt and dark tie , with a small, o blong br ass pla te above it inscribed ,
 
"El-Hajj Malik  El-Shabazz-May 19, 1925-Fe b. 21, 1965."
 
*     *     *
 
Malcolm X followers ha d been canvassing  with gro wing anxiet y for a Harle m ch urch t hat would 
accept the Saturday funeral. O fficials o f several c hurch es ha d refused, including a spok esman for 
the community's  largest church, Abyssinian B aptist, o f which Co ngressman-Reveren d Adam 
Clayton Powell is th e pastor; ot hers which tur ned down requ ests, a ccording t o the _Amsterd am 
News_, includ ed the Williams C.M.E. Church a nd The Refuge Temple o f The Church o f Our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Then the funeral was acc epted by Bis hop Alvin A. Childs f or the Faith Temple, 
Church of God in Christ l ocated at 147th Street and Amsterdam Avenue. The Faith Temple, a 
former movie t heater which h ad been converte d fifteen years previously , could seat a thousand in 
its au ditorium a nd another seven hundred in its basement. Bis hop Childs, who in 1964 had been 
elected as Harle m's "l ocality  mayor," told the press th at it was "as a humanitarian gest ure" that he made his c hurch availa ble, a nd of Malcolm X,he s aid, " . . .a milita nt and vocal  person. I did not 
agree with all o f his p hilosophy , but this di d not affect our friendship ." Shortly  after the news 
became known, Bish op C hilds an d his wife began to receive  the first of a successi on of bomb 
threats telephoned both to the church a nd to their home.
 
Promine nt Negro f igures were be ing quoted by th e various pr ess me dia. The famed psychol ogist 
Dr. Kenneth B. Clark  told _Jet_ magazine, " I had a deep respec t for this m an. I believe t hat he 
was sincerely groping  to find a place in the fight for Civ il Rights, on a level where h e would b e 
respected and understo od fully. I looked forward to his gro wth a long t hose lines. It doesn't matter 
so m uch about his past. It is tragic  that he was cu t down a t the point when h e seemed on the 
verge o f achieving th e positio n of respectability he sought ." A _New York Times_ c orrespo ndent in 
a London press co nference quote d the author a nd dramatist Ja mes B aldwin, who th ough t the 
death of Malcolm X was "a major se tback for the Negro move ment." Pointing  at white reporters, 
Baldwin acc used, "You did it. .  . who ever di d it was  formed in the cr ucible o f the W estern world, o f 
the American R epublic!" E uropean "rape" of Africa b egan racial pro blems and was th erefore the 
begin ning of the end for Malcolm X, Baldwin said.
 
The bookstore owner in H arlem, Louis Michaux, a  major voice in t he community, told the 
_Amsterdam News_, " It's things  like th e murder of Malcolm X th at drive the m asses clos er 
toget her. He d ied in the same manner that Patrice Lu mumba met his d eath in the Co ngo. . . . We 
must unite, not fight."
 
"Malcol m X caus ed m any young Negroes t o take a new vision of themselves," said B ayard 
Rustin , a m ain figure in o rganizing the March o n Washington i n 1963. A "third par ty" was 
suspected of killing  Malc olm X  by CORE' S Natio nal Direct or James Far mer, who said , "Malc olm's 
murder was  calcula ted to produce more violence and murder and vengea nce killings." A few days 
later, asked for his opinion of a rumor circulati ng about that a "Red Chin ese" plot broughta bout 
the murder, Farmer s aid, " I would n ot say it is impossible. "
 
"For the Negroes in America, the death of Malcol m X is the most portentous eve nt sinc e the 
deportation of Marcus G arvey in the 1920's," said Dr . C. Eric Li ncoln, author of _The Black 
Muslims in America _, who t alked to the press at Brown Universit y in Pr ovidence, R.I., where he 
was a visiting  professor a nd research f ellow . "I doubt there are 'inter natio nal implicatio ns' in t he 
slaying. The answer is closer t o home. The answer  is in the loc al strugg le among co ntending 
rivals for leadership o f the black m asses, which are potentially the most volatile sub-group in 
America. " Sai d Roy  Wilkins, Exec utive Secret ary of the Nati onal Associatio n for the Advance ment 
of Colored People, "Master s pell-binder that he was, Malcol m X in death cas t a spell m ore far-
flung a nd more dist urbing th an any he cast in life."
 
The New York City police investigators who were pursuing t he case were u nhappy that Malcolm's 
followers  had "not come forward " to aid the investigation . At police requ est, t he press p rinted a 
telephone number, SW 5-8117, for "strictl y confidential" information that anyo ne m ight offer 
concerning th e slayin g. The police h ad picke d up and were h olding Re uben Fra ncis, de scribed as 
a Malc olm X  "bodyguard," who was  believed t o be the person who h ad shot the suspected 
assassin Talmadge H ayer duri ng the melee the previous S unday at the Audubon Ballroo m. Hayer 
remained in t he Bellevue Prison W ard, awaiting  surgery.
 
As thousands c ontinued vie wing the body o f the slain Malcolm X amid i ntermitte nt new bomb-
threats telephoned to the funeral ho me, and to the Fait h Temple where his funeral was sc heduled 
for Saturday , a new organization, the Federati on of Independent Political Action, threatened to 
picke t all Harle m bu siness e stablishm ents wh ich would not clos e from Thursday afternoon until 
Monday morning "in trib ute to Malcolm X." The FIPA's sp okes man was Jesse Gr ay, the wel l-
known re nt-strike lea der; H arlem p edestrians bega n to behanded printe d sheets rea ding, in p art, 
"If the stores re fuse to close, they identify with our en emy- therefore we must close t hem-pa ss 
them by. Those that shop al ong 12 5th Street during t he hours that the stores a re to be clos ed 
identify with th e murderous s tooge that allowed t he power struct ure to use his hands to kill Brother Malcol m." At a late evening FI PA rally  before Louis Mi -chaux's  bookstor e, Jess e Gray 
declared t hat in 1 965 a Negro sh ould run for Mayor  of New  York "i n the name of Malcolm, " and 
speculat ed that suc h a candidate should rec eive 100,000 votes . Shortly after the FIPA rally, 
merc hants a nd other m embers o f the Uptown Ch amber o f Commerce me t and swiftly passe d a 
resolu tion u rging all Harle m stor es to remain o pen and "contin ue to serve their cus tomers," and 
recommendatio n was  made that full pay be  given t o any store e mployees who might wish to 
attend Malcol m X's  funeral on  Saturday morning. Then one after another, Harlem leaders sharply 
criticized th e FIPA proposal as "irresp onsible ." Fin ally, nearly  all o f the Harlem s tores k ept their 
doors op en for business. The FIPA got t ogether ab out twenty  pickets who patrolled f or a while 
before Harlem's largest s tore, Blumstei n's; le ading th e pick ets were two wh ite me n carrying signs 
reading "All Stores S hould Clos e. Ho nor Malcol m X."
 
The weath er had turned very cold. I cicles  hung from the collapse d roo f of the fire-ruin ed building 
that had housed Black
 
Muslim Mosque Num ber 7 . The _Amsterda m News_, its offices barely a block d own Eighth 
Avenue from the funeral ho me where Malcol m X's  body lay , editorializ ed, "Steady, Eddie!" saying 
that orderly  tribu tes to Malcol m X would "confound his critics,  who would like no thing better th an 
to see black people rioting  over his rem ains. "
 
The fear of serious mass rioting  set off by some unpredicta ble sp ark hung steadily in the air. An 
increasi ng number o f Harle m leaders declar ed that the princi pal reas on for this was  the 
downt own white pr ess me dia, sensati onaliz ing what was going o n in a calm, d ignified community. 
Finally  the Harle m Ministers' I nterfaith Associatio n would issu e a formal acc usation: "The 
screa ming  headlin es of many of our newspapers make it s eem as if all o f Harle m was  an armed 
camp, ready to explod e at any mo ment. The vast ma jority  of the citizens o f the H arlem 
community  is not involved in the unfortunate acts of violenc e that have b een grossl y overpla yed 
by the press. Many  times the sla nting  of the news is ab le to bring a bout an atmosphere through 
which a  few de praved a nd reckless i ndividuals ca n take advant age."
 
"_Malcolm X Died Broke _"-th at headlin e in Harle m's _A msterda m News_ ca me as a shock t o 
many in the community. Few ha d reflected that Malcolm X, upon becoming a Black M uslim 
minist er, had signed an oath of poverty , so that for twelve  years h e never acquired a nything  in his 
own name. (So mewhere I have read that Malc olm X  in his Black Muslim days received a bout 
$175 weekly  to cover his living and other expe nses exclusive  of travel.) " He le ft his four daughters 
and pregnan t wife with n o ins uranc e of any kind , no savings,  and no inc ome," the _Amsterdam 
News_ s tory said (an d it m ight have added that he never drew  up a will; he  had made a February 
26th appointment with his l awyer-five d ays after his de ath). W ithin the week, two g roups h ad 
organized an d were aski ng Harle mites for contribu tions to help Sister B etty raise a nd educate the 
childre n (since orga nized a s the M alcolm X Daught ers' Fund at Harle m's Free dom Natio nal B ank, 
275 West 125th Stre et).
 
In Boston, Malcol m X's half-sister , Mrs.  Ella Ma e Collins, t old a  news co nference that she would 
choose the leaders o f the OAAU t o succe ed Malc olm X. Mrs.  Collins op erated the Sarah A. Little 
School o f Preparatory  Arts where, s he said, children were taugh t Arabic, Swahili, Fre nch, and 
Spanish . In 1959, she, too, had broken awa y from Elija h Muh ammad's Black Muslims, t o which 
she had originally  been converte d by Malcolm X.
 
Far fr om Harle m, in lands where Malcol m X had traveled, the press ha d giventhe murder a 
coverage th at had highl y irritated the Director o f the U nited States Information Agency, Carl T. 
Rowan, himsel f a Negro. I n Washington, addressing th e American Foreign Service  Associati on, 
Rowan said that when he first heard of the murder, he knew it would b e grossly  misc onstr ued in 
some c ountries where p eople were un aware what Malcol m X represe nted, and he said the USI A 
had worked h ard to inform the African press o f the facts ab out Malcol m X and his pr eachments, 
but still th ere h ad been "a host of African reacti on based on misinformatio n and 
misre presen tation." 
Said USIA  Direct or Rowan, "Min d you, h ere was a Negro who preac hed segregatio n and rac e 
hatred, killed by an other Negro, pr esumably from another organization that preach es segregatio n 
and rac e hatred, and neither o f them repr esen tative o f more than a ti ny minority  of the N egro 
population of America-" Rowan hel d up some foreign newspap ers. "A ll this a bout an ex-co nvict, 
ex-dope peddler who became a racial f anatic," continued Rowan. "I can only  concl ude that we 
Americans know  less ab out what go es on  in the minds of other peoples than we th ought , or the 
need to inform is even grea ter th an we in USIA  thought it t o be."
 
The _Daily  Times_ of Lagos, in Nigeria, h ad said: "Like all m ortals, Malcolm X was not without his 
faults . . . but that he was a dedicat ed and consiste nt disci ple o f the movem ent for the 
emancipati on of his brethren, no one can doubt . . . Malcol m X has fought and died for what h e 
believed to be right. He wi ll have a place in t he palace o f martyrs." The _Ghanaian Times_, Accra, 
called Malcolm X "the milita nt and most popular o f Afro-Am erican anti-segregatio nist le aders " and 
it added his name to "a host of Africans and Americans " ranging fr om John Br own to Patrice 
Lumumba "who were martyred in f reedom's cause." Also in Accra, t he _Daily  Graphic_: "The 
assassinati on of Malcol m X will go down i n hist ory as the greatest blow the America n 
integratio nist m ovem ent has suffered since t he shocking  assassin ations of Medgar Evers an d 
John F. Kennedy." 
The Pakist an _Hurri yet o f Karachi_ said: "A grea t Negro  leader"; the _Pakist an Times_ s aid, " His 
death is a definite s etback t o the N egro movem ent for emancipation." The Peking, Chi na 
_People's Daily_  said the killing happened "becaus e Malcol m X . . . fought for the emancipation 
of the 23,000,000 American N egroes ." According  to corresp ondents' reports, th e first Algerian 
headlin e sai d "the Ku Klux Klan" assassin ated Malcol m X; the pro-Co mmunist _ Alger 
Republican _'s e ditorial o n the slaying accus ed "America n Fascism ," and the _Times'_ Algerian 
corresp ondent said Algerians showed " signs" o f raising Malcolm X to martyrdom. The U.S. 
Cons ulate in G eorgetown, British Guiana, was  marched on by pickets a ccusing " American 
imperialists." Another P eking, Chin a paper, _Jenmin Jihpao_, said that the death showed that "in 
dealing  with im perialist o ppress ors, violence must be met with violence ." _Pravda _ in Mosc ow 
carried o nly brie f stories and no editorial c omment, the _New  York Times_ Mosc ow 
corresp ondent said , and another in Poland said th ere was no  notice able reactio n of any kind, and 
that "few Poles ha d heard of Malcolm or we re interested in t he racial issue ." Report edly, the 
murder was  only routin ely rep orted with littl e special int erest by th e press in C airo, Beiru t, New 
Delhi, a nd Saigo n. In Paris a nd Western Eur ope, the story was  "essentially a one-day se nsation," 
with the West Germa n press ha ndling it " as if it were in the C hicago gangster tra dition ." The 
_New  York Times_ sai d: ' The London newspa pers h ave probably  played t he story harder a nd 
longer t han mo st, giving continuing e mphasis t o the police work on  the murder. The _London 
Times_ and the _London Dail y Telegraph _ both carried e ditorial comments, but neither treated 
Malcolm X as a major figure ." Also reported by the _New  York Times_ London corresp ondent was 
that "a London grou p calling  itself the Council of African Organi zations h ad violently attacked the 
Unite d States over  the murder. This grou p is ma de up of students a nd other u nofficial African 
repres entatives  here. A press rel ease describ ed Malc olm a s a 'lead er in t he strug gle agai nst 
American imperialism, o ppressi on and racialism.' It said, ' the butchers ofPatrice L umumba are the 
very same mo nsters who have m urdered Malcolm X in c old bl ood.'"
 
Frida y morning New  York Cit y press headlin es co ncerning Malcol m X's  slaying were d evoted to 
the police d epartment's a pprehensio n of a second sl aying suspect. H e was  a stocky, round-faced, 
twenty-six-year- old karate expert n amed Norm an 3X B utler, allege dly a Black Muslim, and a week 
later, this was  followed by  the arrest of Thomas 15X Jo hnso n, also all egedly a B lack Muslim . Both 
men had been earlier in dicte d in t he January, 1965, shooting of Benjamin Brown, a N ew York City 
Correction Officer a nd a Black Muslim defector. Both men were indict ed, a long with  Haver, for the 
murder o f Malcol m X on March 10 .
 
With the news announcement of Butler's arres t, and his at  leas t tentative identification as a 
member of Elijah Muhammad's organization, tension r each ed a new high a mong all who h ad any 
role in the feud. The Black Muslim Nati onal C onventio n was  sche duled to begin that Friday  in Chicago, t o las t for three days. E arly Frida y morning in N ew York at the Kennedy Airport dozens 
of police men spent forty minutes searching  a plane bel onging  to Capital Airlines, which b ack in 
Dece mber 1964 had acc epted a Mosqu e Nu mber 7  charter f light t o Chicago and return, a t a fee 
of $5,175.54 which t he m osqu e had subsequen tly paid in incre ments.
 
Altoge ther, about three thousand Black Musli ms fr om their mosques in most sizable cities were in 
Chicago f or their annual "Saviour's Day" c onventio n, regard ed by t hem as similar to the holiday  of 
Christm as. In the order o f arriva l, each group from the different mosques a nd cities a ssemble d 
outside the big sp orts colise um s outh of Chicago's b usiness district, the bro thers of all ages 
dress ed in neat, dark s uits a nd white shirts an d the sisters garbe d in flowing silk gowns an d 
headdresses-an d every  individual was filtered t hrough anintense s ecurity  check t hat Chicago 
police sources said was unpreced ented in Chicago exce pt for a visiting  Preside nt.
 
Searche d even more clos ely were the relativel y few n on-Muslim N egroes who ca me to be 
spectat ors, a nd the press repres entatives b oth white a nd black . "Take off your h at, show some 
respect!" snapped a Black Muslim gu ard at  a white report er. As each person was "cleare d" a Fruit 
of Islam ma n ushered him or her to a specific se at in the drafty interior o f the 7500-sea t colise um. 
(Later, Muslim so urces would bl ame the half-full house upon "the white m an's dividing o f 
Negroes," but observers  who r ecalled the packed colise um in 1964 said that bombing f ears ke pt 
away many non-Muslim Negroes.) The audience s at lightl y mur muring un der the two  huge 
hanging banners pr oclaiming " Welcome Elijah Muha mmad-W e Are Gl ad To Have You W ith Us" 
and "We Must H ave Some Of This L and" (referring  to Elija h Muh ammad's de mand that "one or 
more states" be turned over to  the "23 million s o-called N egroes" in America as partial re parati on 
for "over a century of our free blood and sweat as sl aves which h elped to develop t his wealthy 
nation where still today you s how us you d o not wish or in tend to acc ept us as equ als"). I n front of 
the wide, raise d speaker's platform were two ne arly life-sized photograp hic blowups o f Elija h 
Muhammad. Standing be tween the stage a nd the audience were Fruit of Islam  guards. Others 
were prowling  the aisles, scan ning rows of faces, with int ermitt ent peremptory  demands for 
identification, "What mosque, brother?" Still more Fruit o f Islam me n were ins pecting the 
coliseu m's vaca nt balcony , backst age, d ownstairs, an d rafters a nd roof.
 
The ghost o f Malc olm X  was in the colise um. First, in a  high dr ama for the Muslims, Elijah 
Muhammad's so n, Wallace Delan ey Muh ammad, who o nce had sided with Malcol m X, f aced the 
audience a nd begged f orgiveness for his defectio n. Next, two br others o f Malcolm X, Wilfred and 
Philb ert, b oth of them Black Muslim mi nisters, urge d uni ty with Elijah Mu hammad. Said Minister 
Wilfred X of the Detroit m osqu e, "We would be  ignora nt to get c onfusedand go t o arguing an d 
fighting  among o urselves  and forget who the real enemy is." S aid Minister Philb ert X,  of the 
Lansing mo sque, "Malcol m was  my own bl ood bro ther, next to me. . . . I was  shocked . No m an 
wants to  see his own br other de stroyed. B ut I knew that he was traveling on  a very reckless a nd 
dangerous road. I made attempts to change his co urse. W hen he was living, I tri ed to keep him 
living; now that he is dead, there is nothing I c an do." Indicating  the seated Elija h Muh ammad, 
Minister Phil bert X  declared, "Where he leads m e, I will follow"- and then he introduce d the Black 
Muslim le ader to make his a ddress.
 
Only the head of Elijah Mu hammad was v isible a bove t he grim-faced Fruit o f Islam me n in a living 
wall, Cassius Clay am ong t hem. Cresc ents, stars, moons and suns were in gold thread 
embroid ery on the small f ez th at Elija h Mu hammad wore. He said i n his s peec h: "For a  long ti me, 
Malcolm stood here where I stand. In those days, Malcol m was  safe, Malcol m was  loved. God, 
Himsel f, protected Malcol m. . . . For m ore than a year, Malc olm was  given his f reedom. He went 
everywhere-Asia , Eur ope, Africa, eve n to Mecca , trying to make enemies f or me. He ca me back 
preaching th at we sh ould not hate the enemy. . . . He came h ere a few weeks ago to blast away 
his h ate and mud-slinging; ever ything he  could think o f to disgrace me. . . . We didn't want t o kill 
Malcolm and didn't try  to kill him. They k now I didn't harm Malc olm. They know I loved hi m. His 
foolish te aching brought him to his own en d. . . ."
 
Both physically  and emotionally worked u p, often Elijah Mu hammad would b egin c oughing. " Take it easy! Take your tim e!" his a udience pleaded with him . "He had no right t o rejec t me!" Elijah 
Muhammad declared . "He was  a star, who went astray! . .  . They k new I didn't harm Malc olm, b ut 
he tried to make war  against m e." He said that Malcol m X would have b een given " the most 
glorious of burials " if he had stayed with t he Bl ack Muslims and had died a n atural d eath; 
"instead, we st and beside t he grave o f a hypocrite! .  . . _Malcol m_! Who was he  leading? W ho 
was he teaching? He has no truth! We didn't wantto kill Malcol m! His f oolish teaching would bring 
him to his own e nd! I am not going  to let the crack pots de stroy the good t hings Allah s ent to you 
and me!"
 
Elijah Mu hammad drove his f rail e nergy  to speak f or about an hour a nd a half. He c hallenge d any 
would- be assassins : "If you s eek t o snuff out the life of Elijah Mu hammad, you are inviting  your 
own doom! The Holy Qur an tells us n ot to pick a  fight but to defend ours elves. We will fight!" It 
was mid-afternoon when Elijah Muhammad turned back to his seat with so me three thousan d 
Black M uslim me n, wome n, and children shouting "Y es, _sir_! .  . . So sweet! . . . All praise t o 
Muhammad!"
 
In the Unity  Funeral Hom e in t he Harlem community  of New  York City  in the mid-afternoon, the 
public's  viewing of the body of Malc olm X  was in terrupt ed by the arrival of a party of about a 
dozen people whose c entral f igure was a white-turbaned, dark-robed eld erly man whose white 
beard fell to his ch est a nd who carried a  forked stick. W hen reporters rus hed to attempt 
interviews, an other m an in the party  waved t hem away , saying, "A  silent tongue d oes not betray 
its owner ." The man was Sheik
 
Ahmed Hass oun, a Sudanese, a member of the Sunni Mosle ms, who h ad taught in Mecca f or 35 
years  whe n he had met Malcol m X there, and then had soon come to the Unit ed States to serve 
as Malc olm X's  spiritual a dvisor a nd to teach a t the Muslim Mosque , Inc.
 
Sheik Hasso un prepared the body for burial in accorda nce with Mosle m ritu al. Re moving the 
Western clothi ng in which the body had been on displ ay, Sheik Hasso un washe d the body w ith 
special holy oil. Then he draped the body in the tradition al seven white lin en shrouds, calle d the 
_kafan_. Only the face with its reddish m oustache and goatee was le ft expos ed. The mourners 
who had come with Sheik Hasso un filed to the bier an d he read pass ages fr om theKoran . Then 
he turned to a funeral ho me repres entative: "N ow the body is ready for burial. " Soon, the sheik 
and his retinue le ft, and the vie wing by th e public res umed. When the word spre ad, numbers o f 
persons who h ad come b efore returned for another wait  in the long, slow ly moving line, wanting 
to see the Mosle m burial dress .
 
It was lat e during  this Friday  afternoon that I got int o the quie tly moving  line, thinking ab out the 
Malcolm X with whom I had worked clos ely for about two years. B lue-u niformed police men stood 
at intervals  watching us shuffle along within t he woo den gray-painted police b arricades . Jus t 
across t he street several m en were looking at the line from behind a large si de window  of the 
"Lone Star B arber S hop, Eddie Johns, Prop ., William Ashe, Mg r." Among the polic emen were a 
few press re prese ntatives t alking  to each other to pass t he time. Then we we re inside the softly 
lit, hu shed, cool, large chapel. S tanding a t either e nd of the long, handsome bro nze coffin were 
two big, dark p olicemen, mostly looking  straight a head, but moving th eir lips when s ome viewer 
tarried . Within minutes I had reached the coffin. Un der the glass lid, I glimpse d the delicat e white 
shrouding over  the chest a nd up like a  hood about the face on which I  tried to conc entrate for as 
long as I could. All that I could think was that it was  he, all right- Malc olm X. "Move o n"-the 
police man's voice was  soft. Malcol m look ed to me-just waxy and _dead_. The polic eman's h and 
was gest uring  at his waist level. I thought, "_Well-good-bye_ ." I move d on.
 
Twenty -two thousand people had vie wed t he body when the line was st opped that night for go od, 
at eleven P .M. Q uietly , between m idnight and dawn, a dozen p olice c ars flanked a hearse that 
went th e twen ty-odd blocks farther up town to  the Faith Temple. The bronze coffin was wheel ed 
inside and placed upon a platform d raped in thick dark re d vel vet, in front of the altar, and the 
coffin's lid was  reopened. As the hearse pulle d away , police men stood at posts o f vigil both insid e and outsid e Fait h Temple. It was  crispy  cold o utside. 
About six A.M., p eople bega n forming  a line on the east side o f Amsterdam Avenue. By nine A.M. 
, an estimated six thousand persons thr onged t he nearby blocks, b ehind police barriers, a nd 
faces were  in every  window of the apartment buildings across the stre et; some stood shiverin g on 
fire esc apes. Fro m 145th Street to 149th Str eet, police men had block ed off all a utomobile traffic 
except for their own cars, the newspa pers' c ars, and the equipm ent trucks f or radio an d televis ion 
on-the-sp ot coverage. There were h undreds of police men, some on the rooftops i n the immediate 
area. Co mbing t he cr owd's e dges we re reporters w ith m icrop hones and notebooks . "He was 
fascinating, a  remarka bly fascin ating ma n, that's why  I'm her e," a white girl  in her m id-twenties 
told a _ New York Times_ man; and a Negro  woman , "I'm paying my resp ects t o the greatest black 
man in this c entury. He's a black m an. Don't say colored. " Another woman , noticing  steel helmets 
inside a televis ion network c ar, laughe d to the drive r, "You getti ng ready for next s ummer?"
 
When the Faith Temple doors were  opened at 9:20, a corps of OAAU members en tered. W ithin 
the next quarter- hour, twen ty of the men had ushered in six hundred seat-h olders. Fifty press 
reporters, p hotograph ers and television camera men clust ered b eneath religious m urals t o the 
rear o f the altar, and some stood on chairs to see better. A Negro e ngine er monitored rec ording 
equip ment between the altar and the coffin which was guard ed by eight uniformed Negro 
police men and two u niformed Negro po licewomen. One Negro pl ain-cloth es policem an sat o n 
either side of heavily veiled Sist er Betty in t he second row. The raised lid of the coffin hid the Fait h 
Temple's b rass tit he box an d candelabra; t he head of the Islamic Mission of America , in Br ooklyn, 
Sheik Al-Haj Da oud Ahmed Faisal, had couns eled that any hint of Christia nity in t he services 
would ma ke the deceased a _kafir_, an unbeliever . (The sheik h ad also d issen ted with the days 
of public exhibition of the body: "Death is a private matter b etwee n Allah and the deceased.")
 Before the serv ices b egan , OAAU us hers br ought in one floral wreath-a two- by-five arra ngem ent 
of the Isla mic St ar an d Cresc ent in white carn ations agains t a backgrou nd of red car natio ns.
 
First, th e actor Ossi e Dav is and his w ife, actr ess Ruby  Dee, read the notes, telegrams a nd cables 
of condolence. They came from every  major civ il-rights organization ; from individual figures such 
as Dr . Martin L uther Ki ng; from organi zations a nd governments a broad, such a s The Africa-
Pakist an-W est-Indian Society of the London School of Economics, t he Pan-A frican Co ngress of 
Southern Africa, the Niger ian Ambassador f rom Lagos, the Presi dent of the Re public of Ghana, 
Dr. Kwam e Nkrum ah: "The death of Malc olm X  shall not have b een in vain."
 
Next, Om ar Os man stood, a repres entative of the Islam Cen ter of Switzerland and the U nited 
States: "We knew  Brother Malcol m as a  blood bro ther, particularly  after his p ilgrimage t o Mecc a 
last year . The highest thing t hat a Mosl em c an aspire t o is t o die on the battlefield and not die at 
his b edside-" H e paused brie fly to wait out the applause f rom among th e mourners. " Those who 
die on the battlefield ar e not dead, but are alive!" The applause was lou der, and cries rose, "Right! 
Right!" Omar O sman then criticall y commented upon the remarks which US IA Director Carl 
Rowan had made in Washingto n, D.C. , about the foreign press reacti on to the death of the 
deceas ed. From the audience t hen hiss es rose .
 
Again, the actor Ossie Davis sto od. His deep voice d elivered the eulogy  to Malcolm X which was 
going  to cause Dav is subsequ ently  to be hailed more than ever among Negroes i n Harlem :
 
"Here-a t this final hour, in this quiet pl ace, Harlem h as come to bid farewell to one of its bright est 
hopes-extinguishe d now, and gone from us forever. . . .
 "Many will ask what Harle m finds to honor in this stor my, controversial a nd bold young ca ptain-
and we w ill smile. . . . They will say that he is o f hate-a fanatic, a racist- who c an only bring evil to 
the cause for which you strugg le!
 
"And we will answer  and say unto them: Did you ever talk to Br other Malcolm ? Did you ever t ouch 
him, or h ave hi m smile at you? Did you ever re ally listen to him? Did he ever  do a mean thing? 
Was he ever  hims elf associat ed with violence or any pu blic dist urbance? For i f you d id you would 
know him. And if you k new him you would k now why we must honor him: Malcol m was  our manhood, our liv ing, black manhood! This was his m eaning to  his p eople. And, in honoring  him, 
we honor the best in ours elves. . . . And we  will know him then for what he was and is-a Prince-
our own b lack s hining  Prince!-who di dn't hesit ate to die, becaus e he loved u s so."
 
Brief speeches were made by o thers. Then, the family, the OAAU members an d other Muslims 
present stood and filed by the coffin to view the body f or the last time. Fin ally, the two pl ain-
clothes p olicem en ushered Sister B etty to have h er last sight of her h usband. S he leaned over , 
kissing  the glass over hi m; she broke into tears. Un til then almost no crying had been heard in the 
services, but now Sist er Betty's so bs were  taken up by other women.
 
The services h ad lasted a little over a n hour whe n the three minutes of prayers  said for ever y 
Muslim who is d ead were  recite d by Alhajj Hesh aam Ja aber, of Elizabe th, N ew Jersey . At the 
phrase " Allah u Akbar"-"G od is m ost great "-all M uslims in t he audienc e placed their opened hands 
at the sid es of their faces.
 
An official c ortege, with t he hearse, of three family cars, eight een mo urners' cars, twel ve police 
cars a nd six press c ars-followed by about fifty other cars-briskl y drove the eight een miles o ut of 
Manhattan and along th e New  York Thruway , then off its Exit 7 to reac h the Fernclif f Cemetery in 
Ardsley , N.Y . All along t he route, Negroes p laced their ha ts or hands over t heir h earts, payin g their 
final respec ts. At each bridge crossi ng in Manhattan County, polic e cars st ood watch; t he 
Westchester Co unty polic e had stationed individual p atrolmen at intervals en  route to the 
cemetery.
 
Over  the coffin, final Mosle m prayers we re said by S heik Alhajj Hesha am Jaaber. The coffin was 
lowere d into the gra ve, the head facing the east, in ke eping wi th Islamic traditi on. Among t he 
mourners, th e Mosle ms k nelt b eside the gra ve to pray with th eir foreheads pr esse d to the earth, 
in the Eastern m anner. When the family left the gravesite , followers  of Malcolm X would n ot let 
the coffin be covered by the white gra ve-dig gers who ha d stood a little dis tance away , waiting. 
Instead, seven OA AU me n bega n dro pping b are h andfuls of earth down o n the coffin; then they 
were given  shovels a nd they carried d irt to fill the grave, a nd then mound it.
 
The night f ell over the earthly remains o f El-Hajj Malik El-Sh abazz, who h ad been called Malcolm 
X; who h ad been calle d Malcolm Little; who h ad been called " Big Red" and "Satan" and 
"Homeboy" an d other na mes-who h ad been burie d as a M oslem . "According to  the Koran," the 
_New  York Times_ rep orted, "the bodies of the dead remain in their graves  until the Last Day , the 
Day of Judgme nt. O n this d ay of cataclysm the heavens a re rent and the mountains groun d to 
dust, the graves op en and men are called to acco unt by Allah.
 
"The blesse d-the godfearing,  the humble, the charitable , those who have s uffered and been 
persecuted for Allah's s ake or fought in religious wars  for Isl am-are summoned to the G arden of 
Paradise.
 
"There, accordi ng to the teaching o f Moh ammed, the Prop het, they live forever  by flowing 
strea ms, reclining  on silke n cus hions , and enjoying  the company of dark-eyed maidens an d wives 
of perfect purity.
 
 "The damned-the coveto us, the evildoer, the follower o f gods o ther than Allah-are sent to Eternal 
Fire, where t hey are fed boiling  water and molten brass. ' The death from which ye fl ee will truly 
overtake you,' th e Koran says.  'Then will ye b e sent b ack to the Knower o f things  secret and 
open, and He will tell you the truth of the things t hat ye did.'"
 
After signing  the contract f or this book, Malc olm X  looked at me hard. "A writer is what I want, not 
an interpreter ." I tried to be a dispassion ate c hronicler . But he was th e most electric personality I 
have ever m et, and I still can't quite c onceive hi m dead. It still f eels to me as if he has jus t gone 
into some n ext ch apter, to be written by his torians.
 New York, 19 65
 
 
 
OSSIE D AVIS
ON MALCO LM X
 
[Mr. Davis  wrote t he followin g in respo nse to a magazine edi tor's questi on: W hy did you eulogize 
Malcolm X?] You ar e not the only person curio us to know why I would eu logize a m an like 
Malcolm X. Many who kn ow and respec t me have w ritten letters. O f these l etters I am proudest o f 
those f rom a sixth-g rade class of you ng white b oys and girls who ask ed m e to expl ain. I 
appreciat e your gi ving me  this ch ance to do so.
 
You m ay anticip ate my  defense somewhat by consi dering  the followin g fact: no Negro has yet 
asked m e that ques tion. (My pastor in Grac e Baptist Church where I teach Sunday School 
preache d a serm on about Malcolm in which  he calle d him  a "gi ant in a sick world.") Every  one of 
the many letters I got frommy own p eople lauded M alcolm a s a man, and commended me  for 
having  spoken at his funeral.
 
At the same time-and this is i mportan t-most of them took sp ecial pai ns to dis agree with m uch or 
all of what Malcol m said and what h e stood for. That is, with one singing  exce ption, they all, ever y 
last, black, glory-huggin g one of them, knew that Malc olm-w hatever  else h e was or was no t-
_Malcol m was  a man_!
 
White folks do not need anybo dy to remind them that they are me n. We do! This was his o ne 
incontrovertible b enefit to his people.
 
Protocol a nd common sense require th at Negroes sta nd back and let the white m an speak u p for 
us, defend us, and lead us from behind the scene in our fig ht. This is the ess ence of Negro 
politics. But Malcolm said t o hell with that! G et up off your k nees an d fight your own b attles. That's 
the wa y to win ba ck your  self-resp ect. That's t he way to make the white m an resp ect you. And if 
he won't let you live like a  man, he certainly can't ke ep you from dying like o ne!
 
Malcolm , as you can see, was  refreshi ng excite ment; he scared hell o ut of the rest o f us, bred as 
we are to caution, to hypocrisy  in the presence of white folks, to the smile that never fades. 
Malcolm knew  that every  white ma n in America pro fits directly  or indirectly  from his p osition vis-a-
vis Negroes, pr ofits from racism eve n though h e does not practice it or believe in it.
 
He als o knew that every Negro who di d not challe nge on the spot every  instance o f racis m, overt 
or covert, c ommitted ag ainst hi m and his p eople, who c hose inst ead to swallow  his spit a nd go on 
smiling, was  an Uncle Tom and a traitor, without b alls or guts , or a ny other co mmonly accep ted 
aspects o f manhood!
 Now, we knew all these t hings as well  as Malcol m did, but we als o knew what h appened to 
people who stick t heir ne cks ou t and say them. And if all th e lies we tell o urselves by  way of 
exten uation were pu t into pri nt, it would constitu te one of the great c hapters in the hist ory of 
man's jus tifiable cowardice in t he face of other m en.
 
But Malcol m ke pt snatching our lies away . He k ept shouting t he painful tru th we whites an d 
blacks did n ot want to  hear from all t he housetops. And he wouldn't stop for love nor m oney.
 
You can imagine what a howling, sh ocking  nuisance this m an was to both Negroes a nd whites. 
Once Malcol m fastened on you, you c ould n ot escape. He was on e of the most fascina ting and 
charming  men I have ever m et, and never hesitated to take his at tractiveness and beat you to 
death with it. Yet his irritatio n, though pa inful to us, was m ost salut ary. He would ma ke you angry 
as hell, b ut he would also make you pr oud. It was  impossible t o remain defensive and apologetic 
about being a Negro in his pres ence. He wouldn't l et you. And you a lways left his p resence with the sneaky  suspicio n that maybe , after all, you _were _ a man!
 
But in expl aining  Malcolm, let m e take care not to explain h im away . He had been a criminal, a n 
addict, a  pimp, and a priso ner; a  racist, a nd a hater, he had really believed the wh ite ma n was a 
devil.  But all t his had change d. Two d ays before his d eath, in c ommenting  to Gord on Parks a bout 
his p ast life he said: "That was a mad scene. The sickn ess a nd madness o f those days! I' m glad 
to be free of them."
 
And Malcol m was  free. No o ne who knew him before and after his trip to Mecca could do ubt that 
he had completely abandoned racism, s eparatism , and hatred. B ut he had not abandoned his 
shock-effect statements, h is bristling  agitation for immediate freedom in this country  not only for 
blacks , but for everybody. And most of all, in the are a of race relatio ns, h e still delighted in 
twisting  the white m an's tail, a nd in m aking Uncle Toms, compro misers a nd acco mmodationists- I 
delib erately includ e mysel f-thoroughly  ashamed of the urbane and smiling  hypocris y we practice 
merely to exist in a world whose valu es we  both envy and despise.
 
But even had Malcol m no t change d, he would s till have be en a relevant figure o n the America n 
scene, s tanding in rela tion as he does, to the "responsible " civil rights leaders, jus t about where 
John Br own st ood in rel ation to the "respo nsible a bolitionists in the fight ag ainst slaver y. Almost 
all disagree d with Brown's  mad and fanatical tactics which le d him foolishly  to attack a Federal 
arsenal a t Harp ers Ferry, to los e two  sons th ere, a nd later to be hanged f or treason.
 
Yet today the wor ld, and especiall y the Negro  people, proclaim Br own n ot a traitor, but a hero and 
a martyr in a noble cause S o in future, I will not be surprised i f men come to see that Malc olm X 
was, within his own limitati ons, and in h is own inimit able style, also a  martyr in t hat cause.
 
But there is m uch controvers y still about this m ost controversial American , and I am content to 
wait for hist ory to make the final d ecisio n.
 
But in p ersonal ju dgme nt, there is no appeal from instinct. I  knew the man pers onally, and 
howe ver m uch I disagreed with hi m, I never d oubted that Malcolm X, even when h e was wron g, 
was alwa ys that rarest t hing in t he world am ong u s Negroes: a true m an. And if to protect my 
relatio ns wi th the ma ny good white folk who m ake it p ossible for me to earn a  fairly good living in 
the entertain ment industry , I was to o chicken, too cautious, to admit that fact when he was alive, I 
thought at least that now when all the white f olks are s afe from him at last, I could be honest with 
myself  enough to lift my hat for one final sal ute to that brave, b lack, ironic gallantry , which was his 
style a nd hallmark,t hat shocking  _zing_ o f fire-an d-be-d amned-to-you, s o absolut ely absent in 
every other Negro ma n I know, which brough t him , too soon, to his d eath.
 
 
*     *     *
 
Alex Haley is the world-renowned author of _Roots_, which h as sold six  million h ardcover co pies 
and has been translat ed into thirty  languages. He is the winner o f the Pulitzer Pri ze and the 
Natio nal B ook Award. Alex Haley died, at the age o f seventy, in F ebruary  1992.